SECTION 4
IRAQ’S WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION
Introduction
1.  Section 4 addresses:

•	
•	
•	
•	

how the Joint Intelligence Committee’s (JIC) Assessments of Iraq’s chemical,
biological, nuclear and ballistic missile capabilities, and the intent of Saddam
Hussein’s regime to retain, produce, use or proliferate such weapons, evolved
between 2000 and the invasion of Iraq in March 2003;
the robustness of the evidence base on which those judgements were made;
other advice given to Ministers on Iraq’s capabilities and intent;
the way in which the intelligence and Assessments were used:
{{ within

Government to underpin policy decisions; and

{{ in

•	
•	

public statements and material presented to Parliament to underpin
the Government position that urgent action was needed to secure the
disarmament of Iraq;

the search for weapons, materials and evidence of prohibited programmes after
the conflict; and
the background to and findings of the four previous Inquiries into aspects of the
issues covered in this Section.

2.  In doing so, the Inquiry has drawn on the JIC Assessments addressing these issues
produced between 2000 and 2005, which are being published alongside this Report.
3.  The roles of the JIC, the Cabinet Office Assessments Staff and the Secret
Intelligence Service (SIS), and the priority given to collection of intelligence on Iraq, are
set out in Section 2.
4.  As well as documents provided by the Government and the oral evidence it was
given, the Inquiry has drawn on other authoritative accounts including:

•	
•	

reports to the United Nations Security Council by the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), the UN Special Commission (UNSCOM) and the UN
Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission (UNMOVIC); and
various reports of the Iraq Survey Group (ISG) published in 2003 to 2005.

5.  Section 1.1 describes Iraq’s chemical, biological, nuclear and ballistic missile
programmes after the 1991 Gulf Conflict and the international community’s attempts to
disarm Iraq – through a series of UN Security Council resolutions, a UN inspection and
monitoring regime and a policy of containment supported by limited military action – and

1

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

Iraq’s responses. That Section also sets out, from information available in open
sources, the evolution of the JIC’s Assessments of Iraq’s capabilities between 1990
and December 1998.
6.  Section 1.2 addresses the UK’s Iraq strategy between September 2000 and
September 2001.
7.  The wider context of the development of UK strategy and options for Iraq after the
attacks on the US on 11 September 2001 (9/11) is addressed in Section 3, including the
judgement that Iraq was not involved in 9/11, the absence of evidence of links between
Iraq and Al Qaida (AQ), and the potential consequences of military action for the threat
to the UK and UK interests from international terrorism.

Previous Inquiries
8.  Aspects of the UK Government’s actions in relation to its assessment of Iraq’s
weapons of mass destruction (WMD), and the way in which intelligence information
was deployed in support of the case for urgent action to disarm Iraq, have already
been addressed by four previous Inquiries.
9.  The terms of reference for each of those Inquiries, which were narrower than those
of the Iraq Inquiry, are set out below.
10.  The report of the House of Commons Foreign Affairs Committee (FAC), The
Decision to go to War in Iraq (HC 813), was published on 7 July 2003.1 It sought to
“establish whether the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO), within the Government
as a whole, presented accurate and complete information to Parliament in the period
leading up to military action in Iraq, particularly in respect of weapons of mass
destruction”.
11.  The report of the Intelligence and Security Committee (ISC), Iraqi Weapons of Mass
Destruction – Intelligence and Assessments (Cm 5972), was published in September
2003.2 The ISC stated that it had “looked at the supporting intelligence in critical areas to
ensure that the [JIC] Assessments reflected the intelligence correctly”.
12.  The Report of the Inquiry into the Circumstances Surrounding the Death of
Dr David L Kelly CMG by Lord Hutton (The Hutton Inquiry, HC 247), was published on
28 January 2004.3

Report from the Foreign Affairs Committee, Session 2002-2003, The Decision to go to War in Iraq,
HC 813.
2 
Intelligence and Security Committee, Iraqi Weapons of Mass Destruction – Intelligence and
Assessments, September 2003, Cm 5972.
3 
Report of the Inquiry into the Circumstances Surrounding the Death of Dr David L Kelly CMG by Lord
Hutton [“The Hutton Inquiry”], 28 January 2004, HC 247.
1 

2

4  |  Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction

13.  The Inquiry was established by Lord Falconer of Thororton, the Secretary of State
for Constitutional Affairs, on 18 July 2003:
“urgently to conduct an investigation into the circumstances surrounding the death of
Dr Kelly.”4
14.  Lord Hutton’s interpretation of his terms of reference is set out in his report.5
15.  Lord Hutton concluded that the “allegations attacking the integrity of the
Government”, broadcast on the BBC Today programme on 29 May 2003, that:

•	
•	

“the Government probably knew, before it decided to put it in its dossier ... that
the statement was wrong that the Iraqi military were able to deploy weapons of
mass destruction within 45 minutes of a decision to do so”; and
that No.10 had “ordered the dossier to be sexed up”

had to be considered under his terms of reference, because it was those allegations that
had drawn Dr Kelly into the controversy about the broadcasts.
16.  Lord Hutton explicitly determined that two other areas fell outside his terms of
reference.
17.  First, Lord Hutton stated that the question of “whether, if approved by the Joint
Intelligence Committee and believed by the Government to be reliable, the intelligence
contained in the dossier was nevertheless unreliable” was a “separate issue”.
18.  Secondly, Lord Hutton wrote that he had carefully considered “the view expressed
by a number of public figures and commentators” that his “terms of reference required
or, at least, entitled” him to consider:
“... whether the intelligence in relation to weapons of mass destruction set out in
the dossier published by the Government on 24 September 2002 was of sufficient
strength and reliability to justify the Government in deciding that Iraq under Saddam
Hussein posed such a threat to the safety and interests of the United Kingdom that
military action should be taken against that country.”
19.  Lord Hutton “concluded that a question of such wide import, which would involve the
consideration of a wide range of evidence” did not fall within his terms of reference.
20.  The Review of Intelligence on Weapons of Mass Destruction by a Committee of
Privy Counsellors chaired by Lord Butler of Brockwell (The Butler Report, HC 898),
was published on 14 July 2004.6

4 

Report of the Inquiry into the Circumstances Surrounding the Death of Dr David L Kelly CMG by Lord
Hutton [“The Hutton Inquiry”], 28 January 2004, HC 247, page 1.
5 
Report of the Inquiry into the Circumstances Surrounding the Death of Dr David L Kelly CMG by Lord
Hutton [“The Hutton Inquiry”], 28 January 2004, HC 247, pages 2-3.
6 
Review of Intelligence on Weapons of Mass Destruction [“The Butler Report”], 14 July 2004, HC 898.

3

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

21.  The Butler Review was established by Mr Blair in February 2004 to:
“investigate the intelligence coverage available in respect of WMD programmes in
countries of concern and on the global trade in WMD, taking into account what is
now known about these programmes;
“as part of this work, to investigate the accuracy of intelligence on Iraqi WMD up to
March 2003, and to examine any discrepancies between the intelligence gathered,
evaluated and used by the Government before the conflict, and between that
intelligence and what has been discovered by the Iraq Survey Group since the end
of the conflict; and to make recommendations to the Prime Minister for the future
on the gathering, evaluation and use of intelligence on WMD, in the light of the
difficulties of operating in countries of concern.”7
22.  The Butler Report stated that, in assessing the intelligence on Iraq’s nuclear,
biological, chemical and ballistic missile capabilities to establish whether there were
“any detectable systemic issues” which might have affected the JIC Assessments in the
period before March 2003 and whether Assessments made at the time of the 1990 to
1991 Gulf Conflict “had a lasting impact which was reflected in JIC Assessments made
in 2002 and 2003”, it had addressed “three broad questions”:
“•	 What was the quality of the intelligence and other evidence, and the
assessments made of it, about the strategic intent of the Iraqi regime to pursue
... programmes in contravention of its obligations under ... resolution 687?

•	
•	

What was the quality of the intelligence or other evidence, and the assessments
made of it, about Iraq seeking to sustain and develop its indigenous knowledge,
skills and materiel base which would provide it with a ‘break-out’ capability ...?
What was the quality of the intelligence or other evidence, and the assessments
made of it, about Iraqi production or possession of prohibited ... agents and
weapons ...?”8

23.  Sir John Chilcot was a member of the Butler Review.
24.  The Iraq Inquiry has drawn in its work on both the evidence offered to those
Inquiries, where available, and their analyses and conclusions, but the judgements in
this Report are the Inquiry’s own.

Definition of weapons of mass destruction
25.  The term “weapons of mass destruction” originated as an umbrella concept
covering weapons with the capability to cause indiscriminate loss of life and wide-scale
destruction.

House of Commons, Official Report, 3 February 2004, column 625.
Review of Intelligence on Weapons of Mass Destruction [“The Butler Report”], 14 July 2004, HC 898,
paragraphs 152-153.
7 
8 

4

4  |  Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction

26.  The first official definition was provided by the UN Commission for Conventional
Armaments in 1948 which defined weapons of mass destruction as “atomic explosive
devices, radioactive material weapons, lethal chemical and biological weapons, and any
weapons developed in the future which have characteristics comparable in destructive
effect to those of the atomic bomb or other weapons mentioned above”.9 This definition
has been used in successive UN resolutions dealing with disarmament.
27.  The Butler Report pointed out that there was “a considerable and long-standing
academic debate about the proper interpretation of the phrase ‘weapons of mass
destruction’” which had been “used so variously as to confuse rather than enlighten
readers”.10 The Butler Report avoided the use of the term WMD wherever possible.
Where it was used, for example when quoting documents or evidence, the Butler Report
interpreted it in the light of the obligations imposed by the UN Security Council after
the 1990 to 1991 Gulf Conflict to address the threat posed by Iraq and to control Iraq’s
military capabilities, including weapons of mass destruction and ballistic missiles in
resolution 687 (1991) (see Section 1.1).
28.  The Inquiry shares the view expressed in the Butler Report but recognises that
the term has gained common currency and may, therefore, appear in the analysis
that follows as a shorthand description of weapons that would not fall within the
original definition.
29.  All nuclear, chemical and biological weapons are frequently characterised as
weapons of mass destruction, and radiological devices have been included
more recently.
30.  The Butler Report defined radiological weapons as those employing “conventional,
typically high-explosive means to distribute radioactive material”.11
31.  Systems that fall within the definition of WMD may cause limited casualties within
a finite area; for example attacks such as the use of the chemical agent sarin in the
Tokyo underground. On the other hand, as the attacks on the US on 11 September
2001 demonstrated, mass casualties that have a strategic impact can be produced in
other ways.
32.  Mr Tim Dowse, Head of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office (FCO)
Non‑Proliferation Department from January 2001 to November 2003, told the Inquiry
that “efforts to restrain the spread of ballistic missiles” tended to be “associated with”
weapons of mass destruction because they provided a means of delivery against which
it was difficult to defend and which was regarded as “quite destabilising”.12
UN Document S/C.3/32/Rev.1, August 1948.
Review of Intelligence on Weapons of Mass Destruction [“The Butler Report”], 14 July 2004, HC 898,
paragraph 14.
11 
Review of Intelligence on Weapons of Mass Destruction [“The Butler Report”], 14 July 2004, HC 898,
paragraph 17.
12 
Public hearing, 25 November 2009, page 4.
9 

10 

5

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

33.  Nuclear, chemical and biological weapons are all subject to arms control regimes:

•	
•	

the 1968 Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, which entered
into force in 1970, requires non‑nuclear weapons states to agree not to seek
to acquire nuclear weapons; and
the 1975 Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention (BTWC)13 and the 1997
Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) prohibit the development, production
and stockpiling of the respective sets of weapons.

34.  Iraq signed the BTWC in 1972, but did not ratify it. It did not sign the CWC until
2009. One important difference between the two conventions is that the BTWC has no
effective enforcement mechanisms while the CWC does.
35.  Iraq has never been a member of the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR).14

The BTWC reaffirms the 1925 Geneva Protocol, which prohibits use of biological and toxin weapons.
The MTCR was established in 1987 to prevent the proliferation of unmanned systems capable of
delivering weapons of mass destruction. It is an informal and voluntary association that seeks members’
adherence to common export policy guidelines (the MTCR Guidelines) applied to a common list of
controlled goods.
13 
14 

6

