SECTION 4.4
THE SEARCH FOR WMD
Contents
Introduction and key findings ........................................................................................ 425
Planning and preparation for the post-conflict search for WMD ................................... 426
Security Council debate on the future role of UNMOVIC ........................................ 442
Creation of the Iraq Survey Group ................................................................................ 443
Managing public expectations ....................................................................................... 452
Pressure to set up an independent inquiry on pre-conflict intelligence ......................... 469
House of Commons debates on Iraq, 4 June 2003 ................................................ 474
Dr Blix’s final report to the Security Council ............................................................ 481
The JIC Sub-Committee on Iraq/WMD and the WMD Task Force ......................... 483
UK concerns about the ISG’s slow start ................................................................. 486
JIC Assessment, 27 June 2003: ‘Iraq WMD: The Emerging Picture’ ...................... 495
FAC Report, 7 July 2003: ‘The Decision to go to War in Iraq’ ....................................... 498
Mr Blair’s evidence to the Liaison Committee, 8 July 2003 .................................... 499
House of Commons debate on Iraq, 15 July 2003 ................................................. 500
JIC Current Intelligence Group Assessment, 16 July 2003: ‘Iraq:
Prohibited Ballistic Missile Designs’ ........................................................................ 503
The ISG builds momentum ........................................................................................... 505
Preparation of the ISG Interim Report .................................................................... 511
JIC discussion of the draft ISG Interim Report ....................................................... 515
ISC Report, 11 September 2003: ‘Iraqi Weapons of Mass Destruction –
Intelligence and Assessments’ ...................................................................................... 518
The ISG Interim Report, 2 October 2003 ...................................................................... 520
Follow-up to the ISG Interim Report ............................................................................. 530
House of Commons debate on Iraq, 22 October 2003 ........................................... 531
Impact of the transfer of ISG resources from WMD to counter‑terrorism ............... 531
Government responses to the FAC ........................................................................ 534
The transition from Dr Kay to Mr Duelfer ...................................................................... 535
Dr Kay’s evidence to the Senate Armed Services Committee, 28 January 2004 ... 546

423

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

The Hutton Report, 28 January 2004 ............................................................................ 547
The decision to establish the Butler Review ................................................................. 549
Mr Tenet’s speech to Georgetown University, 5 February 2004 ............................. 556
The search for WMD, January to July 2004 .................................................................. 558
Preparation of the ISG Status Report ..................................................................... 562
The ISG Status Report, 30 March 2004 ................................................................. 573
The transfer of power to the Iraqi Interim Government ........................................... 575
The Butler and Senate Intelligence Committee Reports, July 2004 ............................. 581
Mr Blair’s evidence to the Liaison Committee, 6 July 2004 .................................... 583
The Senate Intelligence Committee Report, 9 July 2004 ....................................... 584
The Butler Report, 14 July 2004 ............................................................................. 586
The ISG Comprehensive Report, 6 October 2004 ........................................................ 588
The Government’s response to the ISG Comprehensive Report ........................... 598
Closure of the ISG and Addendums to the Comprehensive Report ............................. 600
Report of the US Commission on the Intelligence Capabilities of the
United States Regarding Weapons of Mass Destruction, 31 March 2005 .............. 603
JIC Assessment, 28 September 2006: ‘Iraqi Chemical Weapons:
Implications of Recent Finds’ .................................................................................. 603
Conclusions .................................................................................................................. 604

424

4.4  |  The search for WMD

Introduction and key findings
1.  This Section addresses:

•	
•	
•	
•	

the post-invasion search for evidence of weapons of mass destruction (WMD)
in Iraq;
the Government’s response to the failure to find stockpiles of WMD in Iraq;
demands for an independent judge-led inquiry into pre-conflict intelligence on
Iraq’s WMD and the decision to establish the Butler Review; and
the Government’s involvement with the preparation and publication of the series
of reports produced by the Iraq Survey Group.

2.  This Section summarises, but does not include, detailed comment on findings relating
to pre-conflict intelligence on Iraqi WMD and the post-conflict search for WMD published
between 2003 and 2005 by:

•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

the House of Commons Foreign Affairs Committee;
the Intelligence and Security Committee of Parliament;
the Hutton Inquiry;
the Butler Review;
the Iraq Survey Group;
the US Senate Committee on Intelligence; and
the US Commission on Intelligence Capabilities.

3.  The pre-invasion intelligence on Iraqi WMD and the withdrawal three lines of
reporting by the Secret Intelligence Service in 2003 and 2004 are addressed in
Sections 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3.

Key findings
•	

The search for evidence of WMD in Iraq was started during the military campaign
by Exploitation Task Force-75 and was carried forward from June 2003 by the Iraq
Survey Group (ISG). The UK participated in both. By June 2004, the ISG had a staff
of 1,787, of whom 54 came from the UK.

•	

As the insurgency developed, the ISG’s operating conditions became increasingly
difficult. There was competition for resources between counter-terrorism operations
and the search for WMD evidence, and some ISG staff were diverted to the former.

•	

Mr Blair took a close interest in the work of the ISG and the presentation of its reports
and the wider narrative about WMD. He raised the subject with President Bush.

•	

The Government was confident that pre-conflict assessments of Iraq’s WMD
capabilities would be confirmed once Saddam Hussein’s regime had been removed.

•	

It quickly became apparent that it was unlikely that significant stockpiles would
be found. This led to challenges to the credibility of both the Government and the
intelligence community.

425

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

•	

There were soon demands for an independent judge-led inquiry into the pre-conflict
intelligence.

•	

The Government was quick to acknowledge the need for a review, rejecting an
independent inquiry in favour of reviews initiated by the House of Commons
Foreign Affairs Committee (FAC) and the Intelligence and Security Committee of
Parliament (ISC).

•	

The Government’s reluctance to establish an independent public inquiry became
untenable in January 2004 when President Bush announced his own decision to set
up an independent inquiry in the US.

•	

Faced with criticism of the pre-conflict intelligence and the absence of evidence of a
current Iraqi WMD capability, Mr Blair sought to defend the decision to take military
action by emphasising instead:
––

Saddam Hussein’s strategic intent;

––

the regime’s breaches of Security Council resolutions; and

––

the positive impact of military action in Iraq on global counter-proliferation efforts.

•	

The ISG’s principal findings – that Iraq’s WMD capability had mostly been destroyed
in 1991 but that it had been Saddam Hussein’s strategic intent to preserve the
capability to reconstitute his weapons of mass destruction – were significant, but did
not support statements made by the UK and US Governments before the invasion,
which had focused on Iraq’s current capabilities and an urgent and growing threat.

•	

The explanation for military action put forward by Mr Blair in October 2004 drew on
the ISG’s findings, but was not the explanation given before the conflict.

Planning and preparation for the post-conflict search
for WMD
4.  In February 2003, Mr Geoff Hoon, the Defence Secretary, approved UK
participation in a US-led rehearsal for the post-conflict search for evidence of
WMD in Iraq.
5.  Before approving UK participation in the search itself, Mr Hoon requested advice
on how to ensure the impartiality of the exercise, including through the possible
early involvement of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection
Commission (UNMOVIC) and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).
6.  During and immediately after the invasion of Iraq, the search for WMD was the
responsibility of Exploitation Task Force-75 (XTF-75), a US-led military unit, with small
UK and Australian contingents.1
7.  XTF-75 was deployed to carry out Sensitive Site Exploitation (SSE), a military term
for the exploitation of “personnel, documents, electronic files, and material captured at
the site, while neutralizing the site or any of its contents”.
Vandal T et al. The Strategic Implications of Sensitive Site Exploitation. National Defense University,
National War College, 2003.
1 

426

4.4  |  The search for WMD

8.  Officials had begun to consider the UK contribution to SSE in early February 2003.
9.  On 4 February, Mr Tim Dowse, Head of FCO Non-Proliferation Department (NPD),2
chaired a meeting with officials from the Secret Intelligence Service (SIS) and the
Ministry of Defence (MOD) to discuss post-conflict WMD issues and the possible
role of UNMOVIC.3
10.  The MOD outlined US plans for intelligence exploitation and clean-up over a period
of several years, and explained that the plans envisaged unilateral action by the US with
no role for the UN or other UN Member States.
11.  Participants at the meeting agreed that it was very unlikely that US views could
be shifted significantly, but that the US must be made aware of the potential value of
internationalising the clean-up.
12.  On 10 February, Mr David Johnson, Head of MOD Iraq Secretariat, sent Mr Hoon
briefing for a visit to Washington (see Section 6.2).4 The briefing included a paper on
“dealing with WMD”.
13.  Mr Johnson stated that there had been a good deal of “military-to-military” planning
between the UK and the US on WMD, and that the UK had identified the specialist
contributions it could make at various stages during and after the conflict.
14.  The attached paper on WMD stated that SSE required specialist expertise that was
“in very short supply”. To secure maximum value from scarce resources, the US planned
to establish a Coalition Intelligence Exploitation Base (IEB) in southern Iraq reporting
to Lieutenant General David McKiernan, Commander of the Coalition Forces Land
Component Command (CFLCC). IEB capabilities would include:

•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

Site Survey Teams for initial analysis of sites secured by ground forces;
Mobile Exploitation Teams to collect evidence;
Disablement Teams to put facilities out of action;
laboratories to verify and catalogue evidence; and
elimination and disposal of WMD.

15.  The paper stated that SSE was important to the UK for two reasons:

•	
•	

achieving the UK’s prime objective of eliminating Iraq’s WMD; and
securing the hard evidence needed retrospectively to demonstrate the case
for military action, especially if it were to take place without UN authorisation.

Non-Proliferation Department (NPD) was renamed Counter-Proliferation Department (CPD) in 2003.
Minute NPD [junior official] to Dowse, 5 February 2003, ‘Iraq: Aftermath: WMD Clean-up’.
4 
Minute Johnson to PS/Secretary of State [MOD], 10 February 2003, ‘Secretary of State’s Visit to
Washington: Iraq.’
2 
3 

427

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

16.  The paper stated that it was in the UK’s interest to contribute and that the US was
“very keen” for it to do so. But the UK needed to be clear that its willingness to help was
conditional on resolving two issues:
“•	 ‘Impartiality mechanisms’ to ensure that Coalition activity has international
credibility.

•	

The involvement of UNMOVIC and the IAEA once the situation is stable; as with
the aftermath generally, the Pentagon’s hang-ups about the UN are getting in
the way of common sense and our long-term interests.”

17.  The paper stated that, if those conditions were met, during the conflict the UK
should contribute:

•	
•	
•	

liaison officers in the IEB and the CFLCC SSE Fusion Cell;

•	
•	

a DIS counter-terrorism expert;

•	

a Squadron HQ of the Joint NBC (Nuclear Biological Chemical) Regiment;
a Battlefield Intelligence Recovery Team of Defence Intelligence Staff (DIS) and
Explosive Ordnance Disposal (EOD) personnel;
an RAF Provost5 and Security Services Forensic Science Team to interrogate
computer hardware; and
seven scientists with a mobile laboratory to provide a limited analytical capability.

18.  Additional contributions could be made on an on-call basis through Air Marshal
Brian Burridge, the UK National Contingent Commander (NCC).
19.  In the post-conflict phase, the UK could contribute the Joint NBC Regiment HQ,
detection assets and other Specialist Monitoring Teams.
20.  Mr Hoon discussed the UK’s objectives and its potential contribution to the search
for WMD with Mr Donald Rumsfeld, the US Secretary of Defense, and Dr Condoleezza
Rice, President Bush’s National Security Advisor, in Washington on 12 February
(see Section 6.5).6
21.  The British Embassy Washington reported agreement that “broad UN cover for day
after management in Iraq would bring political, financial and legal benefits” and would
“facilitate an UNMOVIC and IAEA role in verifying WMD clear-up”.
22.  During the talks, Mr Jack Dyer Crouch II, Assistant Secretary of Defense
(International Security Policy), told Mr Hoon that Iraqi scientists would be key to
identifying the whereabouts of Iraq’s WMD. Because the public in the US and elsewhere
would expect early results, there would be “a heavy forensic input” at the start of
the programme.
A member of the RAF Police (RAFP).
Telegram 204 Washington to FCO London, 13 February 2003, ‘Iraq: Defence Secretary’s Visit to
Washington: Day After Management’.
5 
6 

428

4.4  |  The search for WMD

23.  Mr Crouch also agreed with Mr Hoon that UNMOVIC and the IAEA should help
verify WMD discoveries in order to counter speculation that they had been planted.
24.  On 17 February, the Permanent Joint Headquarters (PJHQ) informed Mr Hoon of
the deployment the next day of 74 personnel to participate in SSE “mission rehearsal
training” in Kuwait, and that up to 92 more personnel assigned to military operations in
Iraq might be “co-opted” to participate in SSE operations as necessary.7
25.  PJHQ stated that the priority was to ensure that any UK contribution:

•	
•	

was coherent with wider policy objectives;

•	

was “efficient and effective”: no more than needed to achieve the UK’s aim and
support the US; and

•	

did not put at risk the response to any chemical, biological, radiological and
nuclear (CBRN) incident in the UK;

took account of the significant Home Base and Force Protection demands on
the UK’s EOD and CBRN resources.

26.  Mr Hoon approved the deployment of 74 UK personnel.8 With planning “still at
an early stage”, he asked for further advice on SSE operations after the rehearsal,
including on:

•	
•	
•	

operational management of specialists in the SSE teams, including those from
other agencies;
“impartiality mechanisms”, including the early involvement of UNMOVIC and the
IAEA; and
evidence handling procedures.

PJHQ was also asked to reiterate to the US the UK’s concerns about impartiality.
27.  Mr Hoon requested that further Ministerial approval be sought for the participation of
additional personnel.

Minute Johnson to PS/Secretary of State [MOD], 17 January [sic] 2003, ‘Iraq: UK Contribution to
Sensitive Site Exploitation’.
8 
Minute Williams to PJHQ-Dep Hd Pol/Ops(ME), 18 February 2003, ‘Iraq: UK Contribution to Sensitive
Site Exploitation’.
7 

429

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

Operation ROCKINGHAM
The MOD Defence Intelligence Staff (DIS) set up Operation ROCKINGHAM to provide the
focus for UK intelligence support to UN disarmament activities in Iraq established under
resolution 687 (1991).9
An Op ROCKINGHAM cell in the DIS continued to exist after UN inspectors withdrew from
Iraq in December 1998, but was reduced to a single member of staff who maintained a
watching brief on matters related to possible future UN inspections in Iraq.10
The cell was subsequently expanded to provide UNMOVIC and the IAEA “with all-source
UK intelligence assessments on the extent of Iraq’s nuclear, biological, chemical and
ballistic missile programmes and information about sites of potential significance”.
In mid-March 2003, the Op ROCKINGHAM cell was expanded to encompass the
results of SSE and “WMD/delivery-related information from the DIS in-theatre Battlefield
Intelligence Recovery Team”.11

28.  On 17 March, after the failure of the Security Council to agree a “second” resolution
on Iraq (see Section 3.8), Mr Kofi Annan, the UN Secretary-General, announced the
withdrawal of all UN staff from the country.12
29.  UNMOVIC and the IAEA suspended inspections in Iraq on 18 March.13
30.  Admiral Sir Michael Boyce, Chief of the Defence Staff (CDS), issued the Execute
Directive authorising UK military operations in Iraq on 18 March.14
31.  The Execute Directive included an instruction to Lieutenant General John Reith,
Chief of Joint Operations (CJO), to:

•	
•	

“Support international efforts to find and eliminate Iraqi WMD capacity, its means
of delivery and infrastructure”; and
“… to provide support, as appropriate, to SSE activities during Phase 3
operations, but this must not be detrimental to overall FP [force posture]
adopted”.

Letter Andrews to Cabinet Office [junior official], 18 March 2003, ‘Bowen Group: Iraq WMD/Delivery
Systems – Expanded Role for ROCKINGHAM’.
10 
Review of Intelligence on Weapons of Mass Destruction [“The Butler Report”], 14 July 2004, HC 898,
page 90.
11 
Letter Andrews to Cabinet Office [junior official], 18 March 2003, ‘Bowen Group: Iraq WMD/Delivery
Systems – Expanded Role for ROCKINGHAM’.
12 
UN News Centre, 17 March 2003, Annan to withdraw UN staff from Iraq.
13 
UN Security Council, 30 May 2003, ‘Thirteenth quarterly report of the Executive Chairman of the United
Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission’ (S/2003/580); IAEA.org, ‘INVO and Iraq
Chronology’.
14 
Minute CDS to CJO, 18 March 2003, ‘Op TELIC: Authorisation for Military Operations in Iraq’ attaching
paper ‘Chief of Defence Staff Execute Directive to the Joint Commander for Operation TELIC (Phases 3
and 4)’.
9 

430

4.4  |  The search for WMD

32.  The UK Military Campaign Objectives, published on 20 March, stated that the main
tasks of the Coalition included:

•	
•	
•	

denying the Iraqi regime the use of weapons of mass destruction now and in
the future;
removing the Iraqi regime, given its clear and unyielding refusal to comply with
the UN Security Council’s demands; and
identifying and securing the sites where weapons of mass destruction and their
means of delivery were located.15

33.  The list of “immediate military priorities” in the wake of hostilities included “work with
UNMOVIC and the IAEA to rid Iraq of its WMD”.
34.  On 17 March, Mr John Scarlett, Chairman of the Joint Intelligence Committee (JIC),
sent Sir David Manning, Mr Blair’s Foreign Policy Adviser and Head of the Cabinet Office
Overseas and Defence Secretariat (OD Sec), a minute addressing the different elements
of Iraq’s capability, including Iraq’s actions since the departure of the inspectors in 1998
to pursue chemical and biological weapons programmes, and Iraq’s activities to pursue
enhanced ballistic missile and other means to deliver them.16
35.  In a Note produced on 19 March, the JIC continued to assess that Iraq had usable
chemical and biological weapons and the intent to use them.17
36.  The UK assessments of Iraq’s WMD capabilities and intent and their evolution
between 2000 and March 2003 are addressed in detail in Sections 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3.
37.  In a discussion with President Bush on 24 March, Mr Blair underlined the
importance of Coalition Forces finding Saddam’s WMD.18
38.  At the end of March, Mr Scarlett set out for No.10 the Assessments Staff view
of what the Coalition might find in Iraq, including that:

•	

the bulk of the sites that might yield results were located in the Baghdad
area; and

•	

most had been “cleansed over the preceding six to nine months”.

39.  Mr Scarlett set out the views of the Assessments Staff on what “WMD” the
Coalition “should expect to discover, when and how”, in a minute to Sir David Manning
on 31 March.19

Iraq: Military Campaign Objectives, 18 March 2003.
Minute Scarlett to Manning, 17 March 2003, ‘Iraqi WMD: Evidence of Possession’.
17 
Note JIC, 19 March 2003, ‘Saddam: The Beginning of the End’.
18 
Letter Rycroft to McDonald, 24 March 2003, ‘Iraq: Prime Minister’s telephone conversation with
President Bush, 24 February [sic]’.
19 
Minute Scarlett to Manning, 31 March 2003, ‘Iraq: Update on WMD’.
15 
16 

431

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

40.  Mr Scarlett wrote:
Chemical Weapons

•	
•	

•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

“Iraq is capable of producing the chemical agents mustard gas, tabun, sarin,
cyclosarin and VX.”
“Exact quantities of agent available are unknown, but we judge it is likely to be
between 10 and 100 tonnes (3.5 tonnes of nerve agent would fill 1,000 artillery
shells). We continue to judge that Iraq has produced chemical agent since
UNSCOM [UN Special Commission] left in 1998, although intelligence suggests
that agent production stopped prior to UNMOVIC’s deployment last autumn. We
do not know where this activity took place, but it is probable that it used dual-use
chemical facilities.”
“We know from intelligence that the regime expended a great deal of effort in
cleaning up all WMD associated sites, and dispersing equipment and material
in advance of UN inspections.”
“Details on chemical munitions are scarce. UNSCOM could not account for over
30,000 special munitions (both chemical and biological) although it is unlikely
that all of these remain.”
“We judge the most likely delivery means are artillery and battlefield rockets.
[Reference to reporting of retention of shells] mustard filled artillery shells from
a batch of 550 supposedly destroyed by Coalition air attack in 1991 …”
“Other means of delivery include aerial bombs, sprayers and missiles.
UNMOVIC could not account for 6,500 aerial bombs (which could easily be
hidden in a large hangar).”
“Despite some reports that such munitions have been deployed to Republican
Guard units, we judge that they probably remain under tight control … in the
area of Baghdad.”
“Over last few days there have been a number of reports concerning chemical
weapons … But the nature of the sources makes the veracity … difficult to
judge.”
A “few reports from senior Iraqi security officials” suggested that Iraq could not
“prepare or produce chemical weapons”, and that its stocks were “dispersed,
and that therefore such weapons will not be used”.
“In assessing these statements it is necessary to take into account the limited
access these individuals appear to have to military planning, their lack of
technical expertise and accompanying comments which are less credible.”

Biological Weapons

•	

Iraq was “capable of producing biological agents, including anthrax, botulinum
toxin, aflatoxin and ricin”.

432

4.4  |  The search for WMD

•	
•	
•	

“The exact quantities of agent and munitions available are unknown.”
“We have no intelligence that biological munitions have been deployed.”
The location of mobile production facilities was not known, but they were “likely
to be within areas tightly controlled by the regime”.

Missiles

•	

The UK was “still unclear” about the “state of readiness/assembly” of up to
20 Al Hussein missiles “or the numbers of launchers available. Some or all
of these missiles could have been dismantled to aid concealment. While we
believe Iraq retains the technical expertise to maintain and re-assemble … the
speed with which this can be achieved depends on the extent to which they
have been disassembled, and the degree to which they might need access to
specialised equipment.”

Sensitive Site Exploitation

•	
•	
•	

“The bulk of the sites which might yield results are located in the Baghdad
area. But … most sites previously associated with WMD production have been
cleansed over the last six to nine months.”
The JIC continued to judge that “key documents on Iraqi WMD programmes”
had been “dispersed”.
“Given the recent Iraqi emphasis on clean-up, dispersal and concealment, the
best prospect of exposing the full extent of the WMD programmes rests in free
contact with scientists, and other individuals, involved in the WMD programmes
and the (extensive) concealment activity …”

41.  Sir David Manning commented to Mr Blair and Mr Jonathan Powell, Mr Blair’s
Chief of Staff:
“Chances of finding WMD evidence slim before Baghdad falls and/or regime
collapses.”20
42.  On 3 April, SIS reissued to Mr Scarlett and a wider readership, two reports, from
11 and 23 September 2002, stating that Iraq had continued production of chemical
weapons (CW) after 1998.
43.  The content and provenance of those reports, and their subsequent withdrawal, is
addressed in Section 4.3.

20 

Manuscript comment Manning on Minute Scarlett to Manning, 31 March 2003, ‘Iraq: Update on WMD’.

433

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

Possible find of CBW agents
On 7 April, The New York Times reported that US troops had found several drums near
Karbala that might contain nerve agents and mustard gas.21
Mr Hoon’s Private Office informed No.10 that initial US tests had “indicated the presence
of nerve and blister agents, but the chemicals could yet prove innocuous”.22
Four duplicate sets of samples would be taken from the drums by a specialist US team,
one of which would be passed to the UK. Perceptions of the sampling process would be
hugely important to the Iraq campaign. Openness and independent verification would be a
counter to those ready to believe evidence had been faked. The UK would:
“… press US colleagues for their sampling process to include additional samples that
can be passed to independent laboratories, and for sites to be maintained as ‘scenes
of crimes’ so that third parties can verify there was no undue Coalition interference.
Verification by a suitable non-Coalition laboratory will be essential if the results are
to be credible in international (and domestic) opinion. There is clearly a role here for
UNMOVIC or a successor organisation.”
Mr Scarlett informed the Ad Hoc Meeting on Iraq on 8 April that there was no definitive
information about the find by Coalition Forces of material which could be chemical and
biological warfare agent.23
Mr John Prescott, the Deputy Prime Minister, who was chairing the meeting in Mr Blair’s
absence, concluded that opportunities to conduct interviews with scientists who had been
engaged on Iraq’s WMD programmes should be “pursued when the fighting stopped”.

44.  Concluding discussion at the Ad Hoc Meeting on Iraq on 9 April, Mr Blair stated
that the proposition that the UN weapons inspectors should return to Iraq could not be
decided at present.24
45.  When Mr Blair spoke to President Bush on 10 April, they discussed the need to warn
Syria not to give refuge to regime figures or to scientists who knew about Iraq’s WMD.25
46.  In mid-April, Sir David Manning advised Mr Blair of the need for a coherent
plan and greater urgency in the search for WMD.
47.  The UK Government sought to reconcile differing UK and US views on the
potential roles of UNMOVIC and the IAEA in the verification and monitoring of
Iraqi WMD.
48.  The US proposed a new organisation, the Iraq Survey Group (ISG), to lead the
Coalition search for WMD.

The New York Times, 7 April 2003, U.S. Finds Barrels that May Hold Chemical Weapons.
Letter Bailey to Rycroft, 7 April 2003, ‘Iraq – Handling of WMD Evidence’.
23 
Minutes, 8 April 2003, Ad Hoc Meeting on Iraq.
24 
Minutes, 9 April 2003, Ad Hoc Meeting on Iraq.
25 
Letter Rycroft to McDonald, 10 April 2003, ‘Prime Minister’s Conversation with Bush, 10 April’.
21 
22 

434

4.4  |  The search for WMD

49.  On 10 April, Sir David Manning chaired a meeting to discuss the search for WMD.26
Participants included Sir Richard Dearlove (Chief of the Secret Intelligence Service
(SIS)), Mr Scarlett, Mr William Ehrman (FCO Director General Defence and Intelligence),
Air Marshal Sir Joe French (Chief of Defence Intelligence (CDI)) and Air Vice Marshal
Clive Loader (Assistant Chief of the Defence Staff (Operations)).
50.  Sir David identified three areas where co-ordination was necessary:

•	
•	
•	

the search for material on the ground;
tracking down and interviewing Iraqi personnel involved in WMD programmes; and
public presentation of the issue and media handling of finds.

51.  Sir David commented that “US handling of those issues did not seem particularly
structured. We could no doubt do better than the UNMOVIC inspections.”
52.  Sir Richard Dearlove underlined that co-ordination with the US, which might want to
control the search for WMD, was the key. He reported that SIS experts were already in
Iraq. SIS was re-examining old material in the hope that it would generate leads.
53.  Mr Scarlett identified four problems:

•	
•	
•	

the large number of Iraqis involved in WMD programmes and their concealment;

•	

co-ordination in the UK and with the US.

the volume of documentation, much of which had been dispersed;
the munitions, which UNMOVIC assessed had been concealed and dispersed in
a disorganised manner; and

54.  Sir David commissioned further advice from Mr Martin Howard, Deputy Chief of
Defence Intelligence (DCDI), including whether there were any points Mr Blair would
need to raise directly with President Bush.
55.  Sir David concluded that the group would meet again to discuss the Whitehall
machinery that should be established “to track and drive forward work in this area”.
56.  Mr Howard sent advice on next steps to Mr Hoon the following day.27 This addressed
both the response to Sir David Manning and US proposals for a new organisation, the
ISG, to take forward activity in the post-conflict phase.
57.  Mr Howard recommended that Mr Hoon:

•	

26 
27 

approve a letter to Sir David Manning emphasising the need for Coalition
commanders to give priority to WMD detection and elimination, and informing
No.10 of the MOD’s intention to offer elements of the UK WMD expertise already
in Iraq to the ISG and to consider what more could made available; and

Minute Cannon to PS/C, 11 April 2003, ‘Iraq: Searching for Evidence of WMD’.
Minute Howard to PS/Secretary of State [MOD], 11 April 2003, ‘Iraq: WMD Detection and Elimination’.

435

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

•	

agree that the MOD should be prepared to approach former UNMOVIC, IAEA
and UNSCOM inspectors from the UK to reinforce the UK effort.

58.  Mr Peter Watkins, Mr Hoon’s Principal Private Secretary, wrote to Sir David Manning
on 11 April:
“As high intensity military action begins to draw to a close … our strategic priority
in Iraq should be the detection and elimination of undeclared WMD and delivery
systems.”28
59.  Mr Watkins wrote that the evidence on WMD would “come in a number of forms
ranging from WMD materials through research facilities to documentation and IT
records”. Interviews of scientists and other Iraqi staff were “likely to be one of the
most fruitful source[s] of evidence”. It would also be essential to minimise the risks of
proliferation of expertise. US and UK commanders had been given directions to search
out and hold “personnel of interest”.
60.  Mr Watkins reported US proposals to create an organisation called the ISG, under
the auspices of the US Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA), and that the US was:
“… keen to integrate UK and Australian expertise into this organisation. We
intend, in the first instance, to offer elements of the UK’s WMD expertise already
deployed in theatre … The total of our personnel currently deployed … is some 100,
increasing to 120 later this month.”
61.  Mr Watkins added that it was important the UK did not limit its work with the ISG
to “the UK Area of Responsibility where sites and personnel of interest are thinner on
the ground”.
62.  A public handling strategy would be needed, including “to moderate expectations
of very early progress”. Mr Watkins warned that the search for WMD and its eventual
destruction was “likely to be a long haul … months if not years”.
63.  Mr Watkins also reiterated concerns about the credibility of the Coalition’s
verification process should WMD be found:
“Given suspicions about Coalition motives, positive results would have considerably
more force if they were verified ‘separately’ by a non-US/UK laboratory. Ultimately,
we would like to see UNMOVIC or a successor body back in play. But US aversion
to the UN means that this is unlikely to be achievable in the short/medium term.”
64.  Mr Watkins reported that the FCO was approaching the Netherlands to explore
whether an independent laboratory there would be a possible alternative.

28 

Letter Watkins to Manning, 11 April 2003, ‘Iraq: WMD Detection and Elimination’.

436

4.4  |  The search for WMD

65.  The points which the MOD suggested Mr Blair might make to President Bush
included:

•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

“Detection and elimination of WMD … now becoming our top political priority.
Need to build on current efforts and demonstrate that our casus belli has
substance.”
Coalition commanders “should give high priority to identifying and detaining”
Iraqi scientists and other staff with information about Iraq’s activities.
Support for an ISG and the hope that it could deploy “as soon as possible”.
“Independent verification of US/UK WMD finds would be extremely useful
politically, although clearly a complicating factor.”
The UK’s “ultimate objective” was UN involvement, but it recognised “that [the]
US had reservations”.

66.  Sir David Manning showed Mr Blair the advice from Mr Howard to Mr Hoon,
including the draft letter from Mr Hoon to Sir David, which differed little from the version
that was sent. Sir David commented:
“We need a coherent plan for Iraqi WMD. This is work in progress … We need
to inject greater urgency; and I am not yet convinced that we need do everything
as part of one large US-led organisation. Finding people [involved in Iraq’s WMD
programmes] is key. That doesn’t depend on CENTCOM [Central Command].”29
67.  In an interview for the Spanish newspaper El País, published on 9 April,
Dr Hans Blix, the Executive Chairman of UNMOVIC, made a number of points about
the role of UNMOVIC and the events preceding military action in Iraq.30 Those included:

•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

The US and UK had told UNMOVIC that Iraq possessed weapons of mass
destruction. UNMOVIC never accepted that statement as an established fact;
its job was to establish the facts.
UNMOVIC had visited sites identified by the US and UK and found “nothing that
had to do with weapons of mass destruction”.
The US intelligence services had provided information to the IAEA about
“contracts for a presumed purchase of enriched uranium from Niger” which were
a “crude lie” (see Box, ‘Uranium and Niger’, later in this Section).
After his report to the Security Council on 27 January criticising Iraq it had
begun to co-operate and provide “significant data”, including the names of many
technicians and scientists who had participated in the development of biological
and chemical weapons in 1991. UNMOVIC “needed some months to work on it”.
The US had welcomed his report on 27 January, but the “great paradox” was that
from then on Iraq began to co-operate and the US began to criticise him (Dr Blix).

Manuscript comment Manning to Prime Minister, 12 April 2003, on Minute Gibbons to Manning,
11 April 2003, ‘WMD Detection and Elimination’.
30 
Global Policy Forum, 9 April 2003, Interview With Hans Blix: By Ernesto Ekaizer, El Pais.
29 

437

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

•	
•	
•	

The US and UK had become “very impatient in the first days of March”, and
UNMOVIC had not been left “to finish the task”.
The presumed threat from Iraq could have been controlled through inspections.
He did not accept the US view that “the war with Iraq was a way of sending
a sign to other countries to preclude their acquisition of weapons of mass
destruction”. If a country felt its security was assured, it would not have the need
to think about WMD. That was the first line of defence against the proliferation of
WMD. North Korea now wanted nuclear arms to fend off others.

68.  At the Ad Hoc Meeting on Iraq on 12 April, Mr Straw stated that the UK Permanent
Mission to the UN in New York (UKMIS New York) would be challenging Dr Blix on the
media story that the British had fabricated evidence about Iraq’s WMD.31
69.  UKMIS New York reported that, at the meeting of the Security Council on 22 April,
Dr Blix had said:
“… some recent reports of his comments – translated from foreign languages
into English – had contained serious errors. It was true that he had pointed to
weaknesses in intelligence provided, but he had also always stressed the need
for intelligence and the difficulties agencies faced. He had not suggested that
any government had fabricated evidence. In addition he had indeed said that
US patience seemed to run out at the same time as the Iraqis had become more
proactive. But if asked about the causal link, his view would be that the Iraqis had
become more active when they had seen that time was running out.”32
70.  In a statement to the House of Commons on 14 April, Mr Blair reported:
“… of 146 possible sites known to us, investigations have begun in seven but, in any
event, we know that for six months before the return of UN inspectors, Saddam put
in place a systematic campaign of concealment of weapons of mass destruction.
Until we are able to interrogate the scientists and experts who worked on the
programmes, and the UN has a list of some 5,000 names, progress is bound to be
slow. A specialised team, however, is beginning work and we are in discussion with
allies and the UN as to what the future role of the UN in such a process may be.”33
71.  In his conversation with President Bush on 14 April, Mr Blair stated that there was a
need to manage media expectations in the search for WMD and suggested there should
be no hesitation in offering amnesty in exchange for concrete information on WMD.34

Minutes, 12 April 2003, Ad Hoc Meeting on Iraq.
Telegram 705 UKMIS New York to FCO London, 23 April 2003, ‘Iraq: UNMOVIC: 22 April’.
33 
House of Commons, Official Report, 14 April 2003, column 616.
34 
Letter Cannon to McDonald, ‘Iraq: Prime Minister’s conversation with Bush, 14 April’.
31 
32 

438

4.4  |  The search for WMD

72.  On 16 April, Mr Scarlett informed Sir David Manning of the content of his
discussions with CIA officials earlier that day, which covered a number of issues,
including the use of available intelligence in the exploitation process.35

IAEA report, April 2003
The IAEA’s 15th report on Iraq, covering the period between 1 October 2002 and
1 April 2003, was submitted to the Security Council on 14 April 2003.36 The report stated:

•	

“As of 17 March 2003, the IAEA had found no evidence or plausible indication of the
revival of a nuclear weapons programme In Iraq”; but the time available “for the IAEA
before inspections were suspended was not sufficient to permit it to complete its
overall review and assessment”.

•	

“Provided that Iraq’s co-operation had remained active, and barring unforeseen
circumstances, the IAEA would have been able to provide the Security Council with
credible assurance regarding the absence of such revival within two to three months
of continuing verification activities.”

•	

Many areas of Iraqi expertise seemed to have been significantly depleted, and the
“core of expertise” on centrifuge enrichment that existed in 1990 appeared to have
been “largely disbanded”.

•	

The IAEA, “with the concurrence of outside experts”, had concluded that documents
provided “by a number of States that pointed to an agreement between Niger and
Iraq on the sale of uranium to Iraq between 1999 and 2001… were in fact forged”.

•	

The IAEA had therefore concluded that those specific allegations were “unfounded”,
but “it could not be automatically extrapolated … that Iraq had never sought to import
uranium”. The IAEA “would continue to investigate the matter”.

•	

“Extensive field investigation and document analysis had failed to uncover any
evidence” that the aluminium tubes sought by Iraq were intended for use in “any
project other than the reverse engineering of rockets”.

•	

“IAEA experts familiar with the use of … magnets in centrifuge enrichment have
verified that none of the magnets that Iraq has declared could be used directly for a
centrifuge magnetic bearing”. Investigations with foreign manufacturers contacted by
Iraq were “ongoing”.

In relation to recent events, the IAEA report stated:

•	

During the period under review it had conducted 237 inspections at 148 sites.
Iraq had provided access to all facilities requested by the IAEA “without conditions
or delay”.

•	

The Iraqi authorities had made available “over 7,000 pages of additional …
documentation” and “a large number of documents” relating to “Iraq’s pre-1991 laser
enrichment programme were found in the home of a former Iraqi scientist”.

Minute Scarlett to Manning, 16 April 2003, ‘Iraq: Discussion with CIA Directorate of Intelligence’.
UN Security Council, ‘Letter dated 14 April 2003 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Council’ attaching ‘Fifteenth consolidated report of the Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency under paragraph 16 of Security Council resolution 1051 (1996)’, S/2003/422.
35 
36 

439

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

•	

Iraq had “provided an updated list of 430 key technical staff involved in the past
programme and their current work locations. The list covered the great majority of
essential staff.” The IAEA was “able to interview 17 individuals selected by the IAEA
at locations chosen by the IAEA”. Some restrictions were imposed at the beginning,
“when interviewees first refused to be seen without the presence of an Iraqi observer.
Subsequently interviewees accepted to be seen alone, but requested that their
interviews be taped. Ultimately, two individuals accepted to be interviewed in private
and without being taped. Most of the interviews proved to be of significant help in
improving the IAEA’s understanding of the current state of Iraq’s nuclear related
capabilities.”

•	

Before inspections were suspended, the IAEA was “able to resolve the modalities”
for interviews outside Iraq.

•	

Since the inception of a system to review applications to sell or supply single or
dual‑use items, in May 2002, the IAEA had examined 9,965 contract communications.
Of those, 0.1 percent had contained prohibited items.

•	

The IAEA had “repeatedly called on States to provide actionable information of
direct and current value” relevant to its mandate. “Towards the end of the recent
inspections”, there had been “an increase in the provision of such information”,
but the “nature and extent of that information remained limited”.

•	

The Iraqi declaration submitted on 7 December 2002 “did not provide any significant
new information” relevant to the issues outstanding since December 1998.

The report concluded that “as the sole legal authority to verify Iraq’s nuclear activities”,
the IAEA remained “ready, subject to Security Council guidance, to resume its verification
activities as soon as conditions permit”.

73.  Mr Tony Brenton, Chargé d’Affaires at the British Embassy Washington, discussed
the role of UNMOVIC with Mr John Bolton, US Under Secretary of State for Arms Control
and International Security, on 15 April.37
74.  Mr Brenton reported that the UK should not expect the US to agree any role
for UNMOVIC in the short term. The US had particular concerns about UNMOVIC
inspectors handling sensitive intelligence on countries outside Iraq that revealed details
about global WMD networks, including procurement and financing. Even in the longer
term, UNMOVIC would have to be reformed before the US would consider involving it.
The US was willing to work with the UK on other ways to validate WMD finds.
75.  Mr Brenton advised that the US argument about intelligence had evident force.
The UK would need to have a good answer if it was to maintain its current position
on UNMOVIC.
76.  The Cabinet Office reported to Sir David Manning that there was a “consensus that
UNMOVIC/IAEA should not – and cannot – return to Iraq in the immediate future”, but in
a meeting on 16 April officials had:
37 

Telegram 507 Washington to FCO London, 15 April 2003, ‘US/Iraq: Role of UNMOVIC’.

440

4.4  |  The search for WMD

“… agreed that a restructured UNMOVIC/IAEA would represent the most credible
way of certifying elimination … While US private statements on Blix/Baradei
[Dr Mohamed ElBaradei, Director General of the IAEA] have been harsh, we have
seen nothing to suggest the Administration would rule out the inspectors returning
after a period of time, without Blix, restructured, and in co-operation with the
Coalition (though the precise mechanics of the last will no doubt prompt debate).
The time to restructure/recruit could cover the period until Blix’s retirement in June.”38
77.  Responding to Mr Brenton on 16 April, the FCO stated that the UK agreed with the
US on the immediate next steps, and on the need for credible third-party verification.39
The UK did not want the future role of UNMOVIC to become a UK/US problem.
Conditions in Iraq were such that it could be argued the return of inspectors was not
an issue. The UK was happy to discuss options for verifying Coalition discoveries, but
it was important to keep in mind the need for credibility, and “what the market will bear
in New York”. UNMOVIC and the IAEA were the bodies likely to carry most weight in
verifying and validating Coalition finds. The UK would look at alternatives, but they
must be sufficiently credible not to be dismissed as US/UK stooges and there were
“no obvious candidates”.
78.  The FCO stated that US officials had previously indicated that they were “prepared
to consider the verification/validation task being performed by a ‘restructured’ UNMOVIC
and INVO [the IAEA’s Iraq Nuclear Verification Office]”. UNMOVIC’s leadership also
needed to change. Dr Blix had said he would not extend his contract when it expired
in June.
79.  The FCO believed that the type of restructuring it had in mind could take place
“without adjustment to UNMOVIC/INVO’s mandates”. It was:
“… reluctant to offer more scope than absolutely necessary for others to make
difficulties for us in the Council. And, presentationally, it strikes us as an own goal for
the Coalition to start trying to re-write the very UNSCRs which we took military action
to uphold.”
80.  The FCO saw “substantial practical advantages” in UNMOVIC and the INVO
retaining responsibility for the destruction of WMD, which “could be a lengthy, hazardous
and very expensive task”. There would also be a need to consider whether long-term
monitoring arrangements could be required.
81.  The FCO concluded that “a successful intrusive inspection regime tailored to
the post-war Iraqi circumstances could be a useful precedent for dealing with other
proliferators”.

38 
39 

Minute Cabinet Office [junior official] to Manning, 17 April 2003, ‘Iraq: Role of UNMOVIC/IAEA’.
Telegram 168 FCO London to Washington, 16 April 2003, ‘US/Iraq: Role of UNMOVIC’.

441

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

Security Council debate on the future role of UNMOVIC
82.  In a meeting in New York on 22 April, Mr Bolton told Sir Jeremy Greenstock,
UK Permanent Representative to the UN, that “the US did not disagree with credible
inspections and getting WMD finds into the public domain”.40 But it was:
“… concerned about involving UNMOVIC too soon or too extensively … The
UNMOVIC issue should be left on the backburner – it would become less of a
problem as the Coalition made discoveries.”
83.  Sir Jeremy replied that the UK was “less neuralgic” than the US about involving
UNMOVIC, but would “not force the issue”. The UK wanted to ensure that there were
“credible arrangements that left no doubt over Coalition discoveries”. He also said that:
“US reluctance would be seen as a general reluctance to have the UN involved
in post-conflict Iraq (this was manageable). We had not identified any credible
alternatives … [I]f international verification emerged strengthened from the Iraq issue
it could be used in other cases.”
84.  The Security Council discussed UNMOVIC on 22 April.41
85.  Sir Jeremy Greenstock described the discussion as “subdued”. He reported that
Dr Blix told the Security Council that it was evident that civilian inspections could
not operate in Iraq. In addition, some of the assumptions on which the Council had
established UNMOVIC had changed, and it was entirely natural that the Coalition should
establish units to search for WMD.
86.  The draft UNMOVIC work programme could be adapted to assume that UNMOVIC
would:

•	
•	
•	

verify and corroborate Coalition findings;
continue to supervise destruction of WMD; and
carry out longer-term monitoring.

87.  Sir Jeremy reported that almost all members of the Security Council accepted
the need for UNMOVIC to return to Iraq and most highlighted the link with the lifting
of sanctions, but none pressed the US hard. The IAEA representative reported that
Dr ElBaradei’s view was that the IAEA should resume inspections as soon as possible;
it was the only body with legal powers to verify nuclear disarmament.
88.  Sir Jeremy told the Security Council that the UK saw a role for UNMOVIC and
the IAEA in verifying disarmament and long-term monitoring. He added that Coalition
Forces were “fully aware of the need to be active, professional, and to treat all relevant

40 
41 

Telegram 705 UKMIS New York to FCO London, 23 April 2003, ‘Iraq: UNMOVIC: 22 April’.
Telegram 705 UKMIS New York to FCO London, 23 April 2003, ‘Iraq: UNMOVIC: 22 April’.

442

4.4  |  The search for WMD

WMD evidence responsibly. We would share with the UN any relevant information we
uncovered.”
89.  Ambassador John Negroponte, the US Permanent Representative to the UN,
made no reference to UNMOVIC. He said that the Coalition had been focused on
re‑establishing security and would now intensify the search for WMD. This was
“likely to take time”. The US:
“… recognised the need for transparency … But … the disarmament regime needed
to be reassessed given the new facts on the ground … [T]he Coalition was still
very much in the stabilisation phase and the principal efforts in the search for WMD
remained ahead of us.”
90.  Responding to comments made during the discussion, Dr Blix made a number of
points, including:

•	
•	

“For independent verification, UNMOVIC would need access to locations and
persons.”
“… UNMOVIC was the only international body which had a role and expertise
in inspections of biological weapons and missiles. If we were moving to a
WMD free zone there was a question of whether we should extend rather than
dismantle that capability.”

Creation of the Iraq Survey Group
91.  In mid-April, the US invited the UK and Australia to participate in the ISG.
92.  At the end of April, Mr Hoon approved the deployment of specialist UK units
to the ISG.
93.  On 16 April, AM Burridge’s Private Office informed PJHQ that 119 UK personnel
were “dedicated to SSE operations”.42 Most were attached to XTF-75, with 44 “on
call” from 1st (UK) Armoured Division. An additional 68 personnel were attached to
“Supplementary Assets” assigned to force protection tasks, and could be “co-opted to
SSE operations” through a request to AM Burridge.
94.  AM Burridge’s Private Office proposed a number of additional UK contributions to
support the creation of the ISG, including appointment of a UK deputy head of the ISG
and additional life support to UK SSE personnel.
95.  In its meeting on 16 April, the JIC was informed:
“The US had invited the UK and Australia to participate in the Iraq Survey Group
(ISG), which would be tasked with looking at a range of post-conflict issues,

Letter Capewell to PJHQ, 16 April 2003, ‘Report from the Iraq Survey Group (ISG) Conference Held at
CENTCOM Forward Headquarters (CFH) – Qatar 13/14 April 2003’.
42 

443

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

including WMD, War Crimes and Terrorism, and would be fully effective in about
four weeks. It was clear that the US placed a different priority on WMD, which was
near the very top of the UK political agenda. Mr Howard would lead a UK team to
Washington … and would listen to American views, clarify their intentions … and
emphasise the importance the UK placed on the WMD issue. He would report
back to the Committee at their next meeting, after which the Chairman would brief
the PM.”43
96.  Mr Scarlett subsequently asked Mr Howard to report on whether the activities to
establish the existence and scope of Iraq’s capabilities was being given a sufficiently
high priority in all parts of the US Administration. Depending on his report, the JIC might
want to recommend the possible appointment of a senior political figure to oversee the
Coalition effort on WMD.44
97.  On 21 and 22 April, Mr Howard led a UK team from the MOD, the FCO and SIS to
Washington to discuss the ISG with a US team including Major General Keith Dayton,
its future military commander.45
98.  The British Embassy Washington reported after the talks that the ISG would be
“substantial”, with up to 2,000 personnel, and its task would be to “piece together the
deeds of Saddam’s regime, in particular the WMD programmes”. The US Department
of Defense (DoD) expected to have an initial operating capability in Iraq by the end of
May and that its work would take about six months. Maj Gen Dayton would welcome
“a substantial UK input”, including providing his Chief of Staff.
99.  The talks had highlighted several “pressing issues”:

•	
•	
•	
•	

gaining access in the short term to scientists and those involved in concealment;
improving the flow of information between theatre and capitals;
managing public expectations about WMD discoveries; and
third-party validation of those discoveries.

100.  US and UK officials agreed that:
“… Coalition forces in theatre needed to start to shift their attention away from the
(well-known) sensitive sites and onto finding the right people to interview. High value
targets were only part of the picture. Piecing together the puzzle would depend just
as much on the co-operation of mid-ranking officials.
“… The immediate priority should be for the commanders in theatre to set up safe
zones and reception points for Iraqis who wanted to provide information … Former
UNSCOM inspectors could then assist in interviews.”

Minutes, 16 April 2003, JIC meeting.
Letter Scarlett to Howard, 22 April 2003, ‘Iraq: WMD Review: Your Visit to the US’.
45 
Telegram 534 Washington to FCO London, 23 April 2003, ‘Iraq: Setting Up the Iraq Survey Group’.
43 
44 

444

4.4  |  The search for WMD

101.  The need to manage public expectations was also discussed. The process would
be long and technical.
102.  Mr Dowse, the FCO member of the UK delegation, highlighted a number of points
to Mr Straw, including:
“The immediate need is to ensure that both US and UK are making best use of
the quite substantial specialist military assets we have in theatre now, to pursue
the search for evidence of WMD programmes. Our understanding is that the UK
assets are not being used at all in their intended roles; the (500-strong) US 75th
Exploitation Task Force is searching sites, but largely on an opportunity basis rather
than in accordance with a coherent set of priorities. The commanders on the spot
have – understandably been focused on … [other issues]. They now need to make
a further gear-change, and put WMD at the top of their priorities. DCDI [Mr Howard]
will visit theatre early next week to make sure this message gets across to UK
commanders. The Americans are taking parallel action with CENTCOM.”46
103.  Mr Dowse reported that, contrary to the reporting telegram from Washington, the
ISG was expected “to roll out incrementally from the start of May”, and:
“Subject to Mr Hoon’s approval, MOD have agreed in principle to a UK contingent in
the ISG of about 100 specialist personnel, including the Chief of Staff.”
104.  Mr Desmond Bowen, the Deputy Head of OD Sec, held a meeting on 24 April
“to focus on the very short term, before the ISG is fully up and running at the end
of May”.47 He informed Sir David Manning that three main obstacles to early progress
had been identified:

•	
•	
•	

the search for WMD not being CENTCOM’s priority and the military operating
“in a piecemeal fashion”;
poor security, especially in Baghdad, making it difficult and dangerous to
interview some of those known to be involved; and
the absence of incentives for scientists and others to come forward.

105.  The meeting produced two ideas:

•	
•	

immediate establishment of a pilot scheme in Basra, using UK resources, to take
advantage of the fact that many WMD scientists were “likely to have been Shia
and may have gone home to the South”; and
development of an incentives package.

106.  Mr Bowen recommended a “real push” with the Americans and offered
Sir David Manning a note to use with Dr Rice.

46 
47 

Minute Dowse to Private Secretary [FCO], 23 April 2003, ‘Iraq WMD: UK/US Talks, 21-22 April’.
Minute Bowen to Manning, 25 April 2003, ‘Iraq Survey Group’.

445

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

107.  Mr Howard recommended next steps to Mr Hoon on 24 April.48 He explained that
the relevant US agencies:

•	
•	
•	

agreed that the discovery of WMD was a “high and urgent policy priority”;

•	

agreed the need to redirect US and UK resources in theatre while the ISG was
still building its capacity;

•	
•	

recognised the political, presentational and legal pressures for the UK;
agreed that the ISG would be “the primary executive vehicle” for detection work
once it was fully established by the end of May;

accepted “the political desirability of third party validation” of finds and did “not
appear to rule out the involvement of the UN in this process”, although there was
“considerable hostility to UNMOVIC in its present form”; and
agreed the need for co-ordinated public handling and expectation management.

108.  In relation to UK support for the ISG, Mr Howard recommended that Mr Hoon:

•	
•	

accede to the US request to provide a Chief of Staff to Maj Gen Dayton;
agree, as a first step, to assign certain assets already in Iraq to the ISG for an
initial period of six months and for deployment across Iraq:
{{ 12

•	

personnel from the DIS Battlefield Intelligence Recovery Team;

{{ eight

personnel from the Joint Forces Interrogation Team;

{{ eight

personnel from 7630 (HUMINT) Squadron;

{{ four

personnel from Document Exploitation teams; and

agree that officials should pursue additional steps to enhance the UK
contribution, including the urgent recruitment and redeployment of WMD
experts.

109.  Lieutenant General Andrew Ridgway, who had succeeded AM Sir Joe French as
CDI, informed Lt Gen Reith that Mr Hoon had approved Mr Howard’s recommendations.49
110.  Lt Gen Ridgway explained that a revised Execute Directive for Op TELIC would
reflect the need for activity in theatre to match the very high priority attached to discovery
of WMD.50 In the meantime, he requested Lt Gen Reith’s support in ensuring all were
aware of the importance attached to the work.
111.  On 25 April, Mr Howard informed Vice Admiral Lowell E Jacoby, Director of the DIA,
that Mr Hoon had approved the broad outline of the UK contribution to the ISG.51 It would
include a Chief of Staff for Maj Gen Dayton and, as a first step, for an initial period of six
months and for theatre-wide deployment, 30-40 personnel comprising:
Minute Howard to PS/SofS [MOD], 24 April 2003, ‘Iraq: WMD Detection and Elimination’.
Minute CDI to CJO, 25 April 2003, ‘Iraq: WMD Detection and Elimination’.
50 
General Sir Michael Walker, Chief of the Defence Staff, issued an addition to the Execute Directive
relating to the ISG on 18 June.
51 
Letter Howard to Jacoby, 25 April 2003, ‘Iraq Survey Group: UK Contribution’.
48 
49 

446

4.4  |  The search for WMD

•	
•	
•	
•	

the DIS Battlefield Intelligence Recovery Team;
the Joint Forces Interrogation Team;
7630 (HUMINT) Squadron of the Royal Auxiliary Air Force;
a Document Exploitation Team.

112.  Mr Howard explained that other possible contributions were being investigated
“as a matter of urgency”.
113.  Mr Hoon’s Private Office informed Sir David Manning on 28 April that:
“The Defence Secretary has agreed that we should respond positively to a US
request to provide a military … Chief of Staff for the ISG, and that we should assign
to the ISG UK specialist WMD related units, amounting initially to some 30-40
personnel, already in theatre or about to arrive. We are also looking at dedicating
other analytical expertise (including a Porton Down52 mobile laboratory and
ex‑UN inspectors) to the ISG effort. The US Commander of the ISG (Major General
Keith Dayton) anticipates taking full command around 30 May, though many US
and UK elements of the ISG should be in operation well before then … There are
considerable variations of view in the US on timescales. General Dayton is talking in
terms of six months. Others see the process taking two years or more.”53
114.  Mr Hoon’s Private Office explained that there was “a complex process” to go
through to ensure assets already in theatre before the ISG was established were put to
best use. Maj Gen Dayton was discussing the issue with CENTCOM. A UK team led by
Mr Howard would do the same with AM Burridge the following week.
115.  Mr Howard reported the outcome of his visit to the ISG planning team in Kuwait
and the site of the future ISG Survey Analysis Centre in Qatar to Mr Bowen on 2 May.54
Mr Howard identified security and logistic support as the main constraints on increasing
the WMD effort in theatre. WMD activity had to compete with other high priorities,
including support for the Office of Reconstruction and Humanitarian Assistance (ORHA).
116.  Mr Howard stated that he had “found no lack of commitment or urgency in respect
of WMD exploitation” and there was “an element of resentment that Washington and
London did not recognise the scale of the current effort”.
117.  Asked by US personnel whether UK political, legal and media opinion would
be satisfied if nothing was found and the case for military action rested on the fact
that Saddam Hussein retained the expertise and could have built a WMD capability,
Mr Howard had responded that he thought not:

The UK chemical and biological defence establishment at Porton Down, Wiltshire.
Letter Williams to Manning, 28 April 2003, ‘Iraq WMD Detection and Elimination’.
54 
Letter Howard to Bowen, 2 May 2003, ‘Iraq: WMD Exploitation: The View From Theatre’.
52 
53 

447

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

“We may not ultimately need to be able to point to vast stockpiles of agent, missiles
or warheads. But we would at the least need hard evidence of a programme that
could be mobilised at short notice and concealment activity.”
118.  Mr Howard also reported that there had been strong support for a scheme to
incentivise and attract scientists to speak to the Coalition.
119.  Separately, Mr Howard advised Mr Scarlett that he saw no need to appoint a senior
political figure to oversee the Coalition effort on WMD detection.55 His impression was
that Secretary Rumsfeld and Mr Stephen Cambone, US Under Secretary of Defense
for Intelligence, had a firm political grip on policy and execution. The difficulty lay in
transmitting the sense of priority and urgency into action on the ground.
120.  A paper prepared by the MOD on 3 May for the Ad Hoc Ministerial Group on Iraq
Rehabilitation (AHMGIR) on 8 May, stated that, by 30 April, investigations had begun at
19 of the 147 highest-priority potential WMD-related sites identified by the US and UK
before the invasion, and at a further 42 ad hoc sites.56 There were 400 lower-priority
potential WMD sites remaining to be investigated.
121.  The MOD stated that the proposed mission of the ISG was to:
“Co-ordinate and conduct intelligence exploitation throughout Iraq and locate,
disable and eliminate Iraqi CBRN/M [chemical, biological, radiological, nuclear/
missile] production, storage facilities and materials in order to: complete the removal
of the Iraqi regime; enable the prosecution of war crimes and crimes against
humanity; determine the status of Kuwaiti POWs … remove the threat from Iraqi
WMD and assist the Global War on Terrorism.”
122.  The concept of operations for the ISG was “still fluid” and could pose some
difficulties for the UK.
123.  The FCO and the MOD were “developing proposals for a reconstitution of
UNMOVIC tailored to the new permissive environment in Iraq”.
124.  The Cabinet Office’s Annotated Agenda for the AHMGIR stated that “US
investigation efforts are currently ad hoc but will be established on a sounder footing
from the end of May”. The ISG would have over 1,000 specialist staff. Officials invited
Ministers to “note the progress made and the time likely before investigations produce
clear results”.57

Letter Howard to Scarlett, 2 May 2003, ‘Iraq: Weapons of Mass Destruction: My Visit to Washington’.
Annotated Agenda, 7 May 2003, Ad Hoc Ministerial Group on Iraq Rehabilitation meeting attaching
Paper MOD, 3 May 2003, ‘Annex E: WMD and the Work of the Iraq Survey Group’.
57 
Annotated Agenda, 7 May 2003, Ad Hoc Ministerial Group on Iraq Rehabilitation meeting.
55 
56 

448

4.4  |  The search for WMD

125.  AM Burridge criticised CENTCOM’s handling of SSE operations in his ‘Hauldown
Report’ of 8 May.58 He wrote:
“The scale and complexity of SSE was underestimated by CENTCOM who primarily
focused on sites with WMD connections. They became fixated on the Weapons of
Mass Destruction Master Site List (WMSL) and there was unfounded confidence
that the ‘smoking gun’ would be found during the exploitation of early Priority 1
sites. With the rapid collapse of the regime and the failure to find any evidence
of WMD, there was a realisation that the number of non-WMD sites was far in
excess of capability. These needed rapid exploitation before looting destroyed any
potential evidence. The diversity of agencies … and forces … involved resulted
in a fragmented approach … In addition, reporting mechanisms were developed
well after the start of operations, which resulted in confusion and inability to
track progress.”
126.  AM Burridge also criticised the US decision to embed media in XTF-75. The “delay
in establishing the facts associated with many discoveries” had led to friction in the
command chain.
127.  On 11 May, an article published in The Washington Post described the
replacement of XTF-75 by the ISG as “a milestone in frustration for a major declared
objective of the war”, but recognised that:
“Even the sharpest sceptics do not rule out that the hunt may eventually find
evidence of banned weapons. The most significant unknown is what US
interrogators are learning from senior Iraqi scientists, military industrial managers
and Iraqi government leaders now in custody … Publicly, the Bush Administration
has declined to discuss what the captured Iraqis are saying. In private, US officials
provide conflicting reports, with some hinting at important disclosures.”59
128.  The article attracted wide coverage and prompted sharply contrasting headlines in
the UK:

•	
•	

in The Telegraph: “Americans keep up pressure on banned weapons”;60
in The Guardian: “Weapons taskforce leaves in failure”.61

129.  The work of XTF-75 was summarised in the introduction to the final report of
the ISG, published in September 2004:
“Many sites were inspected but with an aim of discovering WMD, not inspecting
and developing an analytical assessment of the Iraqi programs. Wartime conditions
Minute Burridge to CJO, 8 May 2003, ‘NCC Operation TELIC Hauldown Report:
07 Feb 03 – 08 May 03’.
59 
The Washington Post, 11 May 2003, Frustrated, US Arms Team to Leave Iraq.
60 
The Telegraph, 12 May 2003, Americans keep up pressure on banned weapons.
61 
The Guardian, 12 May 2003, Weapons taskforce leaves in failure.
58 

449

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

prevailed with concern about force protection primary. The work of XTF-75 was
therefore aimed at discovery of possible WMD locations (to eliminate a threat), not
the compilation of evidence to build a picture of what happened to the weapons
and programs.
“This early approach, perhaps logical if the goal was simply to find hidden weapons,
undermined the subsequent approach of piecing together the evidence of the Iraqi
WMD programs such as they existed. In fact, combined with the chaos of the war
and the widespread looting in the immediate aftermath of the conflict, it resulted in
the loss of a great amount of potentially very valuable information and material for
constructing a full picture of Iraqi WMD capabilities. Sites were looted. Documents
were either ignored or collected haphazardly or burned by either the Regime or
Coalition forces.”62
130.  In his memoir, Mr George Tenet, the US Director of Central Intelligence (DCI),
wrote that a lot of time had been lost by the time the ISG was established:
“… the Iraqis had been deliberately destroying records … government files were
being seized by the truckload by groups such as the Iraqi National Congress …
raising questions about the validity of any information that might later be discovered
in these documents”.63
131.  Lieutenant General Sir Robert Fry, Deputy Chief of Joint Operations during the
invasion, told the Inquiry:
“We certainly had special processes: Sensitive site exploitation … and as the
conventional advance went on there were a series of sites that were pre-identified
that were then searched for evidence of WMD.”64
132.  Asked what proportion of the military operation was geared to finding WMD,
Lt Gen Fry said:
“It was small … subordinate to decisive manoeuvre. Getting to Baghdad, winning the
conventional phase was what it was all about and this was very much a subtext, but
an important subtext.”65
133.  Sir Richard Dearlove told the Inquiry:
“I think that some of us expected that there would be some finds relatively quickly,
you know, whilst the trail was still hot. So it was very frustrating, in the early
weeks after the military conflict finished, when there was absolutely no progress
made at all.
Central Intelligence Agency, 30 September 2004, The Comprehensive Report of the Special Advisor to
the DCI on Iraq’s WMD.
63 
Tenet G & Harlow B. At the Centre of the Storm: My Years at the CIA. HarperPress, 2007.
64 
Public hearing, 16 December 2009, page 69.
65 
Public hearing, 16 December 2009, page 68.
62 

450

4.4  |  The search for WMD

“What we hoped was that maybe a military unit would run into something. But I also
remember the figure for the number of unguarded Iraqi ordnance dumps across Iraq,
and strictly speaking, all of those should have been inspected, but it was completely
impossible to do so.”66
134.  SIS4 told the Inquiry what he had expected to be found when the search began:
“It seemed to me that we had to get a fire blanket over the proliferation hazards, and
very quickly indeed …
“Secondly, while not expecting gleaming arrays of kit to be found, just curiosity
meant that we longed to get in there and find out what we had been tinkering with.
“Lastly, the Whitehall political question, ‘Well, SIS, you have been party to this high
tension pursuit of WMD. Where is it then?’
“So the need to orchestrate immediate follow-up inside Iraq on all that we knew, all
the leads, seemed to me to be very, very, very important. I was concerned that the
lead on this was going to MOD and in America, and my anxieties were borne out by
what happened. There were ammo dumps in Iraq covering square kilometres … It
was a huge task, and it needed very, very skilful and dynamic generalship to run the
follow-up. I’m afraid that didn’t happen.”67
135.  Asked whether SIS had a plan to deal with the situation, SIS4 said that he
recognised:
“… it wouldn’t be up to us. We didn’t have the staff. We didn’t have the authority. But
I did make the point repeatedly in conversations with people in Whitehall, particularly
with the military, that this needed gripping. The plan needed to be written, and
command and control put in place to make sure the plan was implemented.
…
“Movement inside Iraq was very tightly controlled by the military. People were being
arrested. My memory is that we did try to get access, but it was very muddled …
We put people on the ground quite quickly to be there to follow things up, but I don’t
recall any good coming out of it. At this time, of course, the military were on the
ground in Iraq. Force protection and military requirements, operational requirements
took priority.”68
136.  SIS4 expressed surprise at the relative lack of concern about WMD after the
military operation ended: “deployments remained, things were put in place, but they
weren’t being driven from the very top”.69
Private hearing, 13 July 2010, page 18.
Private hearing, [undated], Part 2, page 21.
68 
Private hearing, [undated], Part 2, pages 21-22.
69 
Private hearing, [undated], Part 2, page 25.
66 
67 

451

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

137.  SIS3 told the Inquiry:
“I assumed, as others did, that there was indeed WMD. I mean, it was very swiftly
shown that the nuclear reporting was pretty accurate and the missile reporting was
accurate. But the CBW, obviously, that became clear within a few weeks that there
was a problem. We had expected to come across facilities or shells and so on, and
we didn’t. Therefore there was already political clamour, if you like.”70

Managing public expectations
138.  On 21 April, Mr Straw expressed scepticism to Mr Blair about the likelihood
that physical evidence of Saddam Hussein’s WMD would be found.
139.  On 28 April, Mr Blair told the media “we can take our time about this and so
we should”. He expressed confidence that WMD would be found.
140.  On 21 April, Mr Straw told Mr Blair:
“I am very worried that, inexorably, we are being pushed into a position where we
accept that the war will only have been justified if a significant WMD find is made.
This is exactly the place where our opponents, at home and abroad, and the media
want us. We should not go there.
“The military action was justified the day we took it, on the grounds that:-

•	
•	
•	

the Saddam regime had had chemical and biological weapons – we know
that for sure;
it had failed to meet a mountain of UN obligations;
a huge number of questions about its WMD position and capabilities
remained unanswered (Blix’s 173 page report), and Iraq simply refused to
co-operate properly, raising entirely legitimate issues in the minds of most
members of the Security Council that they had a lot to hide.”71

141.  Mr Straw continued:
“However, I remain sceptical that physical evidence of WMD will be found:-

•	
•	
•	

70 
71 

Saddam had every motive, and months of notice before the fall of Baghdad
to destroy all WMD evidence; so did his collaborators;
remarkably little circumstantial evidence has so far been forthcoming;
the expectations from the intelligence have always been greater than the
product, so far;

Private hearing, 2010, page 4.
Minute Straw to Prime Minister, 21 April 2003, ‘Iraq: the Search for WMD and the Case for the War’.

452

4.4  |  The search for WMD

•	
•	

I was struck by General Franks’ caution on this when I saw him ([Mr Colin]
Powell [US Secretary of State] has been dubious about finds going back to
last summer and I think this reflects a wide view in the US military);
Your point that our experience in Northern Ireland … shows that large arms
caches can be concealed for years …”

142.  Mr Straw added:
“Yes, we did take military action in order to disarm Iraq of its WMD. But if it turns
out that under the pressure of the US/UK military build up, he disarmed himself,
so be it.”
143.  Mr Straw wrote that he understood that public appreciation of why military action
had been taken would be “enhanced” if there were “good finds”:
“But if we carry on saying confidently that the material is there … and have 1,000
men doing nothing but search for the next six months … and still nothing is found,
what then? Knowing it was there is not the same as knowing it is there.”
144.  Mr Straw concluded that, in the absence of significant finds, it would become
“all the more important” to demonstrate that post-Saddam Hussein Iraq was a far better
place than before. He was “wondering whether the whole US Administration” really
appreciated the imperative of “getting the water and power back on” and the hospitals
working fully.
145.  Mr Straw said that he would call Mr Blair “to discuss all this”.
146.  In relation to WMD, Sir David Manning commented to Mr Blair:
“The key is to find people not materiel – who can talk about Saddam’s WMD
programmes/aspirations/deceptions.”72
147.  During the visit to London on 23 April by Mr José María Aznar, the Prime Minister
of Spain, Mr Aznar and Mr Blair spoke to President Bush about progress in Iraq,
including plans to provide incentives for information about WMD locations.73 In Mr Blair’s
view, the Coalition should present the search for WMD as its third priority, after winning
the conflict and humanitarian assistance:
“WMD was not just a US/UK issue: the international community had been searching
for twelve years. It would take time.”
148.  In his minute to Mr Straw’s Private Office reporting the outcome of the Washington
talks on the ISG on 21 and 22 April, Mr Dowse cautioned that a “smoking gun” might not
Manuscript comment Manning to Prime Minister on Minute Straw to Prime Minister, 21 April 2003,
‘Iraq: the Search for WMD and the Case for the War’.
73 
Letter Cannon to McDonald, 23 April 2003, ‘Iraq: Prime Minister’s Conversation with Bush and Aznar,
23 April’.
72 

453

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

be found: Saddam Hussein had “had twelve years to hide the evidence”. Fewer than
a dozen of the 146 suspect sites identified as a priority by the Government had
been visited.74
149.  On third-party validation of findings, Mr Dowse reported that the UK delegation to
the talks:
“… made the point that what constituted credibility was inevitably going to be
subjective – ie what was sufficient for the UK and US Governments might not be
enough for the audiences we really need to convince, including the Security Council
(and UK media). Like it or not, it was hard to escape the fact that a UN seal of
approval would be the most difficult for the critics to dismiss …
“The Americans did not seriously try to argue the point, but I doubt that we entirely
overcame the deep reluctance – particularly in the Pentagon – to contemplate a
further role for UNMOVIC.”
150.  Mr Straw welcomed Mr Dowse’s advice, stating that it highlighted some of his own
key concerns, on which he had already written to Mr Blair.75 Mr Straw asked for a copy to
be sent to Sir David Manning, and for Mr Dowse to prepare a draft minute to Mr Blair.
151.  Mr Straw discussed WMD with Secretary Powell on 24 April.76 UNMOVIC was
rising up the agenda quickly. The US and UK had argued consistently for UNMOVIC,
setting it up in resolution 1284 (1999) and enhancing its role in resolution 1441 (2002).
Mr Straw did not see how they could now argue for it to be set aside. It was important to
keep the moral high ground.
152.  Mr Julian Miller, Chief of the Assessments Staff, sent “lines to take” on Iraq’s WMD,
agreed with NPD, to Mr Simon McDonald, Mr Straw’s Principal Private Secretary.77
On the question: “Iraqi WMD: Where’s the evidence?”, the points made by Mr Miller
included:

•	
•	
•	

Coalition Forces were actively pursuing the issue but the investigation would
not be “a quick process”. Saddam Hussein had had “ample time to conceal his
WMD programmes”.
The process would be “painstaking and detailed: we want to establish the truth
beyond any doubt”.
“Given the emphasis on concealment” it was “hardly surprising that concrete
evidence of WMD” had “yet to come to light”.

Minute Dowse to Private Secretary [FCO], 23 April 2003, ‘Iraq WMD: UK/US Talks, 21-22 April’.
Minute Owen to Dowse, 28 April 2003, ‘Iraq WMD: UK/US Talks, 21-22 April’.
76 
Letter McDonald to Manning, 24 April 2003, ‘Foreign Secretary’s Conversation with US Secretary of
State, 24 April’.
77 
Letter Miller to McDonald, 24 April 2003, ‘Iraq and WMD’ attaching Paper Cabinet Office, ‘Iraqi WMD:
Where’s the Evidence?’
74 
75 

454

4.4  |  The search for WMD

•	

Other judgements had been “borne out, including by UNMOVIC”, for instance:
{{ the

“illegal programme[s]” to “extend the range of the Al Samoud missile”
and “produce even longer range missiles”;

{{ concealment

of documents at homes of personnel associated with WMD
programmes”; and

{{ “suspicious

•	

programmes to manufacture long range UAVs [unmanned
aerial vehicles]”.

The “testimony of scientists and documentation about WMD development
and production programmes” would be “the key”. But witnesses could not be
expected to come forward until they were confident they could speak safely.

153.  On the issue of a role for UN inspectors, Mr Miller wrote:
“We appreciate the need for credible, independent validation of any discoveries …
UNMOVIC and the IAEA would be an option …
“As Dr Blix himself has said, the circumstances are not right for the inspectors to
return to Iraq at present. If and when they do, their tasks would have changed: the
focus would be on monitoring and verification rather than detection. That would call
for different skills – some restructuring of the operation would be needed …”
154.  In his monthly press conference on 28 April, Mr Blair stated that “the first priority
has got to be to stabilise” Iraq, the second was the humanitarian situation, and:
“… the third – and we can take our time about this and so we should – is to make
sure that we investigate the weapons of mass destruction, and we will do that.
And as I say every time I am asked, I remain confident that they will be found.”78
155.  Asked about why Saddam Hussein had not used weapons of mass destruction and
whether the UN needed to be involved to verify any finds, Mr Blair made a number of
points, including:

•	
•	
•	
•	

78 

Independent verification needed to be discussed “with the UN and amongst
allies”, but he had “no doubt at all that … some process of independent
verification” was needed.
There wasn’t “any doubt that Iraq has had” WMD.
Before the return of the inspectors, “there was a six-month campaign of
concealment”. That was “borne out by sufficient intelligence” that there was
“no doubt” in his mind that was what happened.
That meant it was “going to be far more difficult for them to reconstitute that
material to use”, and “we were giving very strong warnings to commanders in
the fields as to what would happen if they did”.

10 Downing Street, 28 April 2003, PM focuses on Iraq and domestic agenda.

455

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

•	

The Government was “anxious not to start making the claims until we have
absolutely bottomed out anything by way of information that comes to us”.

156.  In response to a suggestion that WMD had not been as big a threat as he thought,
Mr Blair pointed out that Iraq could have reconstituted concealed weapons “had we all
left Iraq and the weapons inspectors not being able to carry out their job”. He added
that he thought there would be “increasing evidence of links between the previous Iraqi
regime and terrorist organisations”.
157.  On 2 May, Mr Straw sent Mr Blair further thoughts on what might be found
in Iraq. Evidence might take the form of testimony or documents rather than
materiel.
158.  On the role of UNMOVIC and the IAEA, Mr Straw advised that it would be
“odd” if the Coalition refused to co-operate with the weapons inspectors having
made that the centrepiece of the case against Saddam Hussein.
159.  Mr Straw wrote again to Mr Blair on 2 May reiterating his concerns that the
plans for handling the detection and elimination of Iraqi WMD “should not become the
foundation on which critics of our military action in Iraq” could “build a new case to
attack us”.79
160.  Mr Straw welcomed the action being taken to impress on commanders in Iraq
the importance of the issue and that work was in hand to identify a substantial UK
contribution to the ISG. But the timeframe for ISG deployment highlighted the need to
manage expectations:
“This is not a matter of suggesting that we may not, in the event, find any evidence
of WMD programmes. On the contrary, as you told the media on 28 April, we are
confident that we will. But we must keep drumming home three messages:
– 	 we already have substantial evidence: both from before the fighting and
what we have discovered since. There is 173 pages of evidence in Blix’s
7 March report. Examples since include the discoveries of large stockpiles
of protective suits and atropine: Coalition forces were well known not to
possess chemical weapons, so what reason would Iraq have had for such
stockpiles other than to protect its forces against its own chemical weapons?
– 	 this will not be a quick process. Saddam has had twelve years to hide the
evidence and it is unreasonable to expect us to uncover it in a few weeks.
We should be stressing that the process of discovery and validation cannot
be rushed: we must be extremely thorough to minimise the risk of false
alarms …
– 	 evidence can take many forms. It may well not be in the form of finished
materiel (stockpiles of munitions, barrels of nerve agent etc); it is equally if
79 

Minute Straw to Prime Minister, 2 May 2003, ‘Iraq: WMD Detection and Elimination’.

456

4.4  |  The search for WMD

not more likely to come in the form of testimony from scientists and other
Iraqi personnel, and documentation. That sort of evidence is no less valid.”
161.  Mr Straw noted MOD concern that the last point “might be interpreted as moving
the goalposts”. It needed “to be deployed with care”, but it was “not new”. It was “why
we placed such emphasis on the UN inspectors conducting secure interviews”. In
Mr Straw’s view, it carried “more weight than the claim raised in some US newspapers
that the Iraqis may have destroyed their WMD in the days immediately prior to the war.
For that to carry any credibility at all it would have to be backed with very convincing
evidence of such destruction.”
162.  Mr Straw recommended that the UK should, more realistically for the medium
rather than the short term, continue to try “to change US minds” about credible
independent validation of WMD discoveries by UNMOVIC or the IAEA. Dr Blix would
“retire from the scene in June” and the task had:
“… now changed, to one essentially of observation and reporting. Coalition forces
will do the detective work. But the fact is that the inspectors still carry the most
weight with the audiences we need to convince, in the Security Council or the media.
It would be odd if the Coalition was now to refuse to co-operate with the weapons
inspectors after we made this a centrepiece of our case against Saddam.”
163.  Sir David Manning commented to Mr Blair:
“You should be aware. We are pushing the WMD dossier [issue] hard: but J[ack]
S[traw]’s points are well taken.”80
164.  On 1 May, Mr Watkins sent No.10 briefing for Mr Blair’s meeting with Secretary
Rumsfeld at Chequers the following day.81 Mr Watkins suggested that Mr Blair remind
Secretary Rumsfeld of the stronger political and presentational pressures in the UK
to find verifiable evidence of Iraqi WMD programmes. The US saw no short-term role
for UNMOVIC and there was little appetite in the longer term. Mr Watkins proposed
that Mr Blair say that: “suitably reconstituted – UN inspectors would confer maximum
international credibility to WMD finds.”
165.  Mr Matthew Rycroft, Mr Blair’s Private Secretary for Foreign Affairs, commented to
Mr Blair: “No way that Rumsfeld will agree this.”82
166.  Mr Blair and Mr Hoon met Secretary Rumsfeld at Chequers on 2 May.83 There is no
indication in the record of the meeting that WMD was discussed.
Manuscript comment Manning to Prime Minister on Minute Straw to Prime Minister, 2 May 2003,
‘Iraq: WMD Detection and Elimination’.
81 
Letter Watkins to Rycroft, 1 May 2003, ‘Meeting with the US Defense Secretary – 2 May 2003’.
82 
Manuscript comment Rycroft on Letter Watkins to Rycroft, 1 May 2003, ‘Meeting with the US Defense
Secretary – 2 May 2003’.
83 
Letter Cannon to Watkins, 2 May 2003, ‘Iraq: Prime Minister and Defence Secretary’s Meeting with
Rumsfeld, 2 May’.
80 

457

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

167.  Secretary Rumsfeld and Mr Hoon met again at Heathrow Airport before Secretary
Rumsfeld returned to the US.84
168.  Mr Hoon said that the UK had not seen significant output from the debriefing
of high-value individuals and scientists. There could be information emerging that
was of operational use and should be shared with commanders on the ground.
Secretary Rumsfeld agreed that this was an area that could be improved.
169.  Mr Straw raised verification with Mr Richard Armitage, US Deputy Secretary of
State, on 6 May.85 The key question was: “did the US want UNMOVIC back in?” The
issue could not be sidestepped indefinitely. Mr Armitage said that he was not keen.
170.  In discussion at the AHMGIR on 8 May, Mr Hoon stated that, given the role WMD
had played in the justification for action against Saddam Hussein, it would be important
to link any finds back to the pre-conflict evidence.86
171.  Other points made were that:

•	
•	
•	

Military action was justified by the continued failure of the Iraqi Government to
meet its obligations set out in UN resolutions.
If the UK Government faced criticism if further WMD were not found, the
response should be that Saddam Hussein could have avoided war by, for
example, delivering scientists.
If the Security Council had held together, there might not have been a need for war.

172.  Mr Straw concluded that it would be some time before WMD investigation would
produce clear results.
173.  Mr Straw told Sir David Manning that the absence of any reference to UNMOVIC
inspectors in the text of the draft omnibus resolution being discussed on Iraq
(see Section 9.1) meant “we were very exposed on the question of why UNMOVIC
was not on the bus”.87
174.  On 8 May 2003, the Intelligence and Security Committee of Parliament (ISC)
announced a review into the intelligence and assessments that informed the
decision to invade Iraq and whether the intelligence was accurately reflected in
Government publications.
175.  In its Annual Report for 2002/03, presented to Mr Blair on 8 May 2003, the ISC
stated: “It is impossible at the present moment to make any definitive statements about
the role of intelligence and the situation in Iraq.” The ISC had been briefed on the issue,

Minute Williams to Policy Director, [undated], ‘Visit of the US Secretary of Defense – 2 May 2003’.
Letter Sinclair to Manning, 7 May 2003, ‘Foreign Secretary’s Meeting with US Deputy Secretary of State,
6 May’.
86 
Minutes, 8 May 2003, Ad Hoc Group on Iraq Rehabilitation meeting.
87 
Letter Straw to Manning, 7 May 2003, ‘Iraq: Conversations with Colin Powell, 7 May’.
84 
85 

458

4.4  |  The search for WMD

but intended “to examine in more detail the intelligence and assessments available and
their use”.88
176.  Ms Ann Taylor, the Chair of the Committee, wrote to Mr Scarlett on 8 May
requesting “JIC Assessments relating to Iraq and its WMD, dating back to August 1990
and supporting intelligence”.89
177.  In its report, published in September 2003 and addressed later in this Section,
the Committee stated that it had “examined all the JIC Assessments produced since
the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait 1990”. The Committee had also “looked at the supporting
intelligence in critical areas to ensure that the assessments reflected the intelligence
correctly”.90
178.  The discovery on 24 April of a trailer thought to be a possible mobile BW
facility attracted considerable media interest in the UK and US.
179.  On 9 May, Sir David Manning advised Mr Blair that, despite the obstacles,
the initial prospects for finding evidence of Saddam Hussein’s WMD programmes
were “reasonably promising”.
180.  The discovery of a suspect trailer on 24 April is addressed in the Box ‘The
investigation of possible mobile production facilities for biological agent’.
181.  At the JIC meeting on 30 April, Sir Richard Dearlove “suggested that there would
need to be very careful handling of the emerging information on WMD in Iraq”. The JIC
“might find it useful to have a special meeting to discuss this in due course”.91
182.  On 9 May, SIS4 sent Sir David Manning a briefing note for Mr Blair on “the current
status of efforts in Iraq to produce evidence of Saddam’s WMD programmes”.92
183.  The covering letter reiterated the obstacles confronting those efforts, including
the poor security situation, the apparent disconnect between US organisations in Iraq,
the limited circle of knowledge about WMD locations and deployments, and the sheer
volume of potential sensitive sites. It was, however, a critical priority to find convincing
evidence of past WMD programmes before the deployment of the ISG.
184.  The letter described the suspect BW trailer as “an encouraging find” that would be
reinforced through exploitation of other related leads in co-operation with other Coalition
officials, but one that did, however, “illustrate the difficulties of co-ordinating press lines

Intelligence and Security Committee, September 2003, Iraqi Weapons of Mass Destruction –
Intelligence and Assessments, Cm5972, paragraph 10.
89 
Intelligence and Security Committee, September 2003, Iraqi Weapons of Mass Destruction –
Intelligence and Assessments, Cm5972, paragraph 12.
90 
Intelligence and Security Committee, September 2003, Iraqi Weapons of Mass Destruction –
Intelligence and Assessments, Cm5972, paragraph 16.
91 
Minutes, 30 April 2003, JIC meeting.
92 
Letter SIS4 to Manning, 9 May 2003, ‘WMD in Iraq’.
88 

459

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

… with the US”. The letter recommended that Sir David Manning raise the issue with his
US interlocutors during his imminent visit to Washington.
185.  The briefing note attached to the letter confirmed that SIS would be sending more
staff to Iraq to help the US effort on the ground, including debriefing centres. The likely
timescales for successful exploitation of sites was not to be underestimated:
“UNMOVIC allowed an average of two hours per facility, and found virtually nothing.
It had taken over two weeks to exploit and verify a single find, the mobile laboratory.
There were hundreds of known sites to exploit …”
186.  The note also addressed the suspect trailer and provided an update on
investigations into CW munitions and production which had yet to produce concrete
evidence.
187.  Sir David Manning passed the briefing note to Mr Blair, describing it as “An update
on the problems and the (reasonably promising) prospects.”93

The investigation of possible mobile production facilities
for biological agent
On 3 May, Lieutenant General Andrew Ridgway, Chief of Defence Intelligence (CDI)
informed Mr Hoon’s Private Office that the Defence Intelligence Staff (DIS) assessed
that a “trailer recovered north of Mosul on 24 April could be used as a component of a
transportable BW facility”.94
Lt Gen Ridgway wrote that:

•	

“The trailer has a vessel with a capacity of over 100 litres of agent. It is assessed
that […]”

•	
•	

“The discovery of the trailer is highly significant … It is a gun, but not a smoking gun.”
Some details had already appeared in the US media, but “their full significance has
yet to emerge”.

Mr Hoon was invited to agree that:

•	

the exploitation of the trailer was urgent and should be co-ordinated between the US
and UK;

•	

the US should be asked to agree to Dr Blix being briefed and to consider the
evidence being examined by an independent third party; and

•	

the discovery and likely role of the trailer should not be publicised until the US and
UK had agreed a common position.

Manuscript comment Manning to Prime Minister, 11 May 2003, on Letter SIS4 to Manning, 9 May 2003,
‘WMD in Iraq’.
94 
Minute Ridgway to PS/SofS [MOD], 3 May 2003, ‘Iraq: Probable Transportable BW Production Trailer’.
93 

460

4.4  |  The search for WMD

A paper prepared by the MOD on 3 May, for the Ad Hoc Ministerial Group on Iraq
Rehabilitation (AHMGIR) on 8 May, stated that the “most promising find so far is of a HGV
[heavy goods vehicle] trailer” near Irbil where an “initial assessment” closely matched
“earlier descriptions (from intelligence) of a vehicle that supported mobile BW agent
production”.95
The discovery of a “BW factory” was discussed in Mr Blair’s conversation with
President Bush on 7 May.96
The British Embassy Washington reported overnight on 7/8 May that the US had used
a general briefing on Iraqi WMD by Mr Cambone to address growing press speculation
about the discovery of the suspected mobile BW laboratory.97
Mr Cambone had emphasised the scale and complexity of the task facing the Coalition in
uncovering and destroying Iraq’s WMD, and explained that the resources deployed would
be “substantially enhanced” with the arrival of the ISG.
Mr Cambone said that the mobile laboratory was “very similar” to that which had been
described in Secretary Powell’s presentation to the Security Council on 5 February 2003,
and that, while some of the equipment on the trailer could have been used for purposes
other than BW production, “US and UK technical experts have concluded that the unit
does not appear to perform any function beyond what the defector said it was for, which
was the production of biological agents”.
Asked whether the trailer represented the smoking gun, Mr Cambone had stated that he
was sure that, as time went by, Iraq’s WMD programmes would be found to have been as
extensive as described to the Security Council by Secretary Powell in February 2003.
The Embassy added that it had raised the need for independent third-party verification
of the find with the National Security Council (NSC) earlier in the day. Although that
suggestion had been rejected on the grounds that it was highly unlikely that samples
worth verifying would be found in a trailer that had been scrubbed clean, the principle of
third-party verification, once samples had been found, was recognised as “a good one”.
The SIS letter of 9 May described the suspect BW trailer as “an encouraging find” that
would be reinforced through exploitation of other related leads in co-operation with other
Coalition officials.98
The briefing note attached to the letter stated that the suspect BW trailer “remained the
most significant find to date” and had received some media attention. There were differing
views on the function of the trailer, however, it was believed to be part of a transportable
production system (TPS). SIS would be contributing to the Coalition efforts to investigate
the trailer’s provenance, with the aim of obtaining “a high-level view of how it related to
other parts of the BW programme”. There was speculation about whether anthrax was the
original intended product. Further debriefing and computer exploitation were ongoing.

Annotated Agenda, 7 May 2003, Ad Hoc Ministerial Group on Iraq Rehabilitation meeting attaching
Paper MOD, 3 May 2003, ‘Annex E; WMD and the Work of the Iraq Survey Group’.
96 
Letter Cannon to McDonald, 7 May 2003, ‘US Foreign Policy Issues: Prime Minister’s conversation with
Bush, 7 May’.
97 
Telegram 615 Washington to FCO London, 8 May 2003, ‘Iraq: WMD’.
98 
Letter SIS4 to Manning, 9 May 2003, ‘WMD in Iraq’.
95 

461

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

On 13 May, Mr Scarlett informed Mr Powell that a “second possible mobile BW trailer”
had been found in Northern Iraq on 9 May; and that imagery indicated “a third suspicious
trailer in the Mosul area”.99 Mr Scarlett wrote:
“It is not yet clear whether we will be able to prove that these trailers were used
for BW agent production … But our assessment is that the first trailer at least (and
probably the second) were capable of producing micro-organisms as part of a
biological process … It is not impossible that they are capable of producing a crude
(liquid) form of agent …”
“A great deal of thought has been given to other possible applications for these
trailers. So far none has been identified …”
Mr Scarlett added that “our experts” had ruled out the possibility that the first trailer might
have been part of a mobile pesticide unit.
Mr Scarlett concluded:
“These are significant finds. There is a serious chance (I should not put it more
strongly) that the trailers form part of the covert production facilities for which we have
been looking. Whatever their function … [they] should have been declared under …
[resolution] 1441. At the right moment, and once we have reached the firmest
judgement possible … it will be necessary to explain their significance …”
Mr Blair commented:
“This is good + we should keep a careful note of all we are finding. How are the
interviews going?”100
Mr Scarlett also provided a more detailed note produced by the DIS and a minute
addressing claims made on NBC News, which could not be substantiated and appeared to
be based on the views of Dr David Kay. Dr Kay was described as “formerly nuclear Chief
Weapons Inspector for IAEA”.
On 15 May, an official in the FCO Non-Proliferation Department (NPD) advised
Mr Tim Dowse, Head of NPD, that Dr David Kelly, MOD Special Adviser Counterproliferation and Arms Control, had advised that UNMOVIC experts were leaning towards
the view that the mobile laboratory was not a bio-weapons lab.101 The FCO official was
concerned about the implications of Dr Blix casting doubt on the UK’s analysis.
SIS stated on 16 May that the most important piece of evidence found so far was “the
various BW trailers, which we are now firmly of the view are part of the transportable
production system (TPS) for BW agent”.102

Minute Scarlett to Powell, 13 May 2003, ‘Iraq: Second Possible Mobile BW Trailer’ attaching Note DIS,
12 May 2003, ‘Iraq: Second Possible Mobile BW Trailer’ and Minute Cabinet Office [junior official] to
Scarlett, 12 May 2003, ‘Second Mobile Trailer: The NBC News Report’.
100 
Manuscript comment Blair on Minute Scarlett to Powell, 13 May 2003, ‘Iraq: Second Possible Mobile
BW Trailer’.
101 
Minute NPD [junior official] to Dowse, 15 May 2003, ‘Iraq Survey Group: MOD Task Force Meeting,
15 May’.
102 
Letter PS/C to McDonald, 16 May 2003, ‘Iraqi WMD’.
99 

462

4.4  |  The search for WMD

On 1 June, Mr Scarlett informed Sir David Manning that a US inter-agency team with
one UK representative continued to assess that the BW trailers “almost certainly” formed
“part of the mobile BW production facilities identified in [pre-invasion] intelligence”.103 The
experts could not think of “any other credible explanation”. That was also “the firm view”
which had been reported on the US Defense Intelligence Agency website.
Mr Scarlett added that a preliminary draft of the team’s report had stated that the trailers,
as presently configured, could not be used as a biological production system. That report
had been withdrawn. Mr Scarlett commented: “It really does seem that it has no status.
Confusing nonetheless.”
Mr Scarlett concluded that there would be a further assessment of Iraq’s BW capabilities,
but a formal assessment could and should be issued only when “we feel confident that we
have enough data”.
Subsequent assessments of the purpose of the trailers are set out later in this Section.

188.  On 15 May, an official in NPD advised Mr Dowse that:

•	
•	
•	

Iraq’s two most senior BW scientists were denying knowledge of recent Iraqi
WMD programmes.
The head of Iraq’s National Monitoring Directorate was claiming that all SCUD
missiles had been destroyed between 1991 and 1993.
There was “considerable frustration” about the absence of UK involvement in
the US interviews of scientists.104

189.  On 16 May, SIS informed the FCO that information emerging from interviews
with individuals prepared to discuss WMD confirmed some of the original
judgements about Iraq’s programmes.
190.  SIS advised that it was not in the Government’s interest to allow media
reports that there was no evidence to justify pre-conflict claims to become
received wisdom.
191.  On 16 May, Sir Richard Dearlove’s Private Secretary sent Mr McDonald an update
on progress and ideas for changing public perceptions of Iraq’s WMD programmes.105
192.  The letter stated that the “poor security situation, apparent disconnect between
parts of the US system (and thus with UK agencies)” and problems flying in and out of
Baghdad were slowing down the effort, but SIS officers in Iraq were “fully switched on to
the task”.

Minute Scarlett to Manning, 1 June 2003, ‘BW Trailers’.
Minute NPD [junior official] to Dowse, 15 May 2003, ‘Iraq Survey Group: MOD Task Force Meeting,
15 May’.
105 
Letter PS/C to McDonald, 16 May 2003, ‘Iraqi WMD’.
103 
104 

463

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

193.  On the search for evidence, the letter stated:
“People who are prepared to discuss WMD are gradually emerging to provide
information. Most have only small pieces of the jigsaw, but these do confirm some of
the original judgements: continued CW production until mid-late 2002; replacement
of the large, static BW programme with a covert, transportable capacity; a massive
effort in the months before the conflict to break up and conceal much of the WMD
(which may thus have been inaccessible when the conflict began); the start of work
to develop extended range missiles, beyond UN-sanctioned limits; and the highly
restricted circle of those really in the know. Further interviewing of senior detainees
is likely to deliver more insights …”
194.  SIS assessed that the most important piece of evidence found so far was “the
various BW trailers, which we are now firmly of the view are part of the transportable
production system (TPS) for BW agent”. New information was also emerging on Iraq’s
CW and missile programmes.
195.  The letter stated that, despite the emergence of new information, the UK and
international media continued to report that there was no evidence to justify the claims
made by the UK and the US before the war. It was not in the interests of the Government
or SIS to allow that to become received wisdom. SIS was working on a media strategy
with the FCO, the MOD and others to address those points.
196.  SIS also reported that BBC Television’s Panorama planned to make a programme
on Iraqi WMD for broadcast later that year. SIS suggested that the Government provide
assistance to the programme-maker while taking care not to hijack the programme.
The onus would still be on the programme-maker to seek independent expert advice.
SIS advised that there was a greater risk in the programme being made without the
Government’s help, and that the programme-maker “might take at face value the denials
of senior detainees and be without the technical knowledge and guidance we can offer”.
197.  A copy of the SIS letter was shown to Mr Blair by Sir David Manning, with the
comment: “Evidence beginning to build. Suggestions here too for media – that need to
be reviewed with Alastair [Campbell]”.106
198.  Mr Blair replied to Sir David Manning: “A[lastair] C[ampbell] to speak to me about
this.”107 Mr Blair described as “vital” the letter’s assessment of evidence emerging to
support pre-invasion judgements.
199.  Sir David Manning sent Mr Blair’s comment to Sir Richard Dearlove’s Private Office
“To note”.108

Manuscript comment Manning on Letter PS/C to McDonald, 16 May 2003, ‘Iraqi WMD’.
Manuscript comment Blair on Letter PS/C to McDonald, 16 May 2003, ‘Iraqi WMD’.
108 
Manuscript comment Manning on Letter PS/C to McDonald, 16 May 2003, ‘Iraqi WMD’.
106 
107 

464

4.4  |  The search for WMD

200.  Mr McDonald replied to the letter from Sir Richard Dearlove’s Private Office about
progress in uncovering hard evidence of prohibited Iraqi weapons programmes on
2 June.109 He agreed:
“… that we have pro-actively to confront some of the negative media about the lack
of Iraqi WMD, and work to ensure that some of the evidence that is coming to light
finds its way into the public domain. Or, as you say, the media will remain camped
on the position of No evidence, No justification. In the absence of independent
validation of Coalition WMD finds, the media are playing a crucial role in setting
public opinion. Having an effective media strategy, agreed interdepartmentally, will
help address this …”
201.  Mr McDonald added:
“The idea of working with the BBC Panorama programme … seems an excellent
way to take the strategy forward in the short term. Providing background briefing and
unobtrusively helping point the programme makers in the right direction […] should
help to bring to light some of the hard evidence that is being uncovered. It will be
important to ensure that Panorama maintains its overall independence … However,
we should not regard this as an exclusive … [W]e should work with a range of
journalists to ensure that the message comes across clearly and coherently.”
202.  Resolution 1483 was adopted on 22 May 2003.110 Its provisions relating to Iraq’s
continued obligation to disarm, the US and UK activities in that regard and the future
of UNMOVIC and the IAEA’s mandates, are set out in the Box ‘Resolution 1483: WMD
provisions’. The wider purpose and provisions of the resolution are addressed in
Section 9.1.

Resolution 1483: WMD provisions
In resolution 1483, the Security Council:

•	

reaffirmed “the importance of the disarmament of Iraqi weapons of mass destruction
and of eventual confirmation of the disarmament of Iraq”;

•	

determined that “the situation in Iraq, although improved, continues to constitute a
threat to international peace and security”.

In operative paragraph 11 of the resolution, the Security Council:

109 
110 

•	
•	

reaffirmed “that Iraq must meet its disarmament obligations”;

•	

underlined “the intention of the Council to revisit the mandates” of UNMOVIC and the
IAEA “as set forth in resolution 687 (1991) … 1284 (1999) and 1441 (2002)”.

encouraged the UK and US “to keep the Council informed of their activities in this
regard”; and

Letter McDonald to PS/C, 2 June 2003, ‘Iraqi WMD’.
UN Security Council Resolution 1483 (2003).

465

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

203.  Speaking after the adoption of the resolution, Sir Jeremy Greenstock stated that
the resolution “did not seek to resolve every issue”; and that the functions of UNMOVIC
and the IAEA “as they relate to the complete disarmament of Iraq under previous
resolutions” would need to be taken up “in due course”.111
204.  Sir Jeremy added that the UK:
“… continues to see a role for both bodies in the eventual confirmation of
disarmament and perhaps, if the Council agrees, in the longer term monitoring
and verification.”
205.  On 23 May, Mr Howard sent Mr Hoon’s Private Office an update on plans for the
ISG and a draft letter to No.10.112
206.  Mr Howard reported that there was “considerable media interest” in the efforts to
find WMD and there had been “numerous PQs [Parliamentary Questions] on this and
the functioning of the ISG”.
207.  Mr Howard added that there was:
“… growing pressure for the Government to provide an assessment of how the
WMD findings match the statements made in their September 2002 Dossier and
No.10 have made accommodating statements on this: the US are understood to
be undertaking their own ‘post-mortem’ exercise in this area. There have been
problems that US briefings … are not properly cleared with us …”
208.  Mr Howard stated that there was a need for urgent work to develop a coherent PR
strategy for the ISG work and that he would provide further advice.
209.  Mr Watkins wrote to Sir David Manning on 27 May reporting that work on SSE
continued and would be enhanced by the ISG, but the timelines for establishing the ISG
were “still fluid”.113
210.  Mr Watkins explained:
“At present, Coalition Forces are working from a list of over 500 sites potentially
linked to the development, production and storage of WMD, overwhelming[ly]
concentrated in the US area of operations. As at 22 May, Coalition forces had
initiated investigations into 122 of these sites, plus a further 55 sites identified
since the conflict began. The most promising finds so far relate to mobile facilities.
The Cabinet Office is receiving daily updates from the DIS ROCKINGHAM cell
on all SSE activities.”

UN Security Council, ‘4761st Meeting, 22 May 2003’, S/PV.4761.
Minute DCDI to PS/Secretary of State [MOD], 23 May 2003, ‘Iraq: The Search for WMD’.
113 
Letter Watkins to Manning, 27 May 2003, ‘Iraq WMD: Update’.
111 
112 

466

4.4  |  The search for WMD

211.  Mr Watkins reported that the US was planning to expand and better co-ordinate
the existing Coalition effort by bringing together current WMD and other post-conflict
activities under the ISG. The draft mission for the ISG was to:
“Organise, direct and apply capabilities and expertise in Iraq to discover, take
custody of, exploit, disseminate and disable, eliminate information and material on
individuals, records, NBC samples, weapons systems, materials, facilities, networks,
and operations relative to:

•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

Terrorism
Iraqi intelligence
WMD (Main Effort)
Individuals associated with the Iraqi regime/leadership with WMD
Individuals detained by the Iraqi regime
War crimes and crimes against humanity.”

212.  Mr Watkins reported that the UK would be providing the Deputy Commander,
Brigadier John Deverell, who would “be running all ISG operations, with Maj Gen Dayton
addressing external and higher level ISG issues”. The UK would:
“… also assign to the ISG the UK WMD related units already in theatre or about to
arrive, including:
The DIS Battlefield Intelligence Recovery Team
The Joint Forces Interrogation Team
7630 (HUMINT) Sqn RauxAF [Royal Auxiliary Air Force]
A Document Exploitation Team.
“We are also investigating the most effective use of the joint NBC Regiment and
other assets in theatre … DIS liaison staff in Washington will be reinforced to
support ISG work, with a view to providing a UK presence in the ISG Fusion Cell in
Washington. The DIS is also providing individual reinforcements to ISG in theatre.
“We are also actively recruiting a cadre of UK ex-UNSCOM and ex-UNMOVIC
inspectors, and others …”
213.  Mr Watkins wrote that the UK needed to keep up the pressure on the US to
ensure WMD detection received the attention it deserved. There also needed to be
more work on public handling. There had been problems with US briefings in theatre
and in Washington not being properly cleared with the UK. The UK had taken steps to
ensure co-ordination was as good as possible. There was also a more general need for
Whitehall to develop a “coherent and proactive PR strategy” for the ISG’s work.

467

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

214.  Sir David Manning commented to Mr Blair: “US has been very slow to get the Iraq
Survey Group up + running – one reason for the PR difficulties – along with Rumsfeld.”114
215.  The ISG was launched on 30 May.115
216.  On 4 June, officials advised that the ISG was expected to achieve an initial
operating capability about 10 days later.116
217.  Under an arrangement negotiated between the DoD and the CIA, the ISG was
initially placed under US military command.
218.  The UK planned to provide 100-120 personnel, including some former UNSCOM
inspectors.117
219.  In a background note for Mr Blair on the difference between the ISG and XTF-75,
Mr Nicholas Cannon, Mr Blair’s Assistant Private Secretary for Foreign Affairs, described
XTF-75 as “a slightly mechanical exercise, carried out by the military, and based on a
fixed body of information”.118 The ISG was intended to be “a more flexible, intelligencedriven organisation”, which would generate its own intelligence, including through
interrogations, and have its own analysis capacity. The ISG would include former
UNMOVIC inspectors, would target individuals as well as sites, and would have
1,300-1,400 personnel compared with 750-800 in XTF-75.
220.  General Sir Michael Walker, Chief of the Defence Staff, issued an addition to
the 18 March Execute Directive for Op TELIC on 18 June. The Directive instructed
Lt Gen Reith to provide air transport for the movement of small teams of ISG personnel
between Iraq and Qatar as “a high priority”.119 The arrangement was to be kept under
monthly review.
221.  A revised Directive incorporating additional guidance, issued on 30 July, is
described in the Box ‘Revised Directive on UK military co-operation with the ISG’ later
in this Section.
222.  The ISG became “fully operational” in early August.120

Manuscript comment Manning to Prime Minister, 29 May 2003, on letter Watkins to Manning,
27 May 2003, ‘Iraq WMD: Update’.
115 
Letter McDonald to Rycroft, 2 June 2003, ‘Iraqi WMD: Third Party Validation’.
116 
Letter Watkins to Manning, 4 June 2003, ‘Iraq: WMD Detection and Elimination: Public Handling’.
117 
Letter McDonald to Rycroft, 2 June 2003, ‘Iraqi WMD: Third Party Validation’.
118 
Minute Cannon to Prime Minister, 3 June 2003, ‘Iraq: Iraq Survey Group and 75th Exploitation
Task Force’.
119 
Paper MOD, 18 June 2003, ‘Chief of the Defence Staff Execute Directive to the Joint Commander
Operation TELIC Edition 2 Frago 02’.
120 
Minute Scarlett to Cannon, 8 August 2003, ‘Iraq WMD’.
114 

468

4.4  |  The search for WMD

Pressure to set up an independent inquiry on pre-conflict
intelligence
223.  In late May, UK and US media comment on the implications of the failure to
find WMD intensified.
224.  On 29 May, the BBC broadcast allegations by the journalist Mr Andrew
Gilligan that the September 2002 intelligence dossier had been “sexed up”.
225.  On 27 May, after delivering a speech on Iraq to the US Council on Foreign
Relations, Secretary Rumsfeld was asked why Iraqi forces had not used chemical
weapons during the invasion.121 He speculated that one reason might have been that it
had been decided to destroy the weapons before the conflict. More information would
emerge as people were interrogated and there were still hundreds of suspect sites that
had not been investigated. Secretary Rumsfeld concluded: “It will take time”.
226.  An interview with Mr Paul Wolfowitz, US Deputy Secretary of Defense, published
in Vanity Fair magazine in late May, was widely reported to have suggested that the US
had settled on WMD as the justification for the invasion of Iraq for “bureaucratic reasons”
and as the only issue that all parts of the Administration could agree on given the
disputes over whether there was a link between the Iraq regime and terrorists.122
227.  On 31 May, the DoD challenged Vanity Fair’s account of Mr Wolfowitz’s
comments.123 It explained that the full transcript showed that Mr Wolfowitz had gone
on to say that WMD had always been one of “three fundamental concerns”, including
support for terrorism and Saddam Hussein’s criminal treatment of the Iraqi people.124
228.  On 29 May, the Today programme on BBC Radio 4 broadcast allegations by the
journalist Mr Andrew Gilligan that No.10 had called for the September 2002 intelligence
dossier to be “sexed up”.125
229.  Mr Alastair Campbell, Mr Blair’s Director of Communications and Strategy, wrote in
his diaries on 30 May that the “WMD firestorm was getting worse” and that Mr Blair was
“a bit jumpy” about the September dossier.126 Mr Campbell wrote that he had spoken to
Mr Miller and Mr Scarlett. Mr Scarlett had said that he was:

US Department of Defense, 27 May 2003, Council on Foreign Relations (Transcript): Remarks as
Delivered by Secretary of Defense Donald H Rumsfeld, New York, NY, Tuesday May 27, 2003.
122 
BBC News, 29 May 2003, WMD emphasis was ‘bureaucratic’.
123 
CNN International, 31 May 2003, Pentagon challenges Vanity Fair Report.
124 
US Department of Defense, 9 May 2003, Deputy Secretary Wolfowitz interview with Sam Tannenhaus,
Vanity Fair.
125 
Report of the Inquiry into the Circumstances Surrounding the Death of Dr David Kelly C.M.G.
by Lord Hutton, 28 January 2004, HC 247, paragraph 32.
126 
Campbell A & Hagerty B. The Alastair Campbell Diaries. Volume 4. The Burden of Power: Countdown
to Iraq. Hutchinson, 2012.
121 

469

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

“… emphatic in saying to people that it was not true that we pressured them … But
he stopped short of agreeing to do a letter about it. He was very much up for helping
us but only so far.”
230.  On 1 June, The Mail on Sunday published an article in which Mr Gilligan wrote that
his source attributed the “exaggeration” in the September dossier to Mr Campbell.127
231.  Mr Campbell wrote in his diaries that he had discussed the article with Mr Scarlett
on 1 June, who was “minded to set out everything in a note to Ministers which they could
draw on”.128
232.  On 2 June, Mr Campbell wrote:
“… WMD still raging … T[ony] B[lair] was still in ‘it’s ridiculous’ mode … The main
problem of course was that there were no WMD discoveries beyond the two [mobile]
labs, and no matter how much we said there were other priorities now, the public
were being told as a matter of fact we had done wrong.”
233.  Mr Rycroft sent Mr Blair a series of background papers on 3 June.129 The papers
comprised:

•	
•	
•	

an FCO note on plans for third-party verification;130

•	

the transcript of a request by the Labour MP Mr Graham Allen for Parliament to
set a deadline of 110 days for the Coalition to find WMD in Iraq, matching the
110 days given to Dr Blix before the conflict, and for there to be an independent
inquiry if no internationally verified discovery had been made by then;133 and

•	

a telegram on US attitudes from the British Embassy Washington;131
a short No.10 note attaching a factual MOD description of the role and
composition of the ISG;132

a paper by the FCO on the terms of reference, proceedings and conclusions
of the Franks Inquiry after the Falklands War, which published its report in
January 1983.134

Report of the Inquiry into the Circumstances Surrounding the Death of Dr David Kelly C.M.G. by
Lord Hutton, 28 January 2004, HC 247, paragraphs 38-39.
128 
Campbell A & Hagerty B. The Alastair Campbell Diaries. Volume 4. The Burden of Power: Countdown
to Iraq. Hutchinson, 2012.
129 
Minute Rycroft to Prime Minister, 3 June 2003, ‘Iraq: WMD’.
130 
Letter McDonald to Rycroft, 2 June 2003, ‘Iraq WMD: Third Party Validation’ attaching Paper
[unattributed], [undated], ‘UNMOVIC: Restructuring’.
131 
Telegram 772 Washington to FCO London, 3 June 2003, ‘Iraqi WMD: US Views’.
132 
Minute Cannon to Prime Minister, 2 June 2003, ‘Iraq: Deployment of Iraq Survey Group’.
133 
Email Sumner to Rycroft, 2 June 2003, ‘PA-WMD/Special Advisers’.
134 
Letter Owen to Cannon, 3 June 2003, ‘Background on The Franks Report, 1983’ attaching Paper
[unattributed], ‘Falkland Islands Review (“The Franks Report”)’.
127 

470

4.4  |  The search for WMD

234.  In its advice on UK plans for third-party verification, the FCO stated that the media
would “provide some independent witnesses for finds in Iraq” but, “without independent
validation”, the Coalition might “well be accused of planting evidence”.135 UN validation,
ideally by UNMOVIC inspectors, would carry the most weight where it really mattered
to the UK, in the Security Council and with UK media. Ideally, the UK would like to give
UNMOVIC inspectors access to any relevant finds. At the least, the Coalition should
undertake to provide a full report of its investigation to the UN, including any test results.
235.  The FCO added that the US remained “neuralgic” on UNMOVIC. Officials
were seeking to engage with the US to revitalise and reform UNMOVIC when
Dr Blix’s contract expired on 25 June. US officials had not yet replied to a UK paper on
restructuring UNMOVIC passed to them on 20 May. The US had, however, agreed that
IAEA experts could check the security of a store of radioactive material.
236.  The FCO was examining other options for independent validation, including using
a laboratory in the Netherlands to test CBW samples, but the Dutch wanted UN cover
for doing so.
237.  Mr Rycroft commented to Mr Blair that UNMOVIC would be the most credible
option for verification, but the US would “not permit that, at least not without a new
leadership/mandate/organisation”.136
238.  The British Embassy Washington reported that comments from US media
and prominent Senators were largely sympathetic to the US Government.137 Most
had argued that it was too early to draw conclusions, but some were calling for an
independent inquiry into US intelligence on Iraqi WMD.
239.  The Embassy also reported that the Chairmen of the Senate Armed Services and
Intelligence Committees had agreed to conduct a joint inquiry into the pre-conflict use
of intelligence by the US Administration. In addition, the White House was “crafting a
line” on whether there should be an independent inquiry. The Embassy had “strongly
encouraged” that it should be discussed in advance with the UK.
240.  Mr Rycroft reported to Mr Blair that the two US Committees were “part of the
normal Congressional oversight of the Administration”.138 The first hearing would be
later in June.
241.  Mr Rycroft also told Mr Blair that:
“… according to the press, the CIA will provide shortly to Congress the
‘underlying intelligence which was the basis’ for [Secretary] Powell’s UN

Letter McDonald to Rycroft, 2 June 2003, ‘Iraq WMD: Third Party Validation’ attaching Paper
[unattributed], [undated], ‘UNMOVIC: Restructuring’.
136 
Minute Rycroft to Prime Minister, 3 June 2003, ‘Iraq: WMD’.
137 
Telegram 772 Washington to FCO London, 3 June 2003, ‘Iraqi WMD: US Views’.
138 
Minute Rycroft to Prime Minister, 3 June 2003, ‘Iraq: WMD’.
135 

471

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

presentation [on 5 February 2003]. This is in response to a request from the
House [of Representatives] Intelligence Committee. Congressional Committees
do not normally have access to raw intelligence, but they have done occasionally
in the past: […]”
242.  Mr Campbell recorded in his diaries that he had spoken to Mr Powell on 3 June
and:
“… agreed a way forward was for the ISC to trail an inquiry before T[ony] B[lair]
formally announced it and John S[carlett] to make clear nothing improper took place.”139
243.  Mr Campbell also sent Mr Blair a note advising that Parliamentary debates on Iraq
on 4 June were :
“… about both the substance of the issue and the manner in which you deal with it.
The overall aim must be to give explanation and context, calm the frenzy, and regain
support for our basic position …”140
244.  In relation to the substance, Mr Campbell wrote:
“… the current frenzy flows from the fact that apart from the two mobile labs nothing
new has been found … so tomorrow is in part about saying as much as you can
about the process towards discovery … The fact there are other more pressing
issues – security, humanitarian, basic services – is relevant …
“What reasonable MPs will want is a signal that you understand the nature of the
concern. We’ve had a week essentially of saying people are being ridiculous … but it
won’t go away … [A]s WMD was the stated reason for war, people want to know the
full story, and that you set out the process as to how they’re going to get it.”
245.  Mr Campbell added:
“The second issue relates to the intelligence services, and in particular the false
charge that we wrongly used intelligence material, or asked the Agencies to do
something they should not have, or that they were not happy with … [T]he media,
particularly the BBC, are trying to create a ‘no smoke without fire’ atmosphere.”
246.  Mr Campbell wrote that the views of Mr Scarlett and others “that nothing improper
took place – should be made public forcefully”. He recommended Mr Blair:
“… say that, in the light of the controversy, you asked the JIC to set out for you
a detailed analysis of the dossier from inception to publication, and as result not
only you, but more importantly the JIC, are 100 percent clear that nothing wrong
took place.”
Campbell A & Hagerty B. The Alastair Campbell Diaries. Volume 4. The Burden of Power: Countdown
to Iraq. Hutchinson, 2012.
140 
Minute Campbell to Prime Minister, 3 June 2003, ‘WMD/Tomorrow’.
139 

472

4.4  |  The search for WMD

247.  The dossier had been:
“… drafted and redrafted by the JIC … in consultation with Allies. It was presented
to No.10 as a JIC document and remains so. Obviously there were discussions with
No.10, not least because you were writing a foreword and you were going to be
presenting it to Parliament. But these discussions related primarily to your frontpiece
printing, briefing materials, preparation of Q&A, in other words the normal stuff of
presentation.”
248.  Mr Campbell stated that that part of the response would give Mr Blair:
“–	 acceptance of genuine concern
–– process, with a sense of timescale, months not days
–– confidence they’ll be found because of historical reality and the labs
–– JIC assurance nothing wrong took place
–– confirmation of the ISC inquiry
–– statement of confidence in Agencies
–– reasons for no need for other inquiry.”
249.  The House of Commons Foreign Affairs Committee (FAC) announced on 3 June
that it would hold an inquiry into “The Decision to go to War in Iraq”.141 The FAC stated:
“The inquiry will consider whether the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, within the
Government as a whole, presented accurate and complete information to Parliament
in the period leading up to military action in Iraq, particularly in relation to Iraq’s
weapons of mass destruction. The Committee will hear oral evidence from several
witnesses in June and will report to the House in July.”
250.  On 4 June, Mr Scarlett sent Mr Blair a written explanation of the process behind
the compilation of the September dossier.142 The letter, described in greater detail in
Section 4.2, concluded:
“At no stage in the drafting process … was there an attempt, from No.10 or
elsewhere, to overrule the judgements of the JIC or my judgement as the person
in charge.”
251.  Mr Blair discussed the position he would take at Prime Minister’s Questions
(PMQs) in a meeting on 4 June with Sir David Omand (Cabinet Office Permanent
Secretary and Security and Intelligence Co-ordinator), Mr Scarlett, Sir Richard Dearlove
and No.10 officials.143

Foreign Affairs Committee Session 2002-2003, 3 June 2003, Announcement of New Inquiry.
Minute Scarlett to Prime Minister, 4 June 2003, ‘September 2002 Iraq Dossier’.
143 
Campbell A & Hagerty B. The Alastair Campbell Diaries. Volume 4. The Burden of Power: Countdown
to Iraq. Hutchinson, 2012.
141 
142 

473

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

House of Commons debates on Iraq, 4 June 2003
252.  The House of Commons held two debates on Iraq on 4 June.
253.  During the second debate, the House of Commons rejected an Opposition
motion calling for an independent inquiry into the use of intelligence.
254.  Iraq was also raised during PMQs and in response to Mr Blair’s statement
about the G8 summit in Evian, France, from 1 to 3 June.
255.  During the exchanges on Iraq on 4 June, MPs raised repeatedly:

•	
•	

the failure to find WMD in Iraq;

•	

the need for an independent, judge-led, inquiry.

statements made by the Government before the conflict about the
intelligence on Iraq’s capabilities and intent; and

256.  Mr Blair told the House of Commons that:

•	

It was “accepted” by the international community and the Security Council
that Saddam Hussein had possessed WMD and had been “a threat to the
world”.

•	
•	

He welcomed the ISC inquiry into the role of intelligence in Iraq.

•	

The ISG had “just gone into Iraq” and “should be allowed to get on with
its job”.

•	

He had “no doubt” that the ISG would find “the clearest evidence” of
Saddam Hussein’s WMD.

•	

The alternative thesis, that Saddam Hussein had decided to get rid of the
WMD, was difficult to accept.

There had been no attempt at any time to override “the intelligence
judgements” of the JIC.

257.  In the first House of Commons debate on Iraq on 4 June, Ms Joan Ruddock
(Labour) and Dr Jenny Tonge (Liberal Democrat) called for the urgent return of UN
inspectors. Dr Tonge expressed concern about the danger of WMD, if it existed, being
found and used.144
258.  During PMQs Mr Blair was asked a series of questions about Iraq.145

144 
145 

House of Commons, Official Report, 4 June 2003, columns 76WH and 84WH.
House of Commons, Official Report, 4 June 2003, columns 146-156.

474

4.4  |  The search for WMD

259.  In response to a question from Ms Oona King (Labour) about the “strong
presumption” of the UN inspectors that Saddam Hussein had not destroyed biological
and chemical agents and his view of the allegations that the threat had been
exaggerated, Mr Blair replied:
“… that it was accepted by the entire international community, and not least by
the UN Security Council, that Saddam Hussein did indeed have weapons of mass
destruction and was a threat to the world … [T]he Iraq Survey Group … is literally
now just beginning its work, because the priority after the conflict was to rebuild Iraq
and to make sure that the humanitarian concerns of the Iraqi people were achieved.”
260.  Mr Blair added:
“Perhaps I can now take this opportunity to inform the House that the Intelligence
and Security Committee … contacted the Government in early May to conduct an
inquiry into the role of intelligence in Iraq. I welcome this and I can assure the House
that the Government will co-operate fully with it.”
261.  Asked by Mr Iain Duncan Smith, the Leader of the Opposition, about remarks
made by Dr John Reid, the Leader of the House, during an interview on the BBC’s
Today programme, that “rogue elements within the intelligence services are undermining
the Government and their numbers are growing”, Mr Blair replied:
“It is obvious from what the Today programme has said – if that source is to
be believed – that of course there was somebody from within the intelligence
community who spoke to the media. But I want to say that the security services and
intelligence services do a superb job …”
262.  Asked how senior he thought the people making the allegations were and
how many of them there were, Mr Blair told Mr Duncan Smith that the source was
anonymous, but he:
“… did not believe that the person who is talking is a member of the Joint
Intelligence Committee and … I have spoken and conferred with the Chairman of the
… Committee – that there was no attempt, at any time, by any official, or Minister,
or member of No.10 Downing Street staff, to override the intelligence judgements of
the Joint Intelligence Committee. That includes the judgement about the so-called
45 minutes [see Section 4.2]. It was a judgement made by the Joint Intelligence
Committee and by that committee alone.”
263.  Referring again to the allegations made by Dr Reid, and allegations from others
that Mr Blair had “misled Parliament and the country”, Mr Duncan Smith asked
Mr Blair to publish “the dossier given to him by the JIC before the one that he published
in September”.

475

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

264.  Mr Blair replied:
“In relation to all those issues, the Intelligence and Security Committee is at full
liberty to go through all the Joint Intelligence Committee assessments and produce a
report on them. Because of the importance of the issue, it is only right that a report is
published so that people can make a judgement on it. However the claims that have
been made are simply false …”
265.  Mr Duncan Smith stated that Mr Blair would allow the ISC to see “only the
intelligence reports that he wanted it to see” and that, as the Committee was being
“asked to investigate the Prime Minister’s role and that of his closest advisers … surely
the only way to clear up the problem is to have an independent inquiry”.
266.  Mr Blair replied that Mr Duncan Smith:
“… was not making an allegation about the intelligence being wrong. On the
contrary, he was rebutting the allegation that the intelligence was wrong … it
is not true that I will withhold from it [the ISC] the Joint Intelligence Committee
assessments. In addition, the Committee can, in accordance with its normal practice,
interview those people in the security services who drew up the JIC reports. That is
surely a fair way to proceed. I will then publish the report.”
267.  In response to further questioning from Mr Duncan Smith, Mr Blair stated:
“I have already said that we will produce all the evidence for the Intelligence and
Security Committee. I really think that is the sensible and right way to proceed. It can
then come to a considered judgement and I will publish the report.”
268.  Mr Blair also rebutted the allegation that the source for “the 45 minute claim
was an Iraqi defector of dubious reliability”, stating that “he was an established and
reliable source”.
269.  Addressing a question from Mr Charles Kennedy, Leader of the Liberal Democrats,
about why people should allow more time and show patience in the search for WMD,
Mr Blair replied:
“… The reason I ask people to be patient is that the group has just gone into Iraq: it
should be allowed to get on with its job, investigate the sites, interview the witnesses
and then report back to us.”
270.  Mr Kennedy also asked for “a fully independent judicial review of what has just
gone on”.
271.  Mr Elfyn Llwyd (Plaid Cymru) also called for “a full public inquiry”.

476

4.4  |  The search for WMD

272.  During his subsequent statement about the G8 summit in Evian, France, from
1 to 3 June, Mr Blair was asked repeatedly about the search for WMD and to consider
an independent inquiry.146
273.  In response to Mr Duncan Smith, Mr Blair stated:
“… the Iraq Survey Group is the body that will be able to … interview the scientists
and visit the sites. There are literally thousands of sites … information is coming up
the entire time, but it is only now … that a dedicated team of people, which includes
former UN inspectors … will be able to go in and do the job properly … I have
no doubt that they will find the clearest evidence of Saddam’s weapons of mass
destruction.
“The alternative thesis is that, having for years obstructed the UN, having had 12
years of sanctions, having kicked out the inspectors in 1998, and having invited
an invasion by defying the UN, Saddam decided to get rid of the weapons of mass
destruction anyway. That is an odd thesis to accept.”
274.  Referring to the press reporting of remarks made by Secretary Rumsfeld and
Mr Wolfowitz, Mr Blair added that the full transcripts of the interviews showed they were
“arguing that it will be difficult to say exactly what has happened to the weapons until we
collect the evidence”; and that it had always been the UK Government’s case that there
had been “a systematic campaign of concealment once Saddam knew the inspectors
were going back in”.
275.  In response to points raised by Mr Ken Clarke (Conservative), including on the
wider consequences if it turned out that the Government’s assertion that military force
was needed to disarm Iraq turned out not to be true, Mr Blair replied:
“… the basis on which we went to conflict was that in resolution 1441, Iraq was given
a final chance to comply … and the conclusion that we drew six months later was
that it was not doing so. The problem in the UN Security Council is that we could
not get agreement even to the fact that, if it [Iraq] carried on not complying fully
and unconditionally … we could take action. That was obviously an unacceptable
situation.
“… I stand entirely by the dossier that we issued and the intelligence contained in
it … When we get a proper and fully documented account of what it [the ISG] has
found, we will present it … [It] would be sensible to suspend our judgement until that
time, but I stand fully by what our intelligence agencies put out …”
276.  Asked by Ms Barbara Follett (Labour) about the role of the UN, Mr Blair stated that
“for obvious reasons there will have to be some independent verification” at the end of
the process; and that was being discussed by Mr Straw with his counterparts.

146 

House of Commons, Official Report, 4 June 2003, columns 157-176.

477

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

277.  Asked by Mr Brian H Donohoe (Labour) if he would allow the Foreign Affairs
Committee to have the same access to the evidence and witnesses as the ISC, Mr Blair
stated that “it would not be sensible to have two inquiries competing”.
278.  Asked by Mr Denzil Davies (Labour) whether the “failure of the Coalition to look
for” weapons of mass destruction “as a matter of the highest priority in the immediate
aftermath of the war could well have provided the opportunity for many of the weapons –
if they are there – to find their way into the hands of the various terrorist groups that are
operating in and around the Middle East”, Mr Blair replied that that was a crucial issue
but he did not think it was wrong:
“… for the Coalition to have said that our first priority at the end of the conflict … had
to be reconstruction and the humanitarian position of the Iraqi people. Indeed we
would have been criticised roundly if we had not done so.”
279.  Mr Blair’s statement about the G8 summit was followed by a second debate
on Iraq.147
280.  The Liberal Democrat motion tabled for the debate stated:
“That this House recalls the Prime Minister’s assertion that Iraq possessed weapons
of mass destruction capable of being used at 45 minutes’ notice; further recalls
the Government’s contention that these weapons posed an imminent danger to
the United Kingdom and its forces; notes that to date no such weapons have been
found; and calls for an independent inquiry into the handling of the intelligence
received, its assessment and the decisions made by Ministers based upon it.”
281.  In his speech opening the debate, Mr Menzies Campbell, Liberal Democrat
Foreign Affairs Spokesperson, set out in detail his interpretation of the case which had
been made by the Government before the conflict; questioned whether military action
was “truly a last resort” and if action to bring an end to the regime of Saddam Hussein
was proportionate; and set out the rationale for an independent Inquiry which would be
answerable to the public, “not just to the Prime Minister or the House”.
282.  The Government tabled an amendment to the Liberal Democrat motion stating
that the ISC was “the appropriate body to carry out any Inquiry into intelligence relating
to Iraq” and asking the House to note the terms of resolution 1483 “in relation to Iraq’s
disarmament obligations”, which had been adopted while Parliament was in recess.
283.  In his speech in support of the amendment, which addressed a wide range of
issues, not just WMD, Mr Straw stated that the Government had not, so far as he was
aware, used some of the words in the Liberal Democrat motion. It had not referred to
Iraq’s weapons posing an “imminent danger”; it had:
“… talked about a threat to international peace and security, as had the
United Nations.”
147 

House of Commons, Official Report, 4 June 2003, columns 180-232.

478

4.4  |  The search for WMD

284.  Mr Straw also stated that the September 2002 dossier had said “that Iraq’s military
planning allowed for some of the weapons of mass destruction to be readied within 45
minutes of an order to use them”.
285.  Subsequently, Mr Straw said that the Foreword was:
“… subject to discussion and agreement from the head of the JIC to ensure, plainly
that what was in the Foreword was entirely consistent with what was in the body of
the document.”
286.  Asked by Mr Michael Portillo (Conservative) whether “any intelligence officers”
had remonstrated with Mr Blair or any other Minister that the 45 minutes point should
not have been included in the Foreword to the dossier, because it was based only on a
single source, Mr Straw replied “no”.
287.  Pressed by Mr Robin Cook (Labour) to acknowledge that the policy of containment
had been successful and that the statement was wrong because no weapons ready for
use within 45 minutes had been found in Iraq, Mr Straw replied:
“I do not accept that, because we have not yet been able to find physical evidence of
the possession of such weapons, these weapons did not therefore exist. That flies in
the face of all the other evidence …”
288.  Mr Straw stated that the 45 minutes point was not “a key factor in the decision to
go to war”, and “The basis for action was not an intelligence dossier that had been put
before the House six months before”.
289.  In response to an intervention from Mr Kennedy pointing out what Mr Blair had
said in his speech to the House on 24 September about Iraq’s WMD programmes,
Mr Straw stated that the international community had judged that Iraq posed a threat to
international peace and security and it was:
“… impossible to explain Saddam’s behaviour unless he had weapons of mass
destruction.
“Dr Blix is just about to publish a further report … The chief weapon inspector said
that Baghdad had supplied his team with increasingly detailed information but that:
even at the end, Iraq failed to allay suspicions that it had something to hide, and
its trend of withholding pertinent information meant that the suspicions mounted
and mounted.
“That was true for Dr Blix and it was also true for the Security Council … It is
impossible to read those reports [from the inspectors to the Security Council] and
to set them against the evidence of Saddam’s behaviour without coming to the
conclusion that, in Dr Blix’s words, there was a strong presumption for the holding
of those weapons.”

479

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

290.  In the concluding section of his speech, Mr Straw asked the critics of the
Government:
“… whether they seriously believed that when Saddam Hussein chose confrontation
rather than co-operation, he possessed no weapons of mass destruction following
our decision on 18 March? Do they seriously argue that Saddam had disposed of all
his poisons and toxins and missiles, and then deliberately chosen not to prove their
destruction but to go down a path that led to his downfall? …
“Even if we make the most extreme allowances … how can we possibly believe
that he cheated and deceived the international community year after year, until we
had no option but military action, and yet that he possessed no weapons of mass
destruction?
“… Is it not more likely that Saddam, knowing the game was up and realising that
we meant what we said, went to extraordinary lengths to dismantle, conceal and
disperse the weapons and any evidence of their existence? … Saddam had spent
years perfecting the art of concealment and carried that out so completely that it will
take some time to search hundreds of sites, interview thousands of scientists and
locate and evaluate what remains of the documentary and physical evidence.”
291.  In his speech, Mr Michael Ancram, the Shadow Foreign Secretary, referred to five
questions posed by Mr Duncan Smith in a letter to Mr Blair the previous day.
292.  The questions posed by Mr Ancram can be summarised as:

•	
•	
•	
•	

Whether the dossier’s original conclusion had been deleted and a new
preamble, reportedly written by the Prime Minister, inserted?
If the 45 minutes point was not significant, why did the information appear
three times in the dossier; why had Mr Blair referred to it in his speech on
24 September 2002; and was it usual to use single-source intelligence?
A request for a “categorical assurance that there was no disagreement between
Downing Street and the intelligence Services on the handling of intelligence
information”.
What was the new, but so far unpublished, information referred to by Mr Blair in
an interview on 1 June?

293.  Mr Ancram stated that the Opposition proposed:
“… a resolution in both Houses of Parliament under the Tribunals of Inquiry
(Evidence) Act 1921. That is the most powerful form of inquiry and is appropriate for
an issue of this gravity. The tribunal would be chaired by a senior judge …”
294.  Mr Ancram also made clear that such an inquiry was required to address the way
intelligence had been used. It was “not about the justification for action in Iraq; nor …
about the conduct of that action”.

480

4.4  |  The search for WMD

295.  The Liberal Democrat motion was defeated by 301 votes to 203 and the
Government amendment was agreed without a further vote.
296.  Demands for an independent judge-led inquiry persisted through the
summer.
297.  Responding to a question from Mr Kennedy at PMQs on 18 June about whether
the Government had been told by SIS that Iraq did not possess WMD “capable of posing
a direct threat to British security”, Mr Blair stated:
“The intelligence that we put out in the dossier last September described absolutely
accurately the position of the Government … that Saddam was indeed a threat to his
region and the wider world. I always made it clear that the issue was not whether he
was about to launch an immediate strike on Britain: the issue was whether he posed
a threat to his region and to the wider world.”148
298.  Asked by Mr Kennedy whether he thought the issue could be “adequately
investigated by a Foreign Affairs Committee to which he refuses to give evidence and
a Joint Intelligence Committee which he controls”, and whether there could not be “a
proper independent judicial inquiry”, Mr Blair stated that the ISC was “entirely capable of
investigating all the facts and getting to the truth”.
299.  The House of Commons’ second debate on setting up an independent inquiry took
place on 15 July and is described later in this Section.

Dr Blix’s final report to the Security Council
300.  Dr Blix submitted UNMOVIC’s 13th quarterly report to the Security Council
on 30 May.149
301.  In presenting the report to the Council on 5 June, Dr Blix highlighted a number of
points, including:

•	
•	
•	

The Commission had not at any time “found evidence of the continuation or
resumption of programmes of weapons of mass destruction or significant
quantities of proscribed items”, whether from pre-1991 or later.
That did “not necessarily mean that such items could not exist. They might”.
Long lists of items remained “unaccounted for”, but it was “not justified to jump
to the conclusion that something exists just because it is unaccounted for”.
The list of unaccounted for items had “not been shortened by inspections or Iraqi
declarations, explanations or documentation”; and it was Iraq’s task to convince
the inspectors that the items did not exist. Without that, the international

House of Commons, Official Report, 18 June 2003, columns 349-350.
UN Security Council, ‘Note by Secretary-General’ attaching ‘Thirteenth quarterly report of the Executive
Chairman of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification and Inspection Commission in accordance with
paragraph 12 of Security Council resolution 1284 (1999)’ (S/2003/580).
148 
149 

481

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

•	
•	

•	
•	
•	
•	

•	

•	

community could not “have confidence that past programmes or any remaining
part of them have been terminated”. An “effective presence of international
inspectors” would, however, “serve as a deterrent against efforts aimed at
reactivating or developing new programmes”.
Iraq had “made considerable efforts to provide explanations, to begin inquiries
and to undertake exploration and excavations” during the month and a half
before UNMOVIC’s withdrawal.
“… [T]hose efforts did not bring the answers needed … We did not have
time to interview the large number of persons who were said by Iraq to have
participated in the unilateral destruction of biological and chemical weapons
in 1991. Such interviews might have helped towards the resolution of some
outstanding issues, although one must be aware that the totalitarian regime in
Iraq continued to cast a shadow on the credibility of all interviews.”
The programme to destroy the Al Samoud 2 missiles had not been completed,
and “there was no time to assess whether the Al Fatah missile stayed within the
range allowed”.
The report showed that the weapons destroyed before the inspectors left in 1998
“were, in almost all cases declared by Iraq, and that the destruction occurred
before 1993 in the case of missiles, and before 1994 in the case of chemical
weapons”.
The existence and scope of the biological weapons programme was uncovered
by UNSCOM in 1995, “despite Iraq’s denials and concealment efforts”; “only a
few remnants” of the programme were subsequently found. “A great deal – Iraq
asserts all – was unilaterally destroyed in 1991.”
The lack of significant finds over many years “could be because the items
were unilaterally destroyed by the Iraqi authorities or else they were effectively
concealed by them”. In the “new environment in which there is full access
and co-operation, and in which knowledgeable witnesses should no longer be
inhibited from revealing what they know, it should be possible to establish the
truth”.
The inspectors had looked for sites where mobile facilities could be operated
and Iraq had presented some information about the mobile systems they
possessed which did not match “the description which has recently been made
available to us, as well as the media, by the United States”. UNMOVIC could not
“make a proper evaluation of the depicted vehicles on the basis of the published
material alone”.
UNMOVIC remained “ready to resume work in Iraq as an independent verifier or
to conduct long-term monitoring, should the Council so decide”.

482

4.4  |  The search for WMD

302.  Reporting on the subsequent discussion in informal consultations, Sir Jeremy
Greenstock stated that most members of the Council saw a future role for UNMOVIC
and asked to be kept updated on Coalition activities.150

The JIC Sub-Committee on Iraq/WMD and the WMD Task Force
303.  In June, the Government set up two bodies to improve oversight and
co‑ordination of the UK approach to Iraqi WMD:

•	

the JIC Sub-Committee on Iraq/WMD, responsible to the JIC for “strategic
co-ordination of all intelligence implications related to Iraq’s WMD
programmes”, including Parliamentary and media issues; and

•	

the WMD Task Force, with a focus on the ISG and information flows
between London, Washington and Iraq.

304.  On 3 June, after a discussion with Sir David Manning and Sir David Omand,
Mr Scarlett informed Sir David Manning that he proposed to establish a “Working Group”
on Iraq/WMD which would act as a sub-committee of the JIC.151
305.  Mr Scarlett wrote:
“The current public debate about WMD in Iraq raises a series of basic questions
about intelligence, its collection, assessment and role in policy making and public
presentation. It therefore touches upon the vital interests of the intelligence
community. The management of our community response, indeed the response
of the Government, to these questions will be complicated and likely to remain
a requirement for some time. We need to consider whether we have the right
structures in place to co-ordinate this to the best effect.”
306.  The Group would need to meet regularly to address:

•	
•	
•	

“Exploitation in Iraq and elsewhere …”;

•	

“Public presentation”, including “proactive and reactive responses to media
coverage”;

•	

“Arrangements for assessing the results …”;
“Public policy issues”, including “Parliamentary aspects” and “support for the
Government response to the ISC Inquiry”;

“Co-ordination with US Agencies and authorities.”

307.  The Group would not be large, but should include representatives from the FCO,
the MOD, DIS, SIS, Government Communications Headquarters (GCHQ) and OD Sec.
Membership should be at a senior level.
Telegram 942 UKMIS New York to FCO London, 6 June 2003, ‘Iraq: Blix Briefing on 13th UNMOVIC
Quarterly Report’.
151 
Minute Scarlett to Manning, 3 June 2003, ‘Iraq/WMD: JIC Co-ordination’.
150 

483

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

308.  Mr Scarlett stated that the new Group would operate at the “strategic, co-ordination
level”. It would need to avoid overlap with other groups, in particular the Executive
Group (also known as the Evidence and Elimination Task Force and, later, the Iraq WMD
Task Force), led by Mr Howard, which oversaw UK interests in the ISG.
309.  The draft Terms of Reference, circulated separately by Mr Scarlett, stated:
“The Sub-Committee on Iraq/WMD will be responsible to the Joint Intelligence
Committee for:

•	

The strategic co-ordination of all intelligence implications related to Iraq’s
WMD programmes, including:
{{ the

[intelligence] community’s response to those issues;

{{ the

[intelligence] community’s advice to Government;

{{ Parliamentary
{{ media

issues;

issues;

{{ relations

with other groups and allies.”152

310.  At its first meeting on 5 June, the Sub-Committee agreed the following Terms of
Reference:
“The Sub-Committee on Iraq/WMD will be responsible to the Joint Intelligence
Committee for:

•	

The strategic co-ordination, and where necessary management, of all
information and intelligence implications related to Iraq’s WMD programmes,
including:
{{ the

[intelligence] community’s response to these issues;

{{ the

[intelligence] community’s advice to Government;

{{ Parliamentary

issues, including the co-ordination of the Government’s
response to the Intelligence and Security Committee inquiry and the
intelligence aspects of the Foreign Affairs Committee inquiry;

{{ media

issues;

{{ relations

with other groups and allies.

“The Chairman of the Joint Intelligence Committee will chair the Group …”153
311.  The meeting agreed that membership of the Committee should be expanded
to include the Home Office, but the No.10 Press Office should not have formal
representation. It also noted the importance of ensuring consistency of message and

Minute Scarlett to Ehrman, 3 June 2003, ‘JIC Sub-Committee on Iraq/WMD’ attaching Agenda, 5 June
2003, JIC Sub-Committee on Iraq/WMD and Paper [unattributed] ‘JIC Sub-Committee on Iraq/WMD Draft
Terms of Reference’.
153 
Minutes, 5 June 2003, JIC Sub-Committee on Iraq/WMD meeting.
152 

484

4.4  |  The search for WMD

discussed the arrangements for units in the Cabinet Office and the FCO to co-ordinate
the responses to, respectively, the ISC and FAC.
312.  On 6 June, Mr Howard informed members of the Evidence and Elimination Task
Force that, as a result of the “intense media and parliamentary interest in Iraqi WMD
and related UK dossiers”, there would be “a shift of gear” in the intensity of Task Force
activity and its role.154
313.  The Task Force “Mark 2” would focus on supporting the ISG’s WMD work and
continuing to improve information flows between London, Washington and theatre,
while the new JIC Group focused on the inquiries to be conducted by the FAC and
ISC. Reflecting the establishment of the ISG, the Task Force would become more
intelligence-led, providing “guidance, ideas and information to the ISG for exploitation”.
Task Force membership would need to reflect those changes. The UK would be
increasing its capabilities on the ground to feed in to the ISG’s work.
314.  Mr Howard circulated Terms of Reference for the Task Force on 18 June.155
Its five functions were:
“•	 To contribute to US/UK/AUS strategic guidance on the conduct of the search for
Iraqi WMD through the Iraq Survey Group and other agencies.

•	
•	
•	
•	

To monitor, report and consider public handling of significant WMD related
discoveries.
To co-ordinate the UK contribution to the ISG and other bodies associated with
the search for Iraqi WMD.
To consider longer term issues associated with Iraqi WMD including destruction
and counter-proliferation.
To provide advice and reports as required to Ministers and other senior
management in MOD and elsewhere in Whitehall as appropriate.”

315.  Sir John Scarlett told the Inquiry:
“The actual day-to-day conduct of business with the ISG was conducted by
something called the Executive Group [the WMD Task Force], which was overseen
by the Deputy Chief of Defence Intelligence [DCDI, Mr Howard]. So it was … more
on the DIS/MOD side, and that was where the direction of the British contribution to
the ISG and personnel was directed from.
“But the JIC sort of overall, I as Chairman of the JIC, and I, in particular, as Chairman
of the JIC sub-group on Iraq WMD … had that as part of our specific remit, that we
needed to oversee the relationship with the ISG. So I was either in direct contact
myself with David Kay [the first Head of the ISG], for the rest of 2003, and then
Minutes, 6 June 2003, WMD Evidence and Elimination Task Force meeting.
Minute Howard to DCPAC, 18 June 2003, ‘Iraq: WMD Task Force’ attaching Paper [unattributed],
[undated], ‘WMD Task Force ToR’.
154 
155 

485

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

Charles Duelfer [Dr Kay’s successor] into 2004 … or I was obviously hearing
about them because I was receiving reports from DCDI, who either himself went to
Baghdad or was conducting the contacts. So there was very regular contact.”156

UK concerns about the ISG’s slow start
316.  During June, Ministers and senior officials pressed the US to ensure a rapid
start to the ISG’s work.
317.  Mr Blair raised with President Bush the urgent need to find and promise
immunity to personnel who had worked on Iraq’s WMD programmes.
318.  Shortly afterwards, President Bush transferred responsibility for the ISG
from Secretary Rumsfeld to Mr Tenet.
319.  Mr Blair met President Bush over breakfast at the G8 Summit in Evian on
2 June.157 Mr Blair said there was “an urgent problem” over WMD. The scientists and
technicians who would tell the truth about the WMD programme needed to be found.
That meant being ready to promise immunity, otherwise they would be too frightened to
talk. Mr Blair said he would look into whether there was a UK judge or lawyer who might
be appointed as Official Prosecutor with authority to agree plea bargains.
320.  Following his visit to Iraq, Mr Blair chaired a meeting on 3 June, attended by
Mr Hoon, Baroness Amos (the International Development Secretary), Sir Michael Jay
(FCO Permanent Under Secretary (PUS), in Mr Straw’s absence) and No.10 officials,
which discussed a range of issues (see Section 10.1).158
321.  After the meeting, Mr Cannon commissioned a number of papers to be ready
before a further meeting on 6 June, including advice on “a judge/lawyer/interrogator to
negotiate incentive/immunity packages for Iraqi WMD scientists and officials”.
322.  Mr Watkins wrote to Sir David Manning on 4 June about the need, given the
continuing media focus on WMD, for short- and medium-term strategies for public
handling of the search for WMD.159
323.  Mr Watkins stated that the “most convincing evidence” of an illicit Iraqi WMD
programme remained “the alleged mobile BW trailers currently under investigation” at
Baghdad Airport. The draft of “a preliminary inter-agency report” suggested that “one of
the trailers was not capable of producing BW agent”. That was, however, “likely to be
subject to considerable revision”, and there was “a strong likelihood that the eventual
conclusions will be very close to our own”. There was “a lot of work to be done” on the
issues, including a further visit by UK experts.
Private hearing, 5 May 2010, pages 57-60.
Letter Manning to McDonald, 2 June 2003, ‘Breakfast meeting between the Prime Minister and
President Bush: 2 June 2003’.
158 
Letter Cannon to McDonald, 3 June 2003, ‘Iraq: Prime Minister’s meeting’, 3 June’.
159 
Letter Watkins to Manning, 4 June 2003, ‘Iraq: WMD Detection and Elimination: Public Handling’.
156 
157 

486

4.4  |  The search for WMD

324.  Without a major find of WMD-related material which could “justifiably be described
as a smoking gun”, the “hunt for evidence” was “likely to take some months”. Finding
“a body of evidence” that persuaded “everybody that the war was proportionate to the
threat” was “unlikely”. But it needed “to be enough to convince mainstream public, media
and parliamentary opinion that a programme existed and had been concealed”.
325.  Mr Hoon thought the Government should:

•	
•	
•	

be prepared to publicise significant discoveries only once they had been fully
validated and after careful co-ordination with the US;
periodically make public a consolidated and validated picture of developments,
with the first before the summer break, provided there was “enough material to
justify it”; and
be in a position to respond to emerging stories, with better co-ordination of US
and UK public positions.

326.  The “public position could be reinforced” if it were possible in due course to
“involve the UN [in] the verification process”. The ISG would host at least one embedded
journalist. Mr Hoon had offered a UK communications adviser in response to a US
request for assistance with ISG communications.
327.  Mr Watkins wrote that a “more radical approach … could be to play down WMD …
and focus on other areas”; but Mr Hoon doubted that would work. In his view, “the
WMD issue would not go away, particular[ly] in the UK. Any attempt to brush it aside or
downgrade its importance” was “likely to backfire”.
328.  Asked if he had any comments, Mr Scarlett wrote: “Not really. This is sensible
but the pace has hottened up. My JIC sub-committee will watch (and drive) specific
issues v. closely.”160
329.  Following a meeting of the AHMGIR on 5 June, which considered the papers
commissioned by Mr Cannon on 3 June, Mr Straw provided a paper on possible
incentives for Iraqi WMD personnel for Mr Blair to send to President Bush.161
330.  The paper stated that UNSCOM had produced a list of “around 6,500 Iraqis who
had been involved in … prohibited weapons programmes”, but “the true figure could be
considerably higher”. Coalition Forces had captured a few high-ranking individuals, but
there had been “no contact with the great mass of personnel”, which “should be a high
priority” for the ISG.

Manuscript comment Scarlett to Manning on Letter Watkins to Manning, 4 June 2003, ‘Iraq: WMD
Detection and Elimination: Public Handling’.
161 
Letter Straw to Blair, 5 June 2003, ‘Iraq: winning the peace’ attaching Paper [unattributed], [undated],
‘Iraqi WMD Personnel’.
160 

487

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

331.  The paper recommended a combination of carrots and sticks. Proposed incentives
were:

•	
•	
•	
•	

immunity from prosecution;
personal security;
financial security; and
job security.

332.  The Coalition Provisional Authority (CPA) de-Ba’athification programme
(see Section 11) and the dissolution of Saddam Hussein’s security apparatus was
“a strong perverse incentive for anyone affected … not to co-operate with the Coalition”.
333.  The paper stated that the threat of prosecution in the Iraqi courts for concealing
evidence might be sufficient to encourage personnel to come forward.
334.  The paper highlighted the need for:

•	
•	
•	

a public information campaign explaining how people should get in touch;
facilities in Iraq to receive, filter and interview personnel; and
an ISG ability to respond quickly to credible information. Looting and arson could
already have destroyed valuable evidence.

335.  On 5 June, at Sir David Manning’s request, Sir Richard Dearlove sent No.10 an
outline for Mr Blair on “what SIS will do additionally over the next six to eight weeks to
uncover evidence of Iraqi WMD”.162
336.  Sir Richard hoped that, by the end of July, the ISG would be fully functional and
able to take activity forward with intelligence support from SIS. If necessary, SIS should
be able to sustain its own effort once the ISG was operational. In the meantime,
Sir Richard intended:
“… to put more SIS staff (or staff borrowed from other Agencies) on the ground and
to boost the WMD-related effort in concert with the MOD. Our aim is primarily to
identify Iraqi scientists who will attest in public to what is in the intelligence record.
As regard logistics (ground penetrating radar, transport etc) I believe MOD can offer
us all we need.”
337.  Sir Richard explained that, over the next six to eight weeks, SIS aimed to pursue
to a conclusion all CBW and missile leads involving more junior scientists and officers.
In pursuing those individuals, it would be important to agree a common position on
adequate incentive and immunities with the US. Mr Bowen was pursuing the issue, but
it would probably be necessary “to cut through the US bureaucracy to achieve a rapid
satisfactory outcome”.

162 

Letter C to Manning, 5 June 2003, ‘WMD in Iraq’.

488

4.4  |  The search for WMD

338.  Sir Richard added that SIS had been “closely involved in the protracted saga of
the [BW] trailers”. The extended debate over the trailers’ function “served to underline
the importance of controlling publicity and of co-ordination both with the US and within
the US system”. He hoped that would become easier to manage once the ISG was up
and running.
339.  In conclusion, Sir Richard said that, over the next week, SIS would be refining
requirements for the “surge effort” described in his letter.
340.  During his conversation with President Bush on 6 June, Mr Blair stressed the
importance of offering inducements to Iraqis involved in WMD programmes.163 He said
that he was relaxed about the ISG and confident it would get results.
341.  At its meeting on 6 June, the Evidence and Elimination Task Force was informed
that, in relation to the recruitment of inspectors, Dr David Kelly, MOD Special Adviser
Counter-proliferation and Arms Control, was conducting “a recce to theatre”, which
would “inform a further briefing of prospective UK ISG inspectors on 13 June”.164
342.  The Task Force was also informed:

•	
•	

“All BW samples” had, “so far, been negative or inconclusive”. The official report
on samples from the bio-trailer was “inconclusive”.
The Vice Chief of the Defence Staff had “formed a ‘Tiger Team’ to look into WMD
lessons learned”.

343.  Reporting the main points to have emerged from the meeting, Mr Dowse wrote:

•	
•	
•	
•	

“… [d]espite all previous assurances, the US have done no further investigation
of the first two bio-lab trailers and – incredibly – have lost the third … it was left
unguarded and disappeared”.
The DoD was suggesting “adopting as ‘hypotheses’ that Iraq either destroyed
all its WMD before the war, or hid it in Syria (and Sudan) – and then focusing
intelligence collection efforts on finding evidence to prove this. This looked
dangerous …”
The ISG had “no clear lines of command … or of reporting back to Washington”.
There was “clear competition between US agencies”.165

344.  Mr Blair discussed the ISG with Mr Straw and Mr Hoon on 9 June.166 They agreed
that it needed to become operational as quickly as possible with clear command and
control arrangements.

Letter Cannon to McDonald, 6 June 2003, ‘Iraq: Prime Minister’s Conversation with Bush, 6 June’.
Minutes, 6 June 2003, Iraq WMD Evidence and Elimination Task Force meeting.
165 
Minute Dowse to Oakden, 6 June 2003, ‘DCDI Iraqi WMD Co-ordination Meeting, 6 June’.
166 
Letter Manning to McDonald, 9 June 2003, ‘Iraq: Conversation with Condi Rice’.
163 
164 

489

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

345.  In his conversation with Dr Rice on 9 June, Sir David Manning reported Mr Blair’s
view.167 He assured Dr Rice that the UK would give its best resources to the intelligence
component of the ISG, but the UK needed access to all the relevant information.
346.  Sir David reported that Dr Rice had assured him that she had been asked to
take action after Mr Blair’s conversation with President Bush on 2 June, and that
responsibility for WMD had been transferred from Secretary Rumsfeld to Mr Tenet, who
was to ensure that the ISG concentrated on two priorities: the search for WMD and the
search for Saddam Hussein and his sons. Mr Tenet intended to recruit Dr David Kay, a
former inspector, to help shape the WMD effort.
347.  Sir David also reported that he had told Dr Rice that action on incentives and
immunities was “extremely urgent”. The absence of interviews had been a “major
weakness” in UNMOVIC’s approach.
348.  Sir David commented that Mr Blair’s concerns had clearly registered with
President Bush and that Sir Richard Dearlove would be in touch with Mr Tenet “shortly”.
349.  Mr Cannon informed Sir Richard Dearlove’s Private Office that, in response to
the US “shake-up” of oversight of the ISG, Sir David Manning thought that the “most
appropriate channel” to follow up Mr Blair’s conversation with President Bush would be
for Sir Richard to write to Mr Tenet setting out the UK’s views.168 Mr Scarlett agreed.
350.  As the basis for a letter, Mr Cannon provided a draft, which had been cleared with
Mr Scarlett, together with a copy of the FCO paper on incentives to encourage Iraqi
WMD personnel to come forward.
351.  The draft identified six “key priority areas” for the success of the ISG:

•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

a clear command structure, with clear priorities and an effective flow of
information;
an intelligence-led campaign with resources put to best use; the UK had
“some skills in this area” and was “keen to contribute”;
complete sharing of intelligence generated by the ISG “without restrictions of
access at any level”; the UK was “keen to play its full part”;
inducements and immunity; there was “some experience in this area which …
could be helpful”;
“a sense of drive and urgency”; and
logistic support.

Letter Manning to McDonald, 9 June 2003, ‘Iraq: Conversation with Condi Rice’.
Letter Cannon to PS/C, 10 June 2003, ‘Iraq Survey Group’ attaching Paper [unattributed], [undated],
‘Iraq Survey Group’.
167 
168 

490

4.4  |  The search for WMD

352.  The draft concluded:
“We agree that we need to take this investigation forward patiently and prudently,
without letting the media and the anti-intervention lobby rattle us. But we have to
move fast to secure the physical evidence of WMD and more importantly the people,
the scientists and administrators with the knowledge of the programmes, before they
have time to get together and work out a co-ordinated strategy for dealing with us …
[and] before they start taking their proliferation skills somewhere else.”
353.  Following a discussion with Mr Tenet on 11 June, Sir Richard Dearlove sent him
the two papers provided by Mr Cannon.169 Sir Richard explained that SIS had made
arrangements to reinforce and reorganise in Iraq to bridge the gap until the ISG was
fully operational. He also asked Mr Tenet for details of the new command and control
arrangements for the ISG so that decisions could be made on adjustments needed
in the UK.
354.  Mr Tenet announced Dr Kay’s appointment as “Special Advisor for Strategy
regarding Iraqi Weapons of Mass Destruction Programs” (commonly known as the
Head of the ISG) on 11 June 2003.170
355.  In his memoir, Mr Tenet wrote:
“Military personnel would have to do the lion’s share of the actual searching and
provide almost all of the physical security for those engaging in the mission. To
get around that hurdle, we carefully negotiated a memorandum of understanding
with DOD, spelling out how a senior advisor appointed by me would work with,
but not command, what was called the Iraq Survey Group (ISG), which would
stay technically under the command of a two-star general reporting to the
Secretary of Defense.”171
356.  Mr Tenet also wrote:
“Our instructions to Kay were simple. Find the truth. We promised him the resources
he needed and an absence of interference from the home front. I am confident that
we delivered both.”
357.  Mr Tenet added, “We protected Kay’s independence fiercely.”
358.  Senior US, UK and Australian military officers and civilians involved with the ISG
took part in weekly video conferences linking Baghdad with capital cities.172 Participants
included Secretary Rumsfeld’s Office, CENTCOM, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the DIA, the
US intelligence office in Baghdad, and UK and Australian intelligence.
Letter Dearlove to Tenet, 12 June 2003, [untitled].
CIA News & Information, 11 June 2003, DCI Tenet Announces Appointment of David Kay as Special
Advisor.
171 
Tenet G & Harlow B. At the Center of the Storm: My Years at the CIA. HarperPress, 2007.
172 
Duelfer C. Hide and Seek: The Search for Truth in Iraq. Public Affairs, 2009.
169 
170 

491

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

359.  On 12 June, Mr Straw told Cabinet that the ISG was starting work. Incentives and
immunities to encourage Iraqi co-operation were being sorted out.173
360.  There is no record in the minutes that Mr Straw explained the UK’s role or
responsibilities to Cabinet.174
361.  Sir Richard Dearlove sent Sir David Manning a copy of the letter to Mr Tenet
on 16 June.175
362.  In a covering letter to Sir David Manning, Sir Richard suggested:
“With CIA in the ISG driving seat on WMD, SIS will need to take a more prominent
role in the co-ordination of the UK effort, as we are best placed to liaise with CIA
here, in Washington and on the ground in Iraq.”
363.  Depending on what Mr Tenet told Sir Richard about command, control and
communications arrangements for the ISG, it might be necessary to “re-jig” the Whitehall
arrangements on WMD to reflect a more prominent SIS role. Any changes would need to
avoid detracting from the “key contribution of DIS/MOD, who are providing the major UK
input of resources and expertise, here and in the field”.
364.  Sir Richard suggested setting “some review deadlines”, with a first review at the
end of July to assess the impact of the joint SIS/DIS “surge effort” and the interface
between that effort and the start of the ISG. He suggested a date around the end of
September for a first formal review of the ISG.
365.  Sir Richard commented:
“Although the UK will be the junior partner in the ISG, and we may need to manage
expectations on both sides of the Atlantic about what it can achieve, I hope that we
will be able to influence its focus and pace of activity.”
366.  Sir David Manning endorsed Sir Richard Dearlove’s proposals and asked
Sir Richard to discuss the streamlining of Whitehall machinery with Mr Scarlett.176
Sir David envisaged the JIC Sub-Committee on Iraq/WMD remaining the focal point
for the overall Whitehall effort, “but it will clearly need to work very closely with the
SIS/CIA liaison machinery”.
367.  SIS3 reported, after visiting Iraq in June, that logistical obstacles were likely to
delay ISG operation until mid-July.177 He had observed some confusion on the ground
as a consequence of recent leadership changes and some “institutional rivalries and
disconnects”, confirming SIS3 in the view that the UK should reinforce its independent
Cabinet Conclusions, 12 June 2003.
Cabinet Conclusions, 12 June 2003.
175 
Letter C to Manning, 16 June 2003, [untitled].
176 
Letter Manning to C, 17 June 2003, ‘Iraq: ISG’.
177 
Letter SIS3 to Manning, 19 June 2003, ‘Iraq: WMD’.
173 
174 

492

4.4  |  The search for WMD

SIS/DIS effort and “seek to harness ISG capabilities to joint operational objectives once
the ISG was up and running”. The “surge effort” should last until the end of July, when
SIS would take stock.
368.  SIS3 reported that co-ordination between UK agencies and units and between
UK bodies and their US counterparts was impressive. The task now was to develop
a coherent and comprehensive strategy and methodology that also encompassed
CENTCOM and the ISG.
369.  Mr Blair informed Cabinet on 19 June that the ISG had started systematic work
on uncovering Iraqi programmes for WMD.178 No further discussion of the issue
was recorded.
370.  Mr Howard sent Mr Bowen a progress report on 20 June.179 It was now clear that
Mr Tenet would exercise strategic oversight of the ISG’s work on WMD and would be
represented in Iraq by Dr Kay. Maj Gen Dayton had been tasked to support Dr Kay.
The ISG would continue to work within the military chain of command to ensure it
received the necessary security, logistics and life support. There was evidence that
CENTCOM was now giving the ISG the support it needed.
371.  Mr Howard reported that, during calls on SIS and the DIS on 19 June, Dr Kay had
stressed the importance he attached to the ISG being an intelligence-led operation and
the need for an accelerated timetable.
372.  Mr Howard also enclosed the first ISG situation report from Brig Deverell,
Maj Gen Dayton’s Deputy, who reported that the main components of the ISG were
now functional and that the first operations would take place later in the week.180
373.  Baroness Symons, Minister of State for the Middle East, explained the ISG’s lines
of accountability to London and Washington in the House of Lords on 16 October:
“… the Iraq Survey Group (ISG) is not part of the Coalition Provisional Authority.
It is part of the United States-led military forces in Iraq and is therefore accountable
to the United States Administration. British personnel seconded to the Survey Group
are under the tactical control of the United States’ commander. They are under
the operational command of and accountable to the United Kingdom Chief of Joint
Operations and thus to Her Majesty’s Government. On reporting, the findings of
the Group are available to the Coalition partners, including our own Intelligence
and Security Committee, which will have access to the full text of the ISG
interim report.”181

Cabinet Conclusions, 19 June 2003.
Letter Howard to Bowen, 20 June 2003, ‘Iraq: Weapons of Mass Destruction: Iraq Survey Group and
Related Issues: Progress Report’.
180 
Report Deverell to CDI, 18 June 2003, ‘Iraq Survey Group Sitrep No.1 18 Jun 03’.
181 
House of Lords, Official Report, 16 October 2003, column 1095.
178 
179 

493

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

374.  Major General Tim Tyler, British Deputy Commander of the ISG from early January
to late March 2004, told the Inquiry that Maj Gen Dayton explained this arrangement by
describing himself as the “taxi driver” for Special Advisors Dr Kay and Mr Duelfer, who
“paid the fare”.182
375.  Maj Gen Tyler described how the separate chains of military and intelligence
oversight worked from a British perspective:
“As senior UK rep, I had two lines of reporting, formal ones … I reported directly
back to the ROCKINGHAM cell for the intelligence aspects … and then to PJHQ on
all military aspects.”
376.  Maj Gen Tyler added: “From my point of view it was straightforward and therefore
did work.”
377.  Mr Howard told the Inquiry that, although he had been concerned that the ISG
would end up with a split command, the arrangement had worked quite well:
“Keith Dayton got on, ran the ISG, did the tasking, sent people out, made sure
they were properly protected and, as it were, managed the administration, and
David really concentrated on the analytical effort and targeting the analysis, saying
this is where we need to concentrate our efforts, and I think that actually worked
reasonably well.
“I thought that the industrial handling of documents and other sources by the ISG
was very good. I think there were problems, nevertheless, of record-keeping,
and problems of actually really bringing a vast amount of material into a single
cohesive report.
“So it was a mixed picture, but the general approach, I think, was right.”183
378.  Mr Blair discussed WMD with President Bush on 26 June.184 He informed
President Bush that he hoped to set out publicly what the UK knew about WMD and the
Iraqi regime’s human rights abuses in the next few weeks. The UK would co-ordinate
with the US in doing so.
379.  In a video conference with President Bush and others on 3 July, Mr Blair stated
that there was a need to redouble the search for WMD.185 Ambassador L Paul Bremer,
CPA Administrator, reported that the work of the ISG had improved over the last week;
and that the ISG had shifted from examination of declared sites and the interrogation of
uncommunicative top regime figures to targeting lower level scientists and officials.
Private hearing, 3 June 2010, pages 2-4.
Private hearing, 18 June 2010, pages 12-13.
184 
Letter Rycroft to McDonald, 26 June 2003, ‘Prime Minister’s Conversation with President Bush,
26 June’.
185 
Letter Cannon to McDonald, 3 July 2003, ‘Iraq: Prime Minister’s Video-conference with President Bush,
3 July’.
182 
183 

494

4.4  |  The search for WMD

JIC Assessment, 27 June 2003: ‘Iraq WMD: The Emerging Picture’
380.  On 27 June, the JIC assessed that:

•	

it was “too early in the investigative process to make any firm
judgements” about Iraq’s WMD; and

•	

so far, it had seen nothing to cause it to change either its “pre-conflict
judgements on Iraq’s WMD programmes and capabilities, or the
intelligence on which these judgements were based”.

381.  At the request of the JIC Sub-Committee on Iraq/WMD, on 27 June the JIC
produced ‘Iraqi WMD: The Emerging Picture’, a summary of its current understanding of
the situation, based on the limited intelligence available since the start of hostilities.186
382.  During the JIC discussion of the draft on 25 June, the main points made were:

•	
•	

There was “a great deal of interest in this paper and it would be important to get
the language right”. The ISG’s work on the ground had only just begun and the
situation was still developing. It was “too early to make firm judgements about
Iraq’s WMD. Nothing had so far been found to disprove earlier JIC judgements.”
The draft “should be structured to refer to previous JIC judgements and describe
new evidence, but it should state that it could only provide a snapshot of work in
progress”. The inclusion of Key Judgements was “not warranted”.187

383.  In the Assessment’s summary, the JIC stated:
“It is too early in the investigative process to make any firm judgements about the
location, status and extent of Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction (WMD). A more
focused approach to conducting the search process is only now being put into place.
Implementation will have to allow for the difficulties of operating in post-conflict Iraq.
“A number of lines of investigation … continue to be pursued. Limited new
information has emerged since the conflict on Iraq’s chemical and biological
capabilities. […] So far we have seen nothing which would cause us to change
either our pre-conflict judgements on Iraq’s WMD programmes and capabilities, or
the intelligence on which these judgements were based.”188
384.  Points made in the Assessment included:
Chemical weapons

•	

Since the last JIC Assessment of 9 September 2002, “intelligence from a
number of sources has continued to indicate that Iraq possessed chemical

JIC Assessment, 27 June 2003, ‘Iraqi WMD: The Emerging Picture’.
Minutes, 25 June 2003, JIC meeting.
188 
JIC Assessment, 27 June 2003, ‘Iraqi WMD: The Emerging Picture’.
186 
187 

495

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

•	
•	

munitions (particularly artillery and battlefield rockets) and was prepared to
use them”.
“Since the conflict began, intelligence has provided further indications that agent
production was continuing in 2002 …”
“In initial interviews senior detainees are maintaining that Iraq’s chemical
weapons programme ended in 1991 and that no weapons were retained.”

Biological weapons

•	
•	

“Very little new intelligence relating to biological weapons alone has been
received … Detainees assessed to be involved continue so far to insist that the
programme stopped in 1991.”
“Confirmation of the exact purpose” of the suspect trailers would require further
work. The trailers were “consistent with, although not optimally designed for,
hydrogen production”. Analytical results had “revealed organic chemicals …
inconsistent with the hydrogen process alone. Even if hydrogen production is
confirmed, technical analysis of the trailers has not undermined the assessment
that they are capable of being used, with only minor modifications, for the
production of micro-organisms.”

Nuclear weapons

•	
•	

“Since the start of the conflict limited information relating to a nuclear weapons
programme has been uncovered in Iraq. One recent report implies that some
activity which could be associated with a centrifuge programme was undertaken
between 1999-2002 …”
Mr Mahdi al-Ubaidi, the former head of the gas centrifuge programme, had
“stated that documentation was concealed from the IAEA” and centrifuge
components had been found buried at his residence. He “claimed that the
nuclear weapons programme was not reconstituted after 1991” but “there was
an intention to do so once UN sanctions were lifted”.

Ballistic missiles

•	
•	

There had been “no new information” about Al Hussein missiles.

•	

Post-conflict interviews and some supporting documentation confirmed previous
judgements that Saddam Hussein “had ordered the development of missiles with
ranges far in excess of the permitted 150km range”. There were “discrepancies”
about when the programme had started and the planned range, but all the
interviewees appeared “to agree that the programme was still at the design stage”.

Mr al-Huwaish, former head of the Military Industrial Commission (MIC) and
a senior member of the National Monitoring Directorate, had claimed the Al
Husseins were “unilaterally destroyed in 1992”.

496

4.4  |  The search for WMD

•	

The missile designs described were “different to some of those previously
highlighted in intelligence, because they are claimed to be based on Volga
engine technology rather than SCUD”.

Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV)

•	

The former Director of the Centre responsible for the UAV programme had
confirmed that an Iraqi UAV flew 500km in June 2002. He continued to state that
they were not designed for the delivery of chemical or biological agent.

Proliferation

•	

“We remain concerned about the proliferation of material, equipment and
technical knowledge from Iraq to third parties … We have not been able to
substantiate intelligence and media reporting of missiles and other related
material being sent to Syria or other countries.”

385.  Addressing why there had been no finds of chemical and biological munitions or
stocks of agent, or Al Hussein missiles or parts, the Assessment stated:
“A number of high value detainees claim that these munitions and systems do not
exist. However, there are serious doubts are [sic] their openness and co-operation.
The weight of intelligence prior to the conflict, and the fact that the investigative
process is at a very early stage, lead us to maintain our previous judgements.
“A number of other explanations have been proposed about the fate of Iraq’s WMD
munitions and systems, some of which are supported by intelligence:

•	
•	

•	
•	

munitions were deployed but have not yet been found, because they were
either destroyed or hidden on the battlefield;
they were destroyed to ensure they were not discovered by UNMOVIC
inspections – […] This would be more extreme than the concealment
measures considered by the JIC in its paper of 11 October 2002 on
inspections. There has also been a suggestion that some munitions were
destroyed just prior to the conflict but intelligence on this has yet to be
verified;
Iraq’s concealment operation was so comprehensive that it did not allow for
rapid reconstitution of an effective CBW or Al Hussein missile capability –
[…] The gap between UN weapons inspectors leaving and the start of the
conflict was only three days.
the political decision-making process in Iraq was paralysed by the
Coalition attack …”

497

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

386.  Sir John Scarlett told the Inquiry that the Assessment “sort of logged the picture
at that moment, which was more or less when the ISG was seriously getting going”.189
He added:
“So in the end of June Assessment it was just stated that no munitions of stocks or
agent had been found for CW … That was set against the fact that even during the
conflict there had been continuing intelligence about tactical deployment of CW. This
was early on, after the end of the conflict, and it was still seen as very early days.
“For BW it was slightly different at that point because it’s important to say that in late
April, early May, trailers were found in Iraq …
“So in the BW context, it wasn’t a case that nothing had been found, because it was
thought that possibly something pretty serious had been found, and of course it played
into a major line of reporting which was still being taken seriously at that time …
“So initially … it was said in bold terms, straight away, up front to customers what
was not being found and what might be being found, and at that stage, emphasis
was placed on it was too early to review judgments or change judgments because it
was very early days in the search.
…
“It’s quite difficult to tell from the reporting notes going backwards and forwards at
what point, if you like, the psychological mood changed, because clearly almost from
the beginning when nothing was found, the possibility that nothing would be found
was there …”

FAC Report, 7 July 2003: ‘The Decision to go to War in Iraq’
387.  On 7 July, the House of Commons Foreign Affairs Committee (FAC) published its
report into the decision to go to war in Iraq.190
388.  Among its conclusions, the FAC stated that:

•	
•	
•	

It was “too soon to tell whether the Government’s assertions on Iraq’s chemical
and biological weapons will be borne out”.
The accuracy of most of the Government’s claims about Iraq’s nuclear weapons
programme could only be assessed once the ISG had access to the relevant
scientists and documentation.
The 45 minutes claim “did not warrant the prominence given to it in the
[September 2002] dossier because it was based on evidence from a single,
uncorroborated source”.

Private hearing, 5 May 2010, pages 58-60.
Ninth Report from the Foreign Affairs Committee, Session 2002-2003, The Decision to go to War in
Iraq, HC 813-1.
189 
190 

498

4.4  |  The search for WMD

•	
•	

The effect of the February 2003 dossier had been “almost wholly counterproductive”, undermining the credibility of the Government’s case for war
and the documents that were part of it.
Ministers had not misled Parliament.

389.  The postscript to the FAC report recorded the continuing absence of conclusive
evidence that Iraq possessed WMD:
“Months after the cessation of the military phase of operations in Iraq, no conclusive
evidence has come to light that the regime did indeed possess weapons of mass
destruction. The question arises, why were these weapons not used, assuming they
existed at all? This is at once one of the most difficult and one of the most important
questions the Government has to answer.”
390.  The FCO sent its initial response to the FAC report in November.191 It deferred its
response to the FAC’s conclusions on the 45 minutes claim and the September dossier
until after the conclusion of the Hutton Inquiry.192 Both responses are addressed later in
this Section.

Mr Blair’s evidence to the Liaison Committee, 8 July 2003
391.  During his evidence on Iraq to the Liaison Committee of the House of Commons
on 8 July, Mr Blair was repeatedly asked about the Government’s position on
Iraq’s WMD.193
392.  In his responses, Mr Blair made a number of points, including:

•	
•	
•	
•	

The House of Commons had not been misled and he stood by the case which
had been made for military action “totally”.
There was “no doubt whatever that Saddam Hussein was developing weapons
of mass destruction”, and that, when the UN inspectors “finally had to leave” in
December 1998, “they made it quite clear that in their view ‘unaccounted for’
meant that he had not revealed them”.
He had “no doubt at all” that the ISG would find “evidence of weapons of mass
destruction programmes”.
The policy of containment “was not working”. Saddam Hussein’s strategy “was
to conceal the programmes, to keep the basic expertise in place and then, the
moment the threat was lifted to go back to reinvigorating the programmes again”.

Ninth Report from the Foreign Affairs Committee, Session 2002-2003, The Decision to go to War in
Iraq, Response of the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, Cm6062.
192 
Ninth Report from the Foreign Affairs Committee, Session 2002-2003, The Decision to go to War in
Iraq, Further Response of the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, Cm6123.
193 
Liaison Committee of the House of Commons, Session 2002-2003, Oral evidence taken before the
Liaison Committee on Tuesday 8 July 2003, Qs 146-209.
191 

499

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

The September dossier had stated that Saddam Hussein would engage in a
programme of concealment and he (Mr Blair) believed, from the information now
available, that was “precisely what he did”.
He reiterated the validity of the intelligence in relation to the statement that Iraq
had chemical and biological weapons that could be activated within 45 minutes.
He suggested that the alternative hypothesis to the one he had set out was that
Saddam Hussein had decided to get rid of the weapons but had not told anyone;
he did not think that was “a very serious hypothesis”.
He regretted that the dossier that had been produced in February had not
correctly attributed the information which had been drawn from published
sources; but that information was correct. The first and third parts of the dossier
were based on intelligence information.
The information in the September dossier on Iraqi attempts to procure uranium
from Niger was not based on the “so-called ‘forged’ documents” seen by the
IAEA, but on separate intelligence.
The ISG should be allowed time to do its work. It would be addressing the issues
“in a systematic way”, which Dr Blix “was unable to do”. “[C]hasing round trying
to find the stuff” was “always going to be incredibly difficult”. The only way to “get
to the truth” was “by interviewing the people involved”.

House of Commons debate on Iraq, 15 July 2003
393.  On 15 July, the House of Commons rejected a second Opposition motion
calling for an independent judge-led inquiry into pre-conflict intelligence.
394.  In the House of Commons on 15 July, Mr Menzies Campbell asked Mr Straw:
“… does not the absence of chemical and biological weapons, the embarrassing
and apparently escalating dispute between Washington and London over Niger,
the failure to find SCUD missiles and the controversy over the February dossier
make an irresistible case for an inquiry independent of Parliament and led by a
senior judge?”194
395.  Mr Straw replied that “the combination of the Foreign Affairs Committee and the
Intelligence and Security Committee is appropriate”.195
396.  An Opposition motion tabled in the House of Commons on 16 July by Mr Ancram
stated:
“That this House welcomes the Ninth Report from the Foreign Affairs Committee …
but notes some reservations by Committee members that it not only had insufficient
time but insufficient access to crucial documents to come to comprehensive and
194 
195 

House of Commons, Official Report, 15 July 2003, column 158.
House of Commons, Official Report, 15 July 2003, column 159.

500

4.4  |  The search for WMD

definitive conclusions on some of the issues; further notes the recent concerns
raised over intelligence material; and calls on the Government to set up a judicial
inquiry finally to establish the facts of the matter.”196
397.  In the debate that followed, Mr Ancram stated:
“The Prime Minister and the Government have an overriding duty to be scrupulous
and consistent in the way that they provide intelligence material to Parliament. Over
these last months that has clearly not been the case. Two key areas exist … the
status of the evidence on weapons of mass destruction, and … the way in which the
Government have handled and made public the material.
…
“For example, there was a claim about uranium from Niger going to Iraq. The claim
was stated as a fact in the September dossier but was subsequently shown to have
been partially based on forged documents. There was no explanation of who forged
them and why. There is no mention of CIA concerns in the Government’s response.
We now have a belated explanation that there were other sources of intelligence
that apparently cannot be disclosed. Even more unusually we are told such sources
cannot be shared with the United States.
…
“Some will ask whether the dodgy dossier really matters. The fact that the Prime
Minister misrepresented its provenance goes to the heart of the trust that Parliament
can put in what he tells it is, or is not, intelligence …
“The erosion of public confidence is gathering pace and beginning to damage the
national interest …
“There is an urgent unanswerable case for the Government to set up an
independent judicial inquiry …”197
398.  Mr Straw tabled the Government’s amendment.198 He stated that an independent
judicial inquiry, whether set up under the Tribunals of Inquiry (Evidence) Act 1921 or
not, “can be frustrating for the public because of the duration and the costs involved”.
It was also quite wrong to assume that such inquiries “automatically bring such issues
to a close”.
399.  Mr Straw concluded:
“A vote for the Opposition’s motion would be a vote of no confidence in the
Intelligence and Security Committee … It would also be a vote of no confidence in
House of Commons, Official Report, 16 July 2003, column 287.
House of Commons, Official Report, 16 July 2003, columns 288-293.
198 
House of Commons, Official Report, 16 July 2003, column 296.
196 
197 

501

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

the ability of this Parliament to have effective oversight of agencies and Ministers
on intelligence matters.”199
400.  The Opposition motion was defeated by 299 votes to 200. The Government
amendment, agreed without a further vote, stated:
“That this House … believes that the Intelligence and Security Committee … is the
appropriate body to consider the intelligence relating to Iraq; and notes that this
Committee has already begun its inquiry.”200
401.  In response to a written question from Ms Lynne Jones (Labour) on 18 July,
Mr Bill Rammell, FCO Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State, stated that the assessment
that Iraq had attempted to procure uranium from Africa was based on information from
the intelligence service of another Government. The UK Government could not pass it to
anyone else without the express consent of the originator.201

Uranium and Niger
In the September 2002 dossier on WMD (Iraq’s Weapons of Mass Destruction. The
Assessment of the British Government), the Government stated that “there is intelligence
that Iraq has sought the supply of significant quantities of uranium from Africa”.202
In his January 2003 State of the Union address, President Bush stated: “The British
Government has learned that Saddam Hussein recently sought significant quantities of
uranium from Africa.”203
On 7 March 2003, Dr Mohamed ElBaradei, Director General of the IAEA, informed the UN
Security Council that the documents pointing to an agreement between Niger and Iraq for
the sale of uranium between 1999 and 2001 were “not authentic” and that those specific
allegations were “unfounded”.204
In its report The Decision to go to War in Iraq, published in July 2003, the House of
Commons Foreign Affairs Committee (FAC) stated that the assertion in the September
2002 dossier should have been qualified to “reflect the uncertainty” surrounding the
evidence upon which it was based.205
In its response to the FAC in November 2003, the FCO stated that: “the claim in the
September dossier rested on separate evidence to that judged fraudulent by the IAEA”,
and that this intelligence was still under review and had not been shared with the CIA.206

House of Commons, Official Report, 16 July 2003, column 305.
House of Commons, Official Report, 16 July 2003, column 346.
201 
House of Commons, Official Report, 18 July 2003, column 810W.
202 
Iraq’s Weapons of Mass Destruction. The Assessment of the British Government, 24 September 2002,
page 25.
203 
The White House, 28 January 2003, President Delivers “State of the Union”.
204 
UN Security Council, ‘4714th Meeting Friday 7 March 2003’ (S/PV.4714).
205 
Ninth Report from the Foreign Affairs Committee, Session 2002-2003, The Decision to go to War in
Iraq, HC 813-1.
206 
Ninth Report from the Foreign Affairs Committee, Session 2002-2003, The Decision to go to War in
Iraq, Response of the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, Cm6062.
199 
200 

502

4.4  |  The search for WMD

In July 2004, the Butler Report supported the FCO’s claim, concluding that the report
appeared “well-founded”: the “intelligence was credible” that Iraq had sought to purchase
uranium ore from Niger in 1999.207
The Iraq Survey Group found no evidence that Iraq sought uranium from abroad after
1991. It found only one offer of uranium to Baghdad after 1991, and that had been turned
down because of sanctions.208

JIC Current Intelligence Group Assessment, 16 July 2003: ‘Iraq:
Prohibited Ballistic Missile Designs’
402.  At the request of the JIC Sub-Committee on Iraq/WMD, a Current Intelligence
Group (CIG) assessed the information on prohibited missile designs provided by senior
figures in the missile programme.209
403.  The Key Judgements were:
“I.  Information that Iraq was pursuing a number of designs for prohibited ballistic
missiles between 2000 and 2002 is, despite some discrepancies, credible.
“II.  The missiles were designed to reach ranges between 500-600km and 9001,000km. Initial examination indicates that the designs produced and the four to five
year timeframe envisaged to reach full production appear technically credible.
“III.  Senior figures in the ballistic missile programme were actively engaged in
concealing this design work from UNMOVIC, both physically and in interviews with
inspectors. The aim was to preserve the designs for future use.
“IV.  Some of the individuals are not being entirely forthcoming on sensitive issues,
such as chemical and biological warhead designs, possibl[y] out of fear of the
consequences for them.”
404.  The Assessment stated that two consistent themes had emerged from the
interviews that had been conducted so far:
“•	 Iraq worked on a number of missile designs between late 2000 and early 2002
… but no missile hardware was produced;

•	

Orders were received in mid 2002 to conceal all signs of such design work from
UN weapons inspectors and these orders were carried out.”

Review of Intelligence on Weapons of Mass Destruction [“The Butler Report”], 14 July 2004, HC 898.
Central Intelligence Agency, 30 September 2004, The Comprehensive Report of the Special Advisor to
the DCI on Iraq’s WMD, Volume II, ‘Nuclear’, pages 7-8.
209 
CIG Assessment, 16 July 2003, ‘Iraq: Prohibited Ballistic Missile Designs’.
207 
208 

503

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

405.  The Assessment contained statements relating to the development of missile
systems including:

•	

•	
•	
•	
•	

Iraq was using multiple Volga engines (the Al Samoud missile had only one
engine). The missile designs were judged to be “credible”; Iraq had “previous
experience with multiple engine systems”. The twin engine missile “would have
had a range approaching that of the Al Hussein (650km)”, but “a much smaller
payload”.
Work had not been undertaken after early 2002.
There was “currently no evidence to link the 380 illicitly procured Volga engines
to these designs, although the number purchased was probably in excess of that
required for the Al Samoud programmes”.
Intelligence pre-conflict had indicated possible work on a long-range derivative
of the SCUD missile, with a range of around 1,200km, but all those interviewed
had stated that they were unaware of any continuing work on a SCUD-based
system.
There had been design work on developing the short-range Al Fatah
(Ababil 100) missile.

406.  The Assessment concluded that it was not clear why development of the designs
for prohibited missile systems had been halted. There was a clear intent to preserve the
designs for future use and UNMOVIC inspectors had been deceived during interviews.
Areas for further investigation included:

•	
•	
•	

“the issue of chemical and biological warheads”;
“the purpose of missile infrastructure such as the Al Rafah test stand”; and
“the extent of foreign technical and material assistance”.

407.  Sir John Scarlett told the Inquiry that after this Assessment:
“… there wasn’t a further formal JIC Assessment until the end of the following year,
23 December 2004, when there was a formal review of JIC judgements in 2002,
which took account of the ISG final report which had been issued in October 2004.
“But in case anybody thinks that therefore the JIC wasn’t looking at it at that time, it
certainly was, but it was doing it through the process of reporting from, contact with,
monitoring of, participation in, through British representatives, the work of the ISG
on the ground. There were regular reports coming in and then being disseminated to
No.10 and to JIC members, and that is how the work of the ISG was tracked.”210

210 

Private hearing, 5 May 2010, page 59.

504

4.4  |  The search for WMD

The ISG builds momentum
408.  On 16 July, Mr Howard reported that the ISG was now focusing its effort
on debriefings and document exploitation, but that it was still “very much at the
beginning” of its task.
409.  Mr Howard visited the ISG in Baghdad and Qatar in the second week of July.211
He reported to Mr Scarlett that:
“A lot of emphasis is being placed on human intelligence and interviews and
debriefings both of high value detainees and low ranking individuals. Another main
area of effort, which is beginning to produce some results, is document and other
media exploitation. Major centres for this have been set up both in Baghdad and
in Qatar which bring together subject matter experts, linguists and, in the case
of Baghdad, some powerful IT tools to sift what is a vast quantity of material for
interesting information and leads.
“… But, it is still true to say that we are very much at the beginning of the task and
the ISG has only really reached its current state of effectiveness in the last fortnight.”
410.  Mr Howard provided a copy of the ISG’s four “Operating Hypotheses”:
“•	 Iraq had an active WMD development program separate and apart from WMD
production

•	
•	
•	

Iraq hid CW/BW weapons and agents, delivery systems, and WMD program
information within Iraq away from sites known to the Coalition, or outside Iraq
Iraq destroyed existing stockpiles (but likely retained a mobilization or production
capability that could produce CW/BW agents and delivery systems)
If Iraq destroyed its stockpile (or most of it), it would have taken place at remote
locations or areas with no previous link to the WMD program.”

411.  Mr Howard advised that, with the exception of evidence of Iraqi attempts to extend
the range of anti-ship cruise missiles to 180km, there needed to be “a good deal more
exploitation and investigation before a rounded picture in any of the key areas can be
pulled together”.
412.  Mr Howard reported that Dr Kay wanted to avoid “drip-feeding” material to London
or Washington for fear of leaks and of raising expectations unjustifiably. Dr Kay was
also very wary of making anything public in the near future, but was “pretty bullish” that
he would have “a reasonably convincing BW package for use in public by early to mid
September”. He would understand if the UK wanted to publicise the missile programme
before then, but believed it would have more impact combined with something on BW or
CW in September. Mr Howard agreed.
Minute Howard to Scarlett, 16 July 2003, ‘Iraq WMD’ attaching Paper [unattributed], [undated], ‘ISG
Operating Hypotheses’.
211 

505

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

413.  Mr Howard described the main risks and obstacles facing the ISG:

•	
•	
•	

the security situation (addressed in more detail in the Box, ‘Deteriorating
Security and the ISG’, later in this Section);
an “insufficiently flexible detention policy”, which was being exploited by former
regime figures to discourage people from co-operating; and
the “lack of an immunity component to the incentives package”.

414.  Mr Scarlett reported Mr Howard’s conclusions to Sir David Manning together with
an outline of the draft JIC Assessment of Iraq’s prohibited missile systems.212
415.  Mr Scarlett advised Sir David that evidence on Iraq’s missile, nuclear and BW
programmes gathered so far demonstrated “a clear policy of concealment”, including
“physical and oral deception”.
416.  Mr Scarlett’s minute was seen by Mr Blair.213
417.  Asked how the absence of evidence of WMD in Iraq was presented to Mr Blair,
Sir John Scarlett told the Inquiry:
“The advice from the Cabinet Office and from the Assessments Staff and the JIC
was straight down the middle. He [Mr Blair] was told what was being found and what
was not being found, and he was given the best advice about the significance of
what was being found and not being found … [T]here was nothing in the advice that
went from me or from the JIC … [to indicate] that anyone was raising expectations
that weren’t justified.”214
418.  In Washington on 17 July, Mr Blair told the media that he believed “with every
fibre of instinct and conviction” that he was right about the threat from Iraqi WMD,
but that it was important to wait for the ISG to complete its work.
419.  On 17 July, Mr Blair visited Washington to deliver a speech to a joint meeting of
Congress, which had awarded him the Congressional Gold Medal. He also met the
Congressional leadership and, separately, President Bush (see Section 9.2).215
420.  Before the visit, the British Embassy Washington reported that the debate on Iraqi
WMD in the US remained “febrile”.216 In the face of an offensive on the issue by the
Democratic Party and in the media, mutual distrust between the White House and the
CIA was palpable. All the Democrat presidential candidates were raising questions about
US intelligence, while other leading Democrats stepped up calls for a full Congressional
investigation or an independent inquiry. Congressional Republicans were holding the line
Minute Scarlett to Manning, 16 July 2003, ‘Iraq WMD: Update from the ISG’.
Manuscript comment Manning, 17 July 2003, on Minute Scarlett to Manning, 16 July 2003, ‘Iraq WMD:
Update from the ISG’.
214 
Private hearing, 5 May 2010, page 62.
215 
Letter [Private Secretary] to Adams, 18 July 2003, ‘Prime Minister’s Visit to Washington, 17 July’.
216 
Telegram 957 Washington to FCO London, 17 July 2003, ‘Iraq WMD: Update, 16 July’.
212 
213 

506

4.4  |  The search for WMD

that the search for WMD should be given time and the House and Senate Intelligence
Committees allowed to work through huge quantities of intelligence provided by Mr Tenet
before any decision was taken.
421.  In his speech to Congress on 17 July, Mr Blair warned of the risk that “terrorism
and states developing weapons of mass destruction come together”.217 He stated:
“If we are wrong, we will have destroyed a threat that at its least is responsible for
inhuman carnage and suffering.
“That is something I am confident history will forgive.
“But if our critics are wrong, if we are right, as I believe with every fibre of instinct
and conviction I have that we are, and we do not act, then we will have hesitated in
the face of this menace when we should have given leadership.
“That is something history will not forgive.”
422.  At a joint press conference with Mr Blair, President Bush was asked whether he
agreed with the suggestion in Mr Blair’s speech that he might be proved wrong about
the threat from Iraqi WMD. President Bush offered three explanations for the absence
of a breakthrough in the search for WMD: the “chaos” in Iraq; the effort Saddam Hussein
had put into concealment; and the fact that high-level officials were only just starting to
co-operate.218
423.  President Bush predicted that:
“… we will bring the weapons, and, of course, we will bring the information forward
on the weapons when we find them.
“And that’ll … end all this speculation.
…
“And we based our decisions on good, sound intelligence, and … our people are
going to find out the truth. And the truth will say that this intelligence was good
intelligence; there’s no doubt in my mind.”
424.  Mr Blair added:
“… if I could just correct you on one thing, I certainly did not say that I would be
proved wrong. On the contrary, I said with every fibre of instinct and conviction
I believe that we are right.
…

217 
218 

BBC News, 17 July 2003, Text of Blair’s speech.
CNN.com, [undated], Transcript: Bush-Blair news conference.

507

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

“The history of Saddam Hussein and weapons of mass destruction is a 12 year
history, and is a history of him using the weapons and developing the weapons and
concealing the weapons and not complying with the United Nations inspectors who
were trying to shut down his programmes.
“And I simply say – which is why I totally agree with the President – it’s important
we wait for the Iraq Survey Group to complete their work. Because the proposition
that actually he was not developing such weapons and such programmes, having
finally effectively got rid of them in December ’98, he then took all the problems
and sanctions and action upon himself, voluntarily destroyed them but just didn’t
tell anyone.
“I don’t think that’s very likely as a proposition. I really don’t.”
425.  On 18 July, the body of Dr Kelly was discovered near his Oxfordshire
home.219
426.  The decision to set up an investigation into Dr Kelly’s death headed by Lord Hutton
is summarised in the Box below.

The death of Dr David Kelly and the Hutton Inquiry
Following the controversy surrounding the allegations by the BBC journalist Mr Andrew
Gilligan that the September 2002 intelligence dossier had been “sexed up”, Dr David Kelly,
MOD Special Adviser Counter-proliferation and Arms Control, was invited to give evidence
to the House of Commons Foreign Affairs Committee on 15 July 2003 and the Intelligence
and Security Committee of Parliament on 16 July.
On 18 July 2003, Dr Kelly’s body was found near his Oxfordshire home.220
Later on 18 July, Lord Hutton was asked by Lord Falconer, the Secretary of State for
Constitutional Affairs, “urgently to conduct an investigation into the circumstances
surrounding the death of Dr Kelly”.221
Lord Hutton concluded that his Terms of Reference should include investigation of the
two allegations that had drawn Dr Kelly into the controversy surrounding Mr Gilligan’s
broadcasts on the Today programme:
“… (1) that the Government probably knew, before it decided to put it in the dossier
of 24 September 2002, that the statement was wrong that the Iraqi military were
able to deploy weapons of mass destruction within 45 minutes of a decision to do so
and (2) that 10 Downing Street ordered the dossier to be sexed up”.222

219 

Report of the Inquiry into the Circumstances Surrounding the Death of Dr David Kelly C.M.G.
by Lord Hutton, 28 January 2004, HC 247, paragraph 130.
220 
Report of the Inquiry into the Circumstances Surrounding the Death of Dr David Kelly C.M.G.
by Lord Hutton, 28 January 2004, HC 247, paragraph 130.
221 
Report of the Inquiry into the Circumstances Surrounding the Death of Dr David Kelly C.M.G.
by Lord Hutton, 28 January 2004, HC 247, paragraph 1.
222 
Report of the Inquiry into the Circumstances Surrounding the Death of Dr David Kelly C.M.G.
by Lord Hutton, 28 January 2004, HC 247, paragraph 9.

508

4.4  |  The search for WMD

Lord Hutton concluded that the wider issue of the reliability of the intelligence contained in
the dossier did not fall within his Terms of Reference.
The Hutton Inquiry began its hearings on 11 August.223
The Report of the Inquiry into the Circumstances Surrounding the Death of Dr David Kelly
C.M.G. was published on 28 January 2004. The Report’s findings are addressed later in
this Section.

427.  On 24 July, officials advised Ministers that Dr Kay had brought new impetus
to the ISG, which was now operating in a “systematic fashion”.
428.  At the meeting of the AHMGIR on 24 July, the MOD reported that the ISG was now
operating in a “systematic fashion” and that Dr Kay had given new impetus to its work.224
The approach was to “understand WMD programmes as whole, with particular focus
on BW and the special Security Organisation”. Ministers agreed that the UK should
continue to engage closely with the ISG and that the UK should be “fully consulted
before any major conclusions were presented publicly”.

Revised Directive on UK military co-operation with the ISG
On 30 July, General Sir Michael Walker, Chief of the Defence Staff, issued a revised
Directive for Op TELIC, superseding the version issued on 18 March and the
supplementary material on the ISG issued on 18 June.225
The revised Directive included a revised strategic military objective that, for the first time,
incorporated the search for WMD:
“To support the Coalition effort, within allocated resources, to stabilise Iraq, find/
secure WMD, alleviate humanitarian needs, and help create the conditions for the
achievement of the strategic end state.”
The Directive included instructions on co-operation with the ISG:
“The shift towards a pro-active WMD finding, evidence handling and elimination
(of soft and hard components) continues and will be led by the ISG. WMD will not
be located only at SSEs [locations of Sensitive Site Exploitation], we will encounter
it ad hoc, and we will have to extend search activities beyond SSEs. WMD ‘soft’
components and particularly scientists and military experts are very important to the
evidence and elimination programme and HUMINT [human intelligence] is an area
where the UK contribution is highly valued … You should note that ISG incorporates
many other strands in its mission than just WMD. Your mainstream CBRN [chemical,
biological, radiological and nuclear] recce assets, principally from the J[oin]t NBC
Reg[imen]t will be supplemented then replaced by specialist search teams. You are

223 

Report of the Inquiry into the Circumstances Surrounding the Death of Dr David Kelly C.M.G.
by Lord Hutton, 28 January 2004, HC 247, paragraph 6.
224 
Minutes, 24 July 2003, Ad Hoc Group on Iraq Rehabilitation meeting.
225 
‘Chief of the Defence Staff Directive to the Joint Commander for Operation TELIC (Edition 3)’,
30 July 2003.

509

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

to provide support, as appropriate, to the ISG as it develops, but this must not be
detrimental to the overall FP [force protection] posture adopted.”
Those instructions remained largely unchanged when the Directive was revised in
December 2003.226

429.  Mr Scarlett told Mr Straw’s Private Office on 24 July about a US request for
the current UK assessment of the possible BW trailers to be provided to the Senate
Intelligence Committee.227 The assessment would not be made public.
430.  Mr Scarlett attached a one-page draft assessment for Mr Straw’s approval, cleared
with DIS and SIS, which stated:
“With the information currently available we are not able to judge that these trailers
are the transportable BW production system (TPS) described in intelligence.
…
“The assessment of an independent UK analyst is that these trailers have the
potential, with a minor modification (addition of flexible tube), to carry out biological
production …
…
“Confirmation of the exact purpose of the trailers will require further documentary
exploitation, chemical/biological analysis and reporting from personalities associated
with the mobile programmes in Iraq …
“Any final decision on the purpose of the trailers would currently be premature.”
431.  On 29 July, Mr Scarlett informed Mr Straw’s Private Office that a difference of
analysis about the trailers had arisen within the US intelligence community.228 Mr Scarlett
reported that he had told the CIA the UK would not submit its own assessment for
presentation to the Senate, pending a review of the revised position taken by another
part of the US intelligence community.
432.  During their conversation on Iraq on 31July, Mr Blair and President Bush discussed
Dr Kay’s progress.229 Most resources were allocated to Iraq’s BW programme. They

‘Chief of the Defence Staff Directive to the Joint Commander for Operation TELIC (Edition 3)’,
19 December 2003.
227 
Minute Scarlett to PS/Foreign Secretary, 24 July 2003, ‘Iraq – Submission to Senate Intelligence
Committee Enquiry’ attaching Paper [unattributed], 24 July 2003, ‘UK Assessment of Possible
Transportable Biological Agent Production System’.
228 
Minute Scarlett to APS/Foreign Secretary, 29 July 2003, ‘Iraq: Submission to Senate Intelligence
Committee Inquiry’.
229 
Letter Rycroft to Adams, 31 July 2003, ‘Iraq: Prime Minister’s Conversation with Bush, 31 July’.
226 

510

4.4  |  The search for WMD

discussed the need for more individuals working on nuclear matters. Addressing the very
large quantity of documents held was being given a lower priority.

Preparation of the ISG Interim Report
433.  During August, UK and US officials began to discuss the content of Dr Kay’s
ISG Interim Report, scheduled for the second half of September.
434.  UK officials assessed that the report “certainly would not” persuade
sceptics, but might be enough to persuade others that progress was being made.
435.  At the end of August, the British Embassy Washington reported that the
US Government was bracing itself for a disappointing report.
436.  Mr Scarlett succeeded Sir Richard Dearlove as Chief of SIS on 1 August.
437.  Dr Kay and Maj Gen Dayton visited London on 5 August.230
438.  On 6 August, Mr Howard sent Mr Scarlett thoughts on handling Dr Kay’s first
progress report, scheduled for mid to late September. It was essential that any public
report was “firmly based on an honest and thorough assessment of the intelligence
picture so far” and that the UK’s classified assessment “matches that of the Americans
exactly”. Mr Howard suggested that public perceptions were “heavily skewed” by media
interest in Dr Kelly and the Hutton Inquiry, and that there was likely to remain “a deep
vein of scepticism” about what might be found.
439.  Mr Howard added:
“… a progress report which focuses mainly on evidence of programmes and intent
and is short on actual hardware is likely to provoke a mixed reaction. It certainly will
not persuade the sceptics. But it may be enough to persuade the mainstream that
progress is being made.”
440.  Mr Scarlett updated No.10 on 8 August.231 He reported that Dr Kay was convinced
that the ISG was making progress, but cautioned that Dr Kay had a “tendency to
overstate potential leads”. ISG efforts were focused on BW, but there was also progress
in other areas. Developments included:

•	

230 
231 

BW: the ISG was developing a clearer picture of the role of the Iraqi Intelligence
Service (IIS). It had concluded that the UN would not have been able to discover
the full extent of Iraq’s BW programme because of “the comprehensive nature
of Iraq’s concealment and deception policy”. The 97 vials recovered from the
home of a BW scientist had tested positive for traces of live type B clostridium
botulinum, the cause of botulism in humans. Iraq had never declared possession
of the type B strain.

Letter Howard to Scarlett, 6 August 2003, ‘Iraqi WMD: Next Steps’.
Minute Scarlett to Cannon, 8 August 2003, ‘Iraq WMD’.

511

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

•	
•	
•	

Missile programme: evidence of proscribed liquid and solid propellant
development projects that had not progressed beyond the design phase, with no
evidence of production.
CW: “some encouraging leads particularly on VX”.
Nuclear: the ISG had discovered that in 2002 the Iraqi Atomic Energy
Commission had obtained a balancing machine identified as the most important
item for a centrifuge programme. This indicated that Iraq’s nuclear programme
might have taken “a small but significant step forward” while sanctions were in
place.

441.  Mr Scarlett explained that the ISG expected to issue a classified progress report to
the UK, US and Australian Governments in mid-September. It was “unlikely” the report
would:
“… present conclusive proof of Iraqi possession of WMD, although General
Dayton said it should provide ample evidence that Iraq was in material breach of
UNSCR 1441 because of the level of deception and concealment of Iraqi WMD
(eg the missile plans and the BW vials)”.
442.  In a Note to No.10 officials on 16 August, Mr Blair listed three foreign policy
priorities, including “Iraq/Afghanistan”.232 On Iraq and WMD he wrote:
“As a discrete part of our strategy, the issue of WMD and Iraq as a threat must
be dealt with. But this can be done. We have Hutton; we have an ISG report in
September; we will be, hopefully, in a better position inside Iraq. But NS [Sir Nigel
Sheinwald, successor to Sir David Manning as Mr Blair’s Foreign Policy Adviser] and
team should draw up a strategy on this.”
443.  On 19 August, Mr Sérgio Vieira de Mello, the UN Secretary-General’s Special
Representative for Iraq, was killed in an attack on the UN headquarters in Baghdad
(see Box below).233

Deteriorating security and the ISG
Deteriorating security in Iraq had an increasing impact on ISG operations from
summer 2003.
On 13 August, the DIS reported the possibility of an emerging pattern of shootings at
scientists who co-operated with the ISG.234
On 19 August, a bomb exploded outside the UN headquarters at the Canal Hotel
in Baghdad, killing 22 UN staff and visitors, including Mr Sérgio Vieira de Mello,
the UN Secretary-General’s Special Representative for Iraq (see Section 9.2).235

Note [Blair to No.10 officials], 16 August 2003, [untitled].
Report of the Independent Panel on the Safety and Security of UN Personnel in Iraq, 20 October 2003.
234 
Op ROCKINGHAM Daily, 13 August 2003.
235 
Report of the Independent Panel on the Safety and Security of UN Personnel in Iraq, 20 October 2003.
232 
233 

512

4.4  |  The search for WMD

Lieutenant General Andrew Ridgway, Chief of Defence Intelligence, told the Chiefs of Staff
on 20 August:
“Further attacks were expected. The bombing would affect coalition building, NGO
confidence, and the reconstruction of utilities, which if not expedited could lead to a
significant loss of consent.”236
On 26 August, the DIS reported the disruption of an ISG deployment following an attack
on a nearby US military convoy.237
As security deteriorated, the US sought to transfer some of the ISG’s analysis capabilities
to counter-terrorism activities.
The Op ROCKINGHAM weekly update for 21-28 August reported that Secretary Rumsfeld
and US General John Abizaid, Commander CENTCOM, had indicated that they wanted
some of the ISG’s HUMINT and analysis capability dedicated to counter-terrorism tasks.238
In early September, the JIC judged that:
“The security environment will remain poor, and will probably worsen over the next
year, unless the Coalition, in conjunction with Iraqis, can reverse current trends.
There are likely to be more spectacular attacks.”239
In October, the DIS reported two direct attacks on ISG convoys.240
In his memoir, Mr George Tenet, the US Director of Central Intelligence (DCI), wrote:
“A senior military officer later told me he … was ‘flabbergasted’ … when [in November
2003] Kay refused to lend some of the ISG’s experienced intelligence analysts to help
him find insurgents ‘that are killing us’… Had he been a regular CIA officer, I would
have relieved Kay of his command and ordered him home.”241
Major General Tim Tyler, British Deputy Commander of the ISG from early January to late
March 2004, told the Inquiry “there were lots of … constraints on the operations and the
most predominant one was the security situation”.242

444.  On 21 August, the ISG was reported to be “firmly established” in Baghdad.243
The Survey Operations Centre (SOC) and Survey Analysis Centre (SAC) had completed
moves to their permanent location in Baghdad. Locations of the various operational
elements of the ISG included:

•	
•	

Combined Media Processing Centre (CMPC): headquarters in Qatar with
satellite operations conducted out of Baghdad and Erbil;
Joint Interrogation and Debriefing Centre (JIDC): Baghdad;

Minutes, 20 August 2003, Chiefs of Staff meeting.
Op ROCKINGHAM Daily, 26 August 2003.
238 
Op ROCKINGHAM Weekly No.11, 21-28 August 2003.
239 
JIC Assessment, 3 September 2003, ‘Iraq: Threats to Security’.
240 
Op ROCKINGHAM Daily, 21 October 2003. Op ROCKINGHAM Daily, 30 October 2003.
241 
Tenet G & Harlow B. At the Center of the Storm: My Years at the CIA. HarperPress, 2007.
242 
Private hearing, 3 June 2010, page 12.
243 
Op ROCKINGHAM Weekly No.10, 14-21 August 2003.
236 
237 

513

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

Sector Control Point (SCP): Baghdad;
Joint Captured Materiel Exploitation Centre (JCMEC): Baghdad;
Task Force Disablement and Elimination (TF D/E): Baghdad;
Coalition Operating Base – Irbil (COB-I); and
Coalition Operating Base – Basra (COB-B).

445.  In a note on 30 August, Mr Blair requested an immediate and longer-term Iraq
strategy dealing with the situation on the ground in Iraq, how we improve it, how we
improve the system for dealing with it; and WMD.244
446.  Mr Blair added:
“… this must tie in with the way we deal with Hutton. I assume that though the judge
may be critical of certain aspects of our handling, he will basically find for us. That
may be optimistic. But if right, Hutton must be the chance to get our integrity back
on Iraq. So whatever NS [Sir Nigel Sheinwald] does must include a timetable that
incorporates: Hutton, Interim Report on WMD, improvement in Iraq, and other WMD
issues (eg Iran, NK [North Korea] and Libya).”
447.  Mr Straw informed Parliament on 1 September that:
“Coalition forces and specialist personnel of the Iraq Survey Group are actively
pursuing sites, documentation and individuals connected with Iraq’s weapons of
mass destruction programmes. We are investing significant effort in the search.
The process will be painstaking.
“There have been some successes: the discovery of mobile laboratories which bear
a striking resemblance to those described in US Secretary of State Colin Powell’s
presentation to the UN Security Council in March 2003; and the recent recovery of a
large quantity of documents relating to Iraq’s nuclear programme together with parts
of a gas centrifuge which had been hidden since 1991 by an Iraqi scientist formerly
engaged on Iraq’s nuclear programme. We anticipate that more scientists previously
employed on Iraq’s WMD programmes will start to come forward with evidence
and equipment.
“Any finds clearly must be very carefully analysed and assessed. This process is
continuing. When we have collated the evidence, it will be presented appropriately
and properly.”245
448.  On 3 September, Mr Sebastian Wood, Counsellor for External Affairs at the British
Embassy Washington, informed Mr Scarlett that the US Government was bracing itself
for a disappointing report from Dr Kay.246 The Embassy was stressing to the US the
Note [Blair], 30 August 2003, [untitled].
House of Commons, Official Report, 1 September 2003, column 809W.
246 
Letter Wood to Scarlett, 3 September 2003, ‘Pre-Conflict Intelligence on Iraq’.
244 
245 

514

4.4  |  The search for WMD

need for careful co-ordination of public lines with the UK, but tensions between different
interests in Washington meant that would be difficult. Close personal contact with
Dr Rice and Mr Tenet would be important.
449.  US General John Abizaid, Commander CENTCOM, called on Mr Blair on
5 September.247 Mr Blair commented that he had “more than a passing interest in what
turned up on WMD”. Gen Abizaid reported that the ISG’s HUMINT effort was starting to
tell and that there was “stuff buried all over the country”.
450.  At Mr Powell’s request, Mr Scarlett updated No.10 on the search for WMD
possibly concealed in Lake Qadisiyah, behind the Haditha Dam on the Euphrates.248
A Royal Navy team was due to arrive there on 5 September to assess the situation.
451.  Mr Scarlett wrote:
“There have been a number of reports, of varying degrees of reliability, that WMD
may have been concealed in lakes, reservoirs, canals and rivers by Iraqi military or
security organisations. Several reports record local gossip. Certain locations feature
in reports from a number of sources, some with apparently good access or with an
established record of reliable reporting.”
452.  The ISG completed the search of Lake Qadisiyah on 14 September.249
No WMD-related material was found.

JIC discussion of the draft ISG Interim Report
453.  The JIC discussed the draft ISG Interim Report on 10 September.
It concluded that the draft contained little that was new and that handling
of the report would be vital.
454.  The JIC considered a Discussion Note, ‘Iraqi WMD: The Emerging Picture’, on
10 September.250 The minutes recorded that the main points made were:
“a) the first progress report from the ISG contained little new. Whilst there had been
some progress on missiles and a coherent story on nuclear weapons, there was still
a serious lack of hard evidence on CB. There had been a lot of collusion between
Iraqi former officials under questioning and clear attempts to identify the limits of our
knowledge in order to calibrate the information they gave … sources were being
intimidated and fear was a big factor with those working in the CB area; and
“b) the handling of the report would be vital. It was highly desirable to avoid
publishing an unclassified version, which would not only display the limits of

Letter Cannon to Adams, 5 September 2003, ‘Iraq: Prime Minister’s Conversation with General Abizaid’.
Minute Scarlett to Cannon, 5 September 2003, ‘Iraq: Underwater Concealment of WMD’.
249 
Op ROCKINGHAM Daily, 15 September 2003.
250 
Minutes, 10 September 2003, JIC meeting.
247 
248 

515

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

our current knowledge but act as a disincentive to potential sources. We should
therefore ensure an authoritative discussion … with the Allies at an early stage.”
455.  Following the discussion, a small number of amendments were made to the Note,
including the addition of the judgement that it was “too early to conclude that there were
no [chemical and biological] programmes”.251 An Annex to the paper stated:
“So far no chemical or biological munitions or stocks of agent have been found, nor
have any Al Hussein missiles or parts. A number of high level detainees claim that
these munitions and systems do not exist. However, there are serious doubts over
their openness and co-operation”.
456.  A number of other possible explanations as to why no munitions or systems had
been found were identified, some supported by intelligence, including:

•	
•	
•	

destruction or concealment on the battlefield;

•	
•	

a political decision-making process paralysed by the Coalition attack;

destruction to ensure they were not discovered by UNMOVIC inspections;
a concealment operation “so comprehensive that it did not allow for the rapid
reconstitution of an effective CBW or Al Hussein missile capability”;
exaggeration of Iraq’s capabilities by Iraqi opposition groups, “possibly through
deliberate manipulation by the Iraqi intelligence services. UK intelligence
assessments did not rely heavily on reporting from Iraqi opposition groups, but it
cannot be ruled out that UK sources indirectly picked up some disinformation.”

457.  The revised Note was sent to Sir Nigel Sheinwald, Sir David Manning (British
Ambassador to the US) and JIC Members, by Mr Scarlett on 12 September.252
458.  The JIC Sub-Committee on Iraq/WMD discussed the ISG Interim Report on
12 September. It agreed advice for Mr Straw, Mr Hoon, Sir Nigel Sheinwald and
Sir Richard Dearlove to use in contacts with their US counterparts.253
459.  Mr Edward Oakden, FCO Director International Security, wrote:
“The objective, self-evidently – which I underlined repeatedly at the JIC Sub-Group –
is to play down Kay’s Report, making clear its interim nature: very far from the ISG’s
considered assessment.”

Note [JIC], [undated], ‘Iraqi WMD: The Emerging Picture – Discussion Note for the JIC Meeting
10 September 2003’.
252 
Minute Scarlett to Sheinwald, 12 September 2003, ‘Iraqi Survey group: interim report’ attaching Paper
[unattributed], [undated], ‘Kay Report: Points to Make with US Interlocutors’ and Note [JIC], [undated],
‘Iraqi WMD: The Emerging Picture - Discussion Note for the JIC Meeting 10 September 2003’.
253 
Minute Oakden to Private Secretary [FCO], 12 September 2003, ‘Iraq WMD: Handling the Interim
ISG Report’.
251 

516

4.4  |  The search for WMD

460.  After the meeting, Mr Scarlett wrote to Sir Nigel Sheinwald about the need urgently
to address the handling of the ISG Interim Report once it reached Washington.254
461.  Mr Scarlett told Sir Nigel that the ISG Interim Report was not expected to differ
significantly from the UK assessment, set out in a revised Discussion Note following the
JIC meeting on 10 September. Mr Scarlett identified the main points as:
“•	 the working environment in Iraq has proved much more difficult than expected
(poor security situation, more denial, deception and intimidation);

•	
•	
•	
•	

•	

the evidence so far has not shown that WMD programmes were active preconflict. Nor has any firm evidence emerged of Iraq possessing WMD;
Iraq maintained an intention to restart its nuclear weapons programme when UN
sanctions were lifted, and concealed equipment and documentation in support of
this (much of this is already in the public domain);
there is credible evidence confirming Iraq’s pursuit of ballistic and cruise missile
programmes with ranges well in excess of the UN’s permitted limit (this will
receive some publicity through Panorama in late September/early October);
it is not yet possible to establish any firm picture of Iraq’s chemical and biological
weapons capability. The compartmented, highly concealable, and dual-use
nature of such programmes means that there are fewer firm leads to follow …
It is too early to conclude that there were no programmes, and we expect more
information to become available. But this will be a long and difficult process;
there is clear evidence that Iraq was in breach of UN Security Council
Resolutions.”

462.  Mr Scarlett advised that an ISG report along those lines, however interim, would
raise difficult questions. That underlined the need to ensure it was handled correctly,
with US and Australian agreement in advance. Mr Scarlett recommended publication
of a short executive summary, with the full Interim Report being treated as a “classified
stocktake for intelligence experts”. The summary should get across three “fundamental
messages”:

•	
•	

the Interim Report was “far from a considered final assessment”;

•	

there was a good deal more work to do.

the ISG was operating in a difficult security environment and after years of
deception and denial by Iraq; and

Minute Scarlett to Sheinwald, 12 September 2003, ‘Iraqi Survey group: interim report’ attaching Paper
[unattributed], [undated], ‘Kay Report: Points to Make with US Interlocutors’ and Note [JIC], [undated],
‘Iraqi WMD: The Emerging Picture - Discussion Note for the JIC Meeting 10 September 2003’.
254 

517

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

463.  Mr Scarlett recommended urgent representations by Ministers and senior officials
in Washington, and on diplomatic and intelligence channels in Canberra. He provided
seven points to be made with US interlocutors:
“•	 Essential to have handling strategy agreed in Washington, London and
Canberra.

•	
•	
•	

Potentially high-profile political issue in London.

•	

Do not favour publishing full Report even in redacted form. It will show the limits
of our knowledge and deter other[s] from coming forward. Better to offer short
Executive Summary.

•	
•	

Expect that Report will feed scepticism about Iraq’s possession of WMD.
Main aim, therefore, to keep Report profile low and emphasise interim expert
nature.

Need to be ready to say this is our approach if press are alerted to arrival of draft
in Washington.
Like to send team to Washington to concert detailed handling once draft Report
received.”

464.  Mr Ehrman discussed the ISG with the Office of the Secretary of Defense (OSD),
the State Department, the National Security Council (NSC) and the CIA in Washington
on 12 September.255 He asked whether the Interim Report needed to be published at all
and raised the difficulties UK members of the ISG were having in accessing sensitive
US information. US views on publication were mixed, but Dr Kay would almost certainly
have to brief Congress. The NSC thought it inevitable that parts of the Report would
leak and suggested that it would be better to publish the whole document to keep leaks
in context.
465.  The British Embassy reported that all Mr Ehrman’s interlocutors agreed to look into
the “ridiculous situation” of UK access to sensitive US information.

ISC Report, 11 September 2003: ‘Iraqi Weapons of Mass
Destruction – Intelligence and Assessments’
466.  The ISC report Iraqi Weapons of Mass Destruction – Intelligence and
Assessments was published on 11 September 2003.
467.  The ISC sent its report Iraqi Weapons of Mass Destruction – Intelligence and
Assessments to Mr Blair on 9 September.256

Telegram 1191 Washington to FCO London, 14 September 2003, ‘Iraq: WMD: Ehrman (DG Def/Int)’s
Visit to Washington, 12 September’.
256 
Letter Taylor to Blair, 9 September 2003, [untitled].
255 

518

4.4  |  The search for WMD

468.  The ISC called on Mr Blair in Downing Street on 11 September, before the Report
was laid before Parliament.257 Mr John Prescott (Deputy Prime Minister), Mr Straw,
Sir David Omand, Mr Scarlett and Mr Powell were also present.
469.  Mr Blair told the ISC that the ISG faced serious security constraints in Iraq, but its
disclosures could change the context of discussion of Iraqi WMD in the UK.
470.  In the conclusions to its report, the ISC stated that:

•	
•	
•	

•	
•	

•	
•	

The September 2002 dossier had been “founded on the assessments then
available”.
It was content that the JIC had “not been subjected to political pressures”.
The JIC’s independence and impartiality had “not been compromised in any
way”. The dossier had not been “sexed up”.
Use of the phrase “continued to produce chemical and biological weapons” in
the foreword could have given the impression that Saddam Hussein had been
actively producing chemical and biological weapons and significant amounts of
agents. The dossier should have highlighted uncertainty about what had been
produced and in what quantities to give a balanced view of Saddam Hussein’s
chemical and biological capacity.
The dossier should have highlighted that battlefield rather than strategic
weapons were the most likely chemical and biological munitions to be used
against Western forces.
The dossier had been for public consumption, not experienced readers of
intelligence. It should have highlighted that the 45 minutes claim referred to
battlefield chemical and biological munitions, not to any other form of attack.
That omission had allowed speculation as to the exact meaning of the claim and
had been unhelpful to an understanding of the issue.
The initial failure by the MOD to disclose that some staff had put their concerns
about the dossier in writing to their line managers was “unhelpful and potentially
misleading”.
If individuals in the intelligence community wrote formally to their line managers
with concerns about JIC Assessments, those concerns should be brought to the
attention of the JIC Chairman.258

471.  Sir David Omand recommended that the Government delay its formal response to
the ISC report until after the conclusion of the Hutton Inquiry, in line with the approach
taken with the FAC.259

Minute, Cannon to Prout, 11 September 2003, ‘Intelligence and Security Committee’.
Intelligence and Security Committee, September 2003, Iraqi Weapons of Mass Destruction –
Intelligence and Assessments, Cm5972, paragraphs 106-116.
259 
Letter Omand to Rycroft, 9 September 2003, ‘The Intelligence and Security Committee Report on Iraq’.
257 
258 

519

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

472.  The Government response, sent in February 2004, is described later in this
Section.

The ISG Interim Report, 2 October 2003
473.  Sir Nigel Sheinwald discussed the ISG with Dr Rice in Washington on
14 September.260 After the meeting, he informed Mr Blair that the timing of the ISG
Interim Report was unclear, but it was said to be detailed and long. There would be a
short pause for analysis; Dr Kay would be obliged to brief Congressional Committees
in private; and there would be leaks. The Report was likely to:

•	
•	
•	

confirm Iraqi deception and Iraqi intention to restart a nuclear weapons
programme once sanctions were lifted;
confirm Iraqi pursuit of ballistic and cruise missile programmes with ranges well
beyond UN limits;
provide little new information on BW or CW, “though there are some leads”.

474.  Sir Nigel advised that there was a risk an Interim Report of that kind would be
used to show there had been no immediate threat from Iraqi WMD. He and Dr Rice had
agreed that handling should be low-key, stress the Interim Report’s preliminary nature,
point out the difficulty of amassing evidence, and note that the Report showed Iraq had
been in breach of UN resolutions.
475.  Sir Nigel concluded:
“The idea of an Interim Report was conceived when we thought there would be more
to say in the autumn. We are now stuck with it, and are not in control of its use. We
can’t suppress it – its existence is too widely known. Nor did I seek to delay Kay’s
Congressional meetings, or any public statement about the Report – this too would
be likely to leak. But it is possible that there will be a delay anyway – to the week of
22 September, or later. And we should avoid publication of a redacted version and
go, if possible, for something shorter. Do you agree this approach?”
476.  Mr Hoon discussed the ISG with Secretary Rumsfeld on 15 September.261
He observed that the forthcoming Interim Report “looked as though it was not going
to be particularly exciting”. Mr Rumsfeld said that the process was “chugging along”,
but the real issue was whether the ISG had enough people. Mr Hoon offered any further
support that was needed.
477.  Mr Scarlett discussed the ISG Interim Report and the UK proposals for handling it
with a senior US official on 15 September.262

Minute Sheinwald to Prime Minister, 14 September 2003, ‘Visit to Washington’.
Letter Williams to Rycroft, 16 September 2003, ‘The Defence Secretary’s Telephone Call with
Donald Rumsfeld 15 September 2003 – Iraq’.
262 
Minute Scarlett to Sheinwald, 15 September 2003, ‘Iraq Survey Group: Interim Report: Update’.
260 
261 

520

4.4  |  The search for WMD

478.  Mr Scarlett reported to Sir Nigel Sheinwald that the US official had strongly
agreed with the UK’s preferred approach, but had made the point that the US and UK
“could not just draft an Executive Summary as if we owned the Report”. Mr Scarlett
had acknowledged the point, “but repeated that the exceptional sensitivity of public
presentation on this issue meant that we had to be involved”.
479.  Mr Blair and President Bush discussed the importance of the ISG’s forthcoming
Report in their video conference on 16 September.263 Mr Blair stated that Dr Kay should
be able to refer to:

•	
•	

the extent of Saddam’s concealment operations;

•	

that Saddam had intended and prepared to reconstitute a nuclear programme
after sanctions were lifted; and

•	

a ballistic missile programme on a far greater scale than intelligence had
indicated;

CW and BW programmes had been in existence as recently as the
previous year.

480.  On 18 September, Mr Wood reported from Washington that Mr Howard had
been invited to discuss the draft ISG Interim Report at CIA Headquarters on 22 and
23 September.264
481.  Initially, Mr Wood suggested that Mr Howard take the opportunity to call on
Mr Dan Bartlett, White House Communications Director. He subsequently commented to
Mr Miller that a call on Mr Bartlett:
“… needs to be weighed against the risk of Howard’s visit leaking & being portrayed
as a ‘sexing up’ exercise. May be better for us [the British Embassy] to follow up
separately with Bartlett/White House.”265
482.  Mr Miller informed Mr Howard that, after consulting Sir David Manning, Mr Wood
had decided it might be better if the visit did not involve meetings with the press and was
kept to the intelligence community.266
483.  On 19 September, Mr Rycroft chaired a meeting at No.10 to discuss how to handle
the Interim Report.267 The Cabinet Office, the MOD, the FCO and SIS were represented.

Letter Cannon to Adams, 16 September 2003, ‘Iraq: Prime Minister’s video-conference with Bush,
16 September’.
264 
Telegram JICTEL 95 Washington to JIC London, 18 September 2003, ‘Iraq WMD: Kay Report’.
265 
Manuscript comment Wood to Miller on Telegram JICTEL 95 Washington to JIC London,
18 September 2003, ‘Iraq WMD: Kay Report’.
266 
Manuscript comment Miller to Howard on Telegram JICTEL 95 Washington to JIC London,
18 September 2003, ‘Iraq WMD: Kay Report’.
267 
Minute Cannon to Watkins, 19 September 2003, ‘Iraq Survey Group’.
263 

521

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

484.  Access to Dr Kay’s text before its release remained a concern. The Interim Report
was likely to be presented to Mr Tenet that day and Mr Howard was:
“… expected to have access to (but not copies of) the Report on Monday
[22 September] in Washington, and possibly a chance on Tuesday to help draft a
summary to be made public …”
485.  In the meantime, No.10 would continue to ask the White House for a copy of the
Interim Report.
486.  The meeting concluded that the Government’s position with the media should
be neither to heighten expectations nor to take a negative line in advance: “The key
question was whether the Report disclosed additional evidence that the Saddam
regime had breached UNSCRs.” Additional material would be needed on areas
expected to feature in the Interim Report as breaches of UNSCRs: “ballistic missiles,
nuclear programme, UAVs, botulism”. That material should be presented in a “factsbased, forensic manner”.
487.  Mr Howard read the Interim Report in Washington on 22 September.268
488.  On 24 September, Mr Howard reported to a meeting of officials in London, chaired
by Mr Miller, that the aim was “to complete the drafting process by the end of the week.
A copy of the full Report would be sent electronically to C.” It was likely that Dr Kay
would brief the US oversight Committees the following week in private session, following
which a very short public statement would be made, probably by Dr Kay and the
Committee Chairs.
489.  Mr Howard understood that:
“The US were keen that the approach in the three countries [UK, US and Australia]
was broadly in line; there was currently no intention in the US for the Administration
to lead on presenting it … The UK and Australian preference was for a fuller
executive summary to be produced which could be put in the public domain.
One possibility was to make public the summary section of Kay’s Report perhaps
accompanied by a note of Iraqi breaches of UN resolutions (being prepared by
the ISG) and evidence such as photographs of targeted locations and destruction.
This approach would need to be agreed by Tenet and the White House.”269
490.  Mr Rycroft told Mr Blair:

•	
•	

The draft ISG Interim Report was “a good, thorough, professional piece of work”,
which, helpfully, included a table setting out all the breaches of UN resolutions.
The section on BW included information on the “vials etc”.

Email Howard to Miller, 23 September 2003, ‘ISG: interim report: discussions with CIA’.
Minute Church to Miller, 24 September 2003, ‘Note of a Meeting to Discuss ISG Report –
24 September 2003’.
268 
269 

522

4.4  |  The search for WMD

•	
•	
•	
•	

CW was the “thinnest area”, with a “preliminary conclusion” that there were
“no current programmes of production and no ability to fill munitions at the time
of military action”, but there was “more work to be done”.
“As expected”, the nuclear section included “evidence of plans to reconstitute
the programme, including research into isotope separation”.
The section on delivery systems included “lots on missile programmes,
intentions, deception etc”.
The section on destruction and sanitation was a “new element” with “evidence of
targeted looting since the end of military action”.270

491.  On the process of publication, Mr Rycroft explained:

•	
•	
•	

The UK was “pushing” the US to see whether Dr Kay’s Congressional and public
appearances could be brought forward from 9 to 8 October, to expand Dr Kay’s
public remarks, and to get him to publish at least his summary.
Australia was “helpfully, pushing for a big public presentation”.
Efforts to press the US on those and other points were “hampered by the arms
length approach the Administration are taking”.

492.  Mr Rycroft added that some aspects of handling the Interim Report had been
overtaken by the “Andrew Neil leak”, which Mr Blair had already discussed with Mr David
Hill, Mr Campbell’s successor as Mr Blair’s Director of Communications and Strategy.
The Government was saying that it was Dr Kay’s Report, the Government did not have
it, and any comment was speculation on “an incomplete Interim Report”.
493.  On 24 September, the BBC reported that a Bush Administration source had told
Mr Andrew Neil, presenter of BBC Television’s Daily Politics, that the ISG had found no
WMD in Iraq.271
494.  In a letter to Sir Nigel Sheinwald on 24 September, Sir David Manning said that
he had repeated to Mr Armitage how important it was to the UK that Dr Kay stress the
provisional nature of his first report.272 Sir David had also explained that there was “an
immediate timing issue”, with “a difficult Labour Party conference lying in wait”.
495.  Sir Nigel Sheinwald spoke to Dr Rice on 25 September.273 He explained the
damaging impact of the recent leak and the extent of the Prime Minister’s concern.
The leak had changed the situation and the UK hoped it would be possible to bring
forward Dr Kay’s testimony in order to reduce the period of uncertainty.

Minute Rycroft to Prime Minister, 24 September 2003, ‘ISG Report’.
BBC News, 24 September 2003, ‘No WMD in Iraq’, source claims.
272 
Letter Manning to Sheinwald, 24 September 2003, ‘Conversation with Rich Armitage’.
273 
Letter Sheinwald to Adams, 25 September 2003, ‘Iraq: Conversation with US National Security
Adviser’.
270 
271 

523

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

496.  Mr Wood told Mr Scarlett on 25 September that President Bush’s critics were:
“… primed to portray the Kay Report as more bad news from Iraq for the
Administration. Leaks will get worse next week when the Report is circulated …
The media focus will inevitably be on the failure to find weapons. The more of
Kay’s Report is in the public domain, the less freedom critics will have to engage in
inaccurate speculation.
“There may be more bad news round the corner in Congress, where … the Senate
Intelligence Committee may be coming to the conclusion that the judgements on Iraq
WMD in the US National Intelligence Estimate of October 2002 were not justified by
the raw intelligence.”274
497.  SIS3 responded to No.10’s request [for additional material needed before the
publication of the ISG Interim Report] on 26 September. SIS recognised:
“… the need to bolster Kay’s Interim Report on publication but … the release of any
of our material on the Iraqi ballistic missile programme into the public domain would
give us severe difficulty. This is a matter not just of source protection in relation to
individual items, but of SIS being perceived by Iraqis and others to have received
material in confidence and then been involved in releasing it in raw form to the
press. This could damage SIS’s reputation and make it even harder, in already
adverse circumstances, to induce Iraqis to reveal the hard core secrets of the former
regime’s WMD programmes.”275
498.  On 29 September, Mr Wood reported that:
“… despite pressing hard … we have not been able to get any further clarity from
the NSC or CIA on what the Administration plan to make publicly available of
David Kay’s Report or of his testimony to Congress”.276
499.  Mr Wood explained that the Iraq WMD story was “now running full-bore in the US
media”. Democratic sources in Congress had leaked a letter from the House Intelligence
Committee to Mr Tenet arguing that the judgements on Iraqi WMD in the US National
Intelligence Estimate (NIE) of October 2002 were based on outdated, fragmentary and
circumstantial evidence. Mr Wood added that “the media … understand that this is
something of a bombshell, and will not let this one drop.”
500.  On 30 September, Mr Miller reported that the classified Interim Report would
be handed to the UK later that day. US intentions on handling the unclassified text
remained uncertain.277

Letter Wood to Scarlett, 25 September 2003, ‘Iraq WMD: the Mood in Washington’.
Letter SIS3 to Cannon, 26 September 2003, ‘ISG: Material Need [sic] Ahead of Publication’.
276 
Letter Wood to Scarlett, 29 September 2003, ‘Iraq WMD: Latest Developments, 29 September’.
277 
Minute Miller to Scarlett, 30 September 2003, ‘ISG interim report’.
274 
275 

524

4.4  |  The search for WMD

501.  The classified version of the ISG Interim Report was received in London on
30 September.
502.  Before Dr Kay delivered his unclassified testimony to Congress on 2 October,
Mr Rycroft sent an advance copy of the text to Mr Blair at the Labour Party Conference
in Bournemouth. Mr Rycroft commented:
“There is better than expected detail in this, particularly on missiles, nuclear + BW.
Even the CW section is not bad. And the Report makes clear the interim nature, +
the difficulties of the WMD search”.278
503.  Mr Rycroft asked for urgent comments from the FCO, the MOD and the Cabinet
Office on a draft core script for use by the Government in response to Dr Kay’s
testimony.279 The draft stated:
“The ISG have discovered dozens of WMD-related programme activities in breach of
UNSCRs and significant amounts of equipment in Iraq concealed from the UN.
“Six things in the ISG Report:

•	
•	
•	

•	
•	
•	

There was a clandestine network of laboratories and safe houses within the
Iraqi Intelligence Service that contained equipment subject to UN monitoring
and suitable for continuing CBW research. None of these were declared.
They have found a prison laboratory complex, possibly used in human
testing of BW agents, which Iraqi officials were explicitly told not to declare
to UN inspectors.
A vial of a strain from which botulinum can be produced was hidden in the
home of an Iraqi scientist, along with … other vials. The same scientist
says he was asked to hide a further large cache of agents and refused.
That cache is still missing. NB it takes just 1-10 nanograms of botulinum to
kill an adult.
… [T]here was R and D work that paired overt work with surrogates for
prohibited agents, such as anthrax and ricin. NB it takes just 1-7 micrograms
of ricin to kill an adult. These are consistent with a BW programme ready for
surge production.
Iraqi scientists and senior government officials have told the ISG that
Saddam remained firmly committed to acquiring nuclear weapons, and that
he would have resumed nuclear weapons development as soon as the West
relaxed … Nuclear work had restarted under Dr Said.
It is clear that Saddam ordered the development of ballistic missiles with a
range up to 1,000km … SCUD fuel production continued until at least 2001.

Manuscript comment Rycroft to Prime Minister, 2 October 2003 on Minute [unattributed], [undated],
‘To all recipients of the unclassified version of David Kay’s testimony’.
279 
Manuscript comment Rycroft, 2 October 2003 on Paper [unattributed], [undated], ‘ISG Report’.
278 

525

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

Iraq tried to procure missiles from North Korea with a range of 1,300km.
And Iraq was continuing to develop Unmanned Aerial Vehicles with ranges
over 500km.
“Even in the area of CW, where the ISG have not yet found the unaccounted
for … and other material, there is emerging evidence of Iraqi attempts to restart
production, and many leads for the ISG to follow up.
“All of these are breaches of UNSCRs. Any one of them, had it been known at the
time, would surely have triggered a report back to the UN Security Council and an
explicit authorisation from the UNSC for the use of military force following UNSCR
1441.
“Yet this is just the tip of the iceberg:

•	
•	

This is just an interim report …

•	

Above all, there is now clear evidence of a pattern of deliberate deception
and concealment, probably centrally organised … Scientists were
threatened with death to stop them talking to UN inspectors. Some are still
under threat now.

The ISG’s working environment has been very difficult … Some WMD
personnel left Iraq during the conflict.

“So the Kay Report is not a final reckoning of Iraq’s WMD. He concludes that we
cannot say definitively either that weapon stocks do not exist or that they did exist
before the war. We are not at the point where we can close the file on any of these
programmes, he says. But what is clear already, after only three months, is that
– at the very least – Saddam kept in place the programmes and the deception/
concealment techniques so that he could revive his chemical, biological and nuclear
weapons capability when the coast was clear. The ISG’s work must go on before we
can have definite answers.”
504.  The Inquiry has not seen any comments from other departments.
505.  Dr Kay delivered his testimony to Congress on 2 October. He described the
Interim Report as a “snapshot” of the ISG’s first three months’ work.
506.  Dr Kay stated that the ISG had discovered “dozens of WMD-related program
activities and significant amounts of equipment that Iraq concealed from the
United Nations during the inspection that began in late 2002”.
507.  Dr Kay avoided drawing conclusions, but stated that Saddam Hussein “had
not given up his aspirations and intentions to continue to acquire weapons of
mass destruction”.

526

4.4  |  The search for WMD

508.  In his unclassified testimony to Congress on 2 October, Dr Kay emphasised that
the Interim Report was a “snapshot” after the ISG’s first three months’ work.280 It was
“far too early” to reach definitive conclusions and in some areas that goal might never
be reached.
509.  Dr Kay stated that the ISG had “not yet found stocks of weapons”, but nor was it
“yet at the point where we can say definitively either that such weapon stocks do not
exist or that they existed before the war”. Search efforts were being hindered by six main
factors:

•	
•	

deception and denial were built into each Iraqi WMD programme;

•	
•	
•	
•	

looting, some of it systematic and deliberate;

there had been deliberate dispersal and destruction of material and
documentation;
some WMD personnel had left Iraq immediately before and during the conflict;
any weapons or material were likely to be small and difficult to find; and
the environment in Iraq was “far from permissive”.

510.  Dr Kay stated that the ISG had discovered “dozens of WMD-related program
activities and significant amounts of equipment that Iraq concealed from the United
Nations during the inspection that began in late 2002”, and listed examples.
511.  Dr Kay explained that, although he had resisted drawing conclusions in the Interim
Report, a number of things had become clearer as a result of the ISG’s work:

•	
•	
•	

Saddam Hussein “had not given up his aspirations and intentions to continue to
acquire weapons of mass destruction”.
There were “well advanced, but undeclared, ongoing activities” in the area of
delivery systems that “would have resulted in the production of missiles with
ranges up to 1,000km” if Operation Iraqi Freedom had not intervened.
The ISG was confident that there had been ongoing clandestine CBW research
and development activities embedded in the Iraqi Intelligence Service.

512.  Discussion of the Interim Report at the JIC Sub-Committee on Iraq/WMD
on 3 October focused on media coverage.281 The response from UK defence
correspondents had been encouraging and there were no plans for Mr Blair to comment
publicly. The meeting judged that press interest in the UK was likely to die down.
513.  The meeting concluded that there was “no benefit in producing a JIC Assessment”
of the Interim Report, but a “community wide analysis” should be made through a
CIG meeting.

Central Intelligence Agency, 2 October 2003, Statement by David Kay on the Interim Progress Report
on the Activities of the Iraq Survey Group (ISG).
281 
Minutes, 3 October 2003, JIC Sub-Committee on IRAQ/WMD meeting.
280 

527

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

514.  Mr Scarlett discussed handling of the ISG Interim Report with Mr Tenet,
Mr Stephen Hadley (Deputy National Security Advisor) and others in Washington
on 2 and 3 October.282
515.  Mr Scarlett reiterated to all those he met:
“… the extreme political sensitivity of the issues in London and the need to bear
UK political interests in mind, even when partisan and interagency tensions in
Washington were high.”
516.  Mr Wood reported that Dr Kay had stated publicly that he would need six to nine
months’ work before he could begin to draw firm conclusions.
517.  Mr Wood also commented on the tensions between senior members of the
US Administration about the responsibility for inserting a reference to yellowcake into
President Bush’s 2003 State of the Union speech, which provoked “public warfare” and:
“… looming over the horizon, the potentially much more serious matter of the
Congressional Oversight Committees concluding after detailed review that the
entire October 2002 NIE was flawed. The potential for renewed, and more serious,
internecine warfare is very clear.”
518.  In his memoir, Mr Tenet wrote:
“Collectively, Kay’s interim testimony was a damning portrait of deception and
dissembling … Yet in the resulting headlines, the press stressed only what Kay
had not found. None of it, however was the ‘smoking gun’ that would justify our NIE
estimates …”283
519.  On 5 October, Sir Nigel Sheinwald sent Dr Rice a Note written by Mr Blair for
President Bush about their common political interest in addressing the problems related
to Iraq.284 The Note and the wider background of the deteriorating position in Iraq are
addressed in Section 9.2.
520.  In relation to WMD, Mr Blair wrote that the failure to find “enough on WMD” and the
losses to terrorist attacks meant the public was led to doubt whether the invasion had
been:
“… worth it, or even worse is persuaded we misled them. And in the international
community there is a sense of Schadenfreude …
“We need a coherent strategy to get us back on the high ground and get the public,
at home and abroad, to focus on the big picture.”

Letter Wood to Scarlett, 3 October 2003, ‘Iraq WMD: Public handling in the months ahead’.
Tenet G & Harlow B. At the Center of the Storm: My Years at the CIA. HarperPress, 2007.
284 
Letter Sheinwald to Rice, 5 October 2003, [untitled], attaching Note [Blair to Bush].
282 
283 

528

4.4  |  The search for WMD

521.  Mr Blair characterised the position as “a battle for legitimacy” which had to be won.
The issue of WMD was about more than Iraq, it was a global threat. Iraq had been the
“starting place”:
“… because of the history. But the reason for action was never Iraq in isolation. It
was Iraq as a test case of how determined we were to confront the threat.
“My worry now is that the world thinks: well, Iraq was a tough deal, so they won’t try
that again.
“I think we must be absolutely unapologetic. This is the security threat. We must deal
with it. This means:
(a)	The Libya deal is really important …
(b)	Iran and North Korea should not be put on the back burner … We need to
be, if anything, stronger on this. Not that we’re about to go to war. But that
it’s only as a result of Iraq that these nations know we’re serious and we
can resolve it peacefully.
(c)	A public disruption of the trade in WMD …”
522.  Mr Blair suggested that the UK and US needed a “strategic plan to re-highlight the
terrorism/WMD issue”, and to:
“Get our confidence in our story back. Iraq is better without Saddam. WMD/terror
remains the 21st century threat. Our global agenda is the only way to a better future
not just for us but for the world. We’re not going soft on it. We’re going to be utterly
determined on it, because it’s right.
“… [M]y political position is very clear. I won’t win re-election on Iraq alone. But if
Iraq is wrong or people don’t get the security threat, it will be a major problem. On
the other hand, if Iraq comes right and people do get the threat, my opponents will
have a lot of explaining to do.”
523.  In a letter on 6 October, Mr Blair wrote that he was:
“… very grateful for SIS’s remarkable contribution both to the Iraq campaign and on
the complex political and diplomatic manoeuvrings which preceded it”.285
524.  In his video conference with President Bush on 7 October, Mr Blair commented
that Dr Kay’s Interim Report had been better than the UK media had anticipated.286

Letter Prime Minister to C, 6 October 2003, [untitled].
Letter Cannon to Adams, 7 October 2003, ‘Iraq: Prime Minister’s video-conference with President Bush,
7 October’.
285 
286 

529

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

Follow-up to the ISG Interim Report
525.  In October, UK officials identified Iraq’s CW and BW programmes as the
issues needing most work. The ISG had opened up several lines of investigation
on BW. There had been little progress on CW.
526.  On 9 October, Mr Howard sent Mr Scarlett a paper on the future direction of the
ISG, agreed with members of his WMD Task Force, suggesting that the ISG focus its
effort on areas where knowledge was “most incomplete”.287
527.  Although work remained to be done on every subject, BW and CW were the most
challenging. The most comprehensive areas of the Interim Report were: nuclear and
long-range missile programmes; denial, deception and destruction; and procurement
networks.
528.  The ISG’s findings on BW had opened up several lines of investigation which
“should continue to be pursued with vigour”. Efforts to find evidence of CW research
and production had yielded little. Mr Howard suggested that it might be better “to focus
on the other end of the food chain and concentrate on amassing evidence of possible
deployment, or plans for deployment of CW”.
529.  Further work would be needed in two important supporting areas:

•	
•	

encouraging sources to come forward; and
ensuring that relevant information on Iraqi WMD generated outside Iraq was fed
into the ISG.

530.  Mr Howard reported that Dr Kay was hinting that “the final reckoning may not
happen for another six to nine months”, which was “probably realistic”. He recommended
striking a balance between producing further interim reports with something substantive
to say and allowing the ISG to continue its work out of the public gaze. A number of
“external drivers”, including the Panorama programme on WMD, the outcome of the
Hutton Inquiry and the need to make the case to Congress for additional funding for the
ISG could have an impact.
531.  Mr Howard also wrote that the probability that force protection and counterterrorism would soon be given equal status with the search for WMD in the ISG’s work
was a “potential complicating factor”. His major concern was that the ISG should be
given sufficient security and logistical support to carry out the investigative work needed.
532.  The JIC Sub-Committee on Iraq/WMD discussed Mr Howard’s paper on
10 October.288 It was agreed that he should produce a version for the US and that the
importance of offering immunity or amnesty to witnesses should be emphasised at the
Letter Howard to Scarlett, 9 October 2003, ‘Iraq Survey Group: The Way Forward’ attaching Paper
DCDI, [undated], ‘Iraq Survey Group: Next Steps: A note by DCDI’.
288 
Minutes, 10 October 2003, JIC Sub-Committee on Iraq/WMD meeting.
287 

530

4.4  |  The search for WMD

highest level. Advice on specific examples should be sought from the ISG before the
issue was put on the agenda for discussion between Mr Blair and President Bush.

House of Commons debate on Iraq, 22 October 2003
533.  On 22 October, the House of Commons rejected a third Opposition motion
calling for an independent judge-led inquiry into pre-conflict intelligence.
534.  On 22 October, the House of Commons debated an Opposition motion to set up
“a comprehensive independent judicial inquiry into the Government’s handling of the
run-up to the war, of the war itself, and of its aftermath, and into the legal advice which
it received”.289
535.  The Opposition motion was defeated by 303 votes to 190.290 The Government
amendment, adopted by 293 votes to 141, stated:
“That this house notes that the Intelligence and Security Committee … the
appropriate body to consider the intelligence relating to Iraq, and the Foreign Affairs
Committee have both carried out inquiries into matters relating to the decision to
go to war in Iraq; further notes that substantial oral and written evidence, by and on
behalf of the Government, was provided to both inquiries; believes that there is no
case for a further inquiry, including a judicial inquiry …”291
536.  During the debate Mr Straw was asked by Mr Tony Wright (Labour) whether he still
believed that the Iraqi regime had represented “a clear and present danger” to the UK.
Mr Straw replied:
“Yes, I do … It [the ISG] has done a great deal of work and found a good deal of
evidence. I regret that, because of the environment in which it has been working, it
has not so far been able to find more. However, nothing that it has found so far has
diminished my view of the threat.”292

Impact of the transfer of ISG resources from WMD to counter‑terrorism
537.  The Op ROCKINGHAM daily report on 21 October stated that the ISG had
aborted an exploitation mission after a convoy had been attacked twice with Improvised
Explosive Devices (IEDs).293 There had been one very minor injury and three vehicles
had been damaged.

House of Commons, Official Report, 22 October 2003, column 663.
House of Commons, Official Report, 22 October 2003, column 747.
291 
House of Commons, Official Report, 22 October 2003, columns 750-754.
292 
House of Commons, Official Report, 22 October 2003, columns 663 and 677.
293 
Op ROCKINGHAM Daily, 21 October 2003.
289 
290 

531

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

538.  Maj Gen Dayton announced during an ISG video conference on 21 October that
counter-terrorism had been given equal status with WMD in the ISG’s work, but that no
extra US resources were being made available.294
539.  On 22 October, Mr Howard informed the Chiefs of Staff of the ISG’s decision.295
540.  Mr Oakden reported that the UK contribution to the ISG would gradually change to
include a counter-terrorism element.296
541.  On 30 October, Op ROCKINGHAM reported another IED attack on an ISG convoy:
“Although the number of ISG missions attacked is still small, and no serious injuries
have yet been sustained, the incidents do appear to be occurring more frequently.”297
542.  Mr Howard told the JIC Sub-Committee on Iraq/WMD on 4 November that a
number of US document exploitation experts, case officers and analysts were being
diverted to counter-terrorism work.298 Maj Gen Dayton was reported to be satisfied that
this could happen without damaging the WMD effort; Dr Kay was less sure. DIS would
be deploying some analysts shortly “who could be applied to either target”.
543.  Mr Scarlett and Mr Dowse expressed concern about an apparent loss of ISG
momentum since the Interim Report. Op ROCKINGHAM reports were “very thin these
days”.
544.  Members of the Sub-Committee agreed that media interest had moved on from
WMD, pending publication of the Hutton Report. The BBC Panorama report on the ISG
would air on 29 November. SIS reported that the programme would focus heavily on
missiles, but also show the difficult conditions under which the ISG was working.
545.  On 11 November, Mr Howard reported to Mr Scarlett that the ISG’s “operational
tempo remains at a very high level, though some site missions have been postponed
due to the increased security threat. The ISG functional teams are all continuing
to conduct debriefing and site exploitation operation.”299 There had also been a
considerable increase in the ability to exploit documents and different media formats.
546.  Mr Howard added that the apparent reduction in reporting was the result of the
move away from large-scale acquisition of data characteristic of the initial months of
operation. Staff turnover and fatigue had also contributed. Measures were in hand to
address that. The DIS had now “lowered reporting thresholds” for Op ROCKINGHAM
daily and weekly reports so that they reflected better the tempo of activity.

Op ROCKINGHAM Weekly No.19, 17-23 October 2003.
Minutes, 22 October 2003, Chiefs of Staff meeting.
296 
Minute Oakden to Chatterton Dickson, 22 October 2003, ‘Chiefs of Staff: 22 October: Iraq’.
297 
Op ROCKINGHAM Daily, 30 October 2003.
298 
Minute Dowse to Ehrman, 4 November 2003, ‘Iraqi WMD: JIC Sub-Group, 4 November’.
299 
Letter Howard to Scarlett, 11 November 2003, ‘Iraq: WMD: ISG Progress’.
294 
295 

532

4.4  |  The search for WMD

547.  On 10 November, Sir Nigel Sheinwald informed Mr Blair that Dr Kay
expected to report to Congress again in February or March 2004. Dr Kay hoped
to have more evidence of WMD programmes, but expected the basic story to be
unchanged.
548.  During a meeting with Sir Nigel Sheinwald in Baghdad on 8 November, Dr Kay said
that the ISG had uncovered more material since the Interim Report:

•	
•	
•	

evidence of development of a ceramic warhead for CW use in 2001:

•	
•	

laboratory testing of advanced chemical agents; and

details of the movement of suspect items to Syria immediately before the war;
work on the stability of CW precursor agents between July 2002 and January
2003;
an anthrax stimulant production line “up to the outbreak of war”.300

549.  Dr Kay was reported to have criticised Coalition handling of detainees. Many had
been debriefed for tactical information only and there was a severe shortage of trained
interrogators.
550.  Dr Kay envisaged that, by June 2004, the ISG would have about 80 percent of
the picture on Iraqi WMD. At that point, it might be appropriate to reconsider its role. He
did not want it to have an open-ended, diminishing role, or to see it refocused on other
tasks. By June 2004, he would also expect Iraq to perceive the ISG as very intrusive.
551.  As part of his wider report on his visit to Iraq (see Section 9.2), Sir Nigel Sheinwald
told Mr Blair that Dr Kay expected to report to Congress again in February or March
2004.301 Dr Kay hoped to have further specific evidence of WMD programmes, but the
basic story would be unchanged. Sir Nigel had told Dr Kay that, if there was a further
interim report, better handling would be needed: “a proper strategy with the key points
identified in advance so that we were not put on the back foot by leaks”.
552.  Sir Nigel asked Mr Blair whether there was anything else he wanted said to Dr Kay
or the CIA. Mr Blair replied:
“Just keep me informed as to what he’s finding; & surely we must now know what
happened to WMD. What do our pre-war contacts say?”302
553.  Mr Scarlett informed Sir Nigel on 17 November that he had asked the DIS to
review the new material described by Dr Kay in his meeting with Sir Nigel Sheinwald.303
The DIS had concluded, “not for the first time, Kay may have talked up some of the

Letter Cannon to Scarlett, 10 November 2003, ‘Iraq: Iraq Survey Group: Sir Nigel Sheinwald’s Meeting
with David Kay’.
301 
Minute Sheinwald to Prime Minister, 10 November 2003, ‘Visit to Iraq’.
302 
Manuscript comment Blair on Minute Sheinwald to Prime Minister, 10 November 2003, ‘Visit to Iraq’.
303 
Minute Scarlett to Sheinwald, 17 November 2003, ‘Lunch with David Kay’.
300 

533

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

current ISG lines of enquiry”. The DIS had not been able immediately to substantiate the
areas highlighted by Dr Kay. They should be treated with caution.
554.  At its meeting on 28 November, the JIC Sub-Committee on Iraq/WMD concluded
that the BBC Panorama programme, broadcast on 23 November, “had presented a
fairly balanced view of the current state of ISG investigations. It suggested that some
progress had been made, but concluded that the jury was still out on the question of
Iraqi WMD.”304

Government responses to the FAC
555.  In November 2003, the FCO sent its initial response to the FAC report The
Decision to go to War in Iraq, which had been published on 7 July and is described
earlier in this Section.305
556.  The FCO stated that several judgements in the September 2002 dossier had been
borne out by subsequent UNMOVIC inspections and the work of the ISG. They included:

•	
•	
•	

Iraq’s programme to extend the range of the Al Samoud missile;

•	
•	

undeclared UAV capabilities;

•	
•	

Iraq’s programme to produce even longer-range missiles;
concealment of documents at the homes of personnel associated with WMD
programmes;
a dual-use capability, “to a greater or lesser extent”, at most of the sites listed in
the dossier and visited by UNMOVIC;
evidence presented in the ISG Interim Report of viable seed stocks of
clostridium botulinum organisms and covert laboratories working on
assassination techniques using WMD-related materials; and
ISG reporting of systematic Iraqi concealment of nuclear weapons-related
materials, personnel and capabilities.

557.  Separately, in September 2003, the FCO had sent an initial response to the FAC’s
15 July 2003 report Foreign Policy Aspects of the War Against Terrorism, in which it
listed key lessons from weapons inspections in Iraq and the UK’s own BW practice
challenge inspection programme.306 Those included “the critical importance of interviews
for effective inspections” and “the need to keep in mind … sites that could be misused to
produce, modify, test and store BW delivery systems”.

Minutes, 28 November 2003, JIC Sub-Committee on Iraq/WMD meeting.
Ninth Report from the Foreign Affairs Committee, Session 2002-2003, The Decision to go to War in
Iraq, Response of the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, Cm6062.
306 
Tenth Report from the Foreign Affairs Committee, Session 2002-2003, Foreign Policy Aspects of
the War Against Terrorism, Response of the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs,
Cm5968.
304 
305 

534

4.4  |  The search for WMD

558.  On 19 November, Mr Donald Anderson, Chairman of the FAC, asked Mr Straw
for answers to a number of questions arising from the Government’s response to the
15 July report, including on lessons learned from the ISG.307
559.  On WMD, Mr Anderson wrote:
“… the Committee asked that the Government set out in detail the lessons that
can be learnt from the experience of UN weapons inspections in Iraq for the future
monitoring of BW programmes. The Committee now requests a memorandum
setting out the lessons learnt from the Iraq Survey Group. It also wishes to learn
how the past year’s weapons inspections process will contribute to developing policy
towards monitoring and addressing the threat of WMD from Iran, Syria and other
states of concern.”
560.  FCO officials recommended that Mr Straw inform Mr Anderson that, in relation to
the ISG, it would not be appropriate to divert resources from an ongoing operation or to
try to present lessons learned from an incomplete process.308
561.  In his response to Mr Anderson on 2 December, Mr Straw stated:
“The Iraq Survey Group is part of an ongoing operation. I do not believe it would be
appropriate at this stage to divert resources away from the ISG’s operational role or
to attempt to present lessons learned from an incomplete process.
“Her Majesty’s Government … has not been given access to UNMOVIC’s records …
It is not, therefore, possible to carry out any full analysis of what lessons have been
learned. The UK has … encouraged UNMOVIC to carry out such an exercise.
If UNMOVIC does conduct an analysis, it is by no means certain that we would have
access to the results.
“What has become clear from the experience of weapons inspections in Iraq since
1991 is the need for intrusive inspection regimes to generate confidence that no
illegal activities are taking place.”309

The transition from Dr Kay to Mr Duelfer
562.  In December 2003, Dr Kay was reported to be considering leaving the ISG.
His departure was confirmed in January 2004.

Letter Anderson to Straw, 19 November 2003, ‘Foreign Policy Aspects of the War Against Terrorism’.
Minute Peters to PS [FCO], 27 November 2003, ‘Further letter from the FAC: lessons learned from
WMD inspections’ attaching Letter [draft], [untitled].
309 
Second Report from the Foreign Affairs Committee, Session 2003-2004, Foreign Policy Aspects of the
War Against Terrorism, HC 81, Ev 23.
307 
308 

535

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

563.  At the beginning of December, UK officials learned from their US counterparts that
Dr Kay was considering not returning to Iraq after his visit to the US in the second week
of December.310
564.  Mr Scarlett told Sir Nigel Sheinwald that the reasons were not clear, but Dr Kay
was reported to have objected strongly to the transfer of some of the ISG’s resources
from WMD to work on the security situation and to be concerned about the difficulty and
danger of ISG activity in Iraq.
565.  On 5 December, Mr Scarlett reported that Sir Richard Dearlove had been told that
Dr Kay’s departure was not certain and that, if he did go, there would be “a heavyweight
replacement”.311 Sir Richard had also received confirmation that there would be no
reduction in resources devoted to the ISG’s WMD work and the job would be done
thoroughly.
566.  Sir Nigel Sheinwald commented to Mr Blair on 8 December:
“… it now seems that Kay has to be persuaded to stay on. It seems unlikely that he’ll
stay, as planned, until next summer.”312
567.  Mr Howard discussed the ISG with Mr John McLaughlin, Deputy Director for
Central Intelligence, in Washington on 11 December.313 Mr Howard said that he was
“scouring the barrel” to meet a request from Mr McLaughlin to find more people for
the ISG. The UK would be able to supply an additional four former UN inspectors
with BW expertise and was looking to see if it could provide more good analysts. The
principal UK BW experts could not be spared full-time, but could continue to deploy to
the ISG in short bursts. Mr Howard suggested that better use could be made of the UK
mobile laboratory.
568.  Mr Howard also reiterated that the UK would need “full consultation on timing,
content and presentation of any interim report”.
569.  On 15 December, Mr Cannon sent Mr Blair a list of “key points” from the ISG
Interim Report for use at PMQs.314 It largely repeated the draft core script sent out by
Mr Rycroft on 2 October. The key additions, taken from the Interim Report, were:

•	

“Two key former BW scientists confirmed that Iraq under the guise of legitimate
activity developed refinements of processes and products relevant to BW
agents. The scientists discussed the development of improved, simplified
fermentation and spray drying capabilities for the stimulant Bt [Bacillus

Minute Scarlett to Sheinwald, 3 December 2003, ‘David Kay’.
Minute Scarlett to Sheinwald, 5 December 2003, ‘David Kay’.
312 
Manuscript comment Sheinwald to Prime Minister, 8 December 2003 on Minute Scarlett to Sheinwald,
5 December 2003, ‘David Kay’.
313 
Telegram JICTEL 122 Washington to JIC London, 12 December 2003, ‘ISG and UK/US intelligence
co‑operation in Iraq’.
314 
Minute Cannon to Prime Minister, 15 December 2003, ‘Iraq: Key Points from the ISG Report’.
310 
311 

536

4.4  |  The search for WMD

•	

•	

•	
•	

Thurengiensis] that would have been directly applicable to anthrax, and one
scientist confirmed that the production line for Bt could be switched to produce
anthrax in one week if the seed stock were available.”
Sufficient evidence had been discovered “to conclude that the Iraqi regime was
committed to delivery system improvements that would have, if Operation
Iraqi Freedom had not occurred, dramatically breached UN restrictions …
in 2000 Saddam ordered the development of ballistic missiles with ranges of at
least 400km and up to 1,000km and that measures to conceal these projects
from UNMOVIC were initiated in late 2002 … several sources contend that
Saddam’s range requirements for the missiles grew from 400-500km in 2000 to
600-1,000km in 2002.”
The ISG had found documents describing “a high level dialogue between
Iraq and North Korea that began in December 1999 and included an October
2000 meeting in Baghdad. These documents indicate Iraqi interest in the
transfer of technology for surface-to-surface missiles with a range of 1,300km
… and land-to-sea missiles with a range of 300km. The documents quote the
North Koreans as understanding the limitations imposed by the UN, but being
prepared ‘to co-operate with Iraq on the items it specified’.”
“Even in the area of CW … there is evidence of Iraqi interest in restarting
production.”
“Dr Kay told the press that one scientist was ‘assassinated literally hours
after meeting’ an ISG member, killed by a single shot to the back of his head
outside his apartment.”

570.  The paper appears not to have been shown to Mr Blair.315
571.  In an interview with the British Forces Broadcasting Service (BFBS), reported in
the media on 16 December, Mr Blair stated:
“… the Iraq Survey Group has already found massive evidence of a huge system of
clandestine laboratories, workings by scientists, plans to develop long range ballistic
missiles. Now frankly, these things weren’t being developed unless they were
developed for a purpose …”316
572.  On 18 December, The Washington Post reported that US Government officials
had confirmed that Dr Kay intended to leave the ISG before it completed its work.317 The
newspaper also reported: “The insurgency has forced the Pentagon to divert personnel
from Kay’s team to help commanders identify and question insurgents.”

Manuscript comment Rycroft on Minute Cannon to Prime Minister, 15 December 2003, ‘Iraq: Key Points
from the ISG Report’.
316 
BBC News, 16 December 2003, Blair’s appeal to Saddam’s men.
317 
The Washington Post, 18 December 2003, Kay Plans To Leave Search for Iraqi Arms.
315 

537

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

573.  Brigadier Garry Robison, Brig Deverell’s successor as ISG Deputy Commander,
reported on 7 January 2004 that the preparation of cases against High Value Detainees
(HVDs) for the forthcoming human rights tribunal had not yet had a direct impact on
the ISG, but had the potential to do so.318 Rules preventing UK ISG personnel from
direct involvement in the preparation of evidence and testimony for the tribunal were
well understood.
574.  Mr Scarlett informed No.10 on 7 January that the US had confirmed that Dr Kay
would be leaving the ISG “probably by the end of next week”.319
575.  In January 2004, in the absence of compelling finds in Iraq, the Government
sought to emphasise the impact of military action in Iraq on wider counterproliferation efforts.
576.  On 11 January, Mr Blair was asked by Sir David Frost on BBC Television’s
Breakfast with Frost whether he should apologise for apparently being wrong about
WMD in Iraq. Mr Blair replied: “What they’ve [the ISG] found already is a whole raft
of evidence about clandestine operations that should have been disclosed to the
United Nations.”320
577.  Pressed by Sir David Frost on the absence of weapons, Mr Blair said: “there is …
something bizarre about the idea that Saddam had these weapons, got rid of them and
then never disclosed the fact that he got rid of them.”
578.  Asked if he thought there was still a chance that WMD would be found, Mr Blair
replied:
“I believe that we will but I agree … there were many people who thought we were
going to find this during the course of the actual operation … In a land mass twice
the size of the UK it may well not be surprising that you don’t find where this stuff is
hidden because part of the intelligence was that it was hidden and concealed. But
you know we just have to wait and see.”
579.  On 13 January, Mr Scarlett told No.10 that Dr Kay’s departure had been delayed
“to distance it from a spate of critical WMD articles in last week’s US media”.321
Mr Scarlett reported that draft US press lines focused on three points:
“•	 The departure does not mean Kay has concluded that no weapons will be found.

•	
•	

The ISG has more work to do on WMD.

Ideally, Kay would have preferred ISG resources not to be diverted (as to some
extent they have been) to counter terrorism …”

Minute Robison to PS/CDI, 7 January 2004, ‘Iraq Survey Group Sitrep Number 12’.
Minute Scarlett to Rycroft, 7 January 2004, ‘Departure of David Kay’.
320 
BBC TV, 11 January 2004, Breakfast with Frost.
321 
Minute Scarlett to Cannon, 13 January 2004, ‘Departure of David Kay’.
318 
319 

538

4.4  |  The search for WMD

580.  Mr Blair and President Bush discussed Dr Kay’s departure in their video
conference on 14 January.322 Mr Blair said that Dr Kay’s departure would have an impact
in the UK media. He hoped the CIA would work with the UK on handling.
581.  In a Cabinet discussion of the situation in Iraq on 15 January, a number of points
were made on WMD, including that:

•	
•	
•	

Public opinion continued to focus on the absence of WMD discovered in Iraq,
while the broader counter-proliferation story was inadequately covered.
The report by Dr Blix in early 2003 (the “clusters” document of 6 March, see
Section 3.7) had provided 173 pages of material about Iraq’s WMD programme,
including 10,000 litres of anthrax unaccounted for. There was a “strong
presumption of its continued existence”.
The counter-proliferation progress in other countries, and “Libya in particular”
was “dramatic”. The military action in Iraq had had a “hugely beneficial effect on
the international climate, but this was insufficiently recognised at home”.323

582.  Mr Blair concluded that the counter-proliferation successes which had been
registered since the invasion of Iraq were “considerable and he hoped that there would
be further developments in the next few weeks. The Government’s supporters need to
be briefed accordingly.”
583.  On 16 January, Mr Scarlett informed No.10 of the dates of a series of US
Congressional hearings in February and March relevant to Iraqi WMD.324 Potentially the
most controversial was Mr Tenet’s appearance on 4 March at a closed session of the
Senate Intelligence Committee on pre-conflict Iraq-related intelligence, and there would
almost certainly be an open session. It would be important to stay in contact with US
briefing plans.
584.  In his State of the Union address on 20 January, President Bush reported that:
“We’re seeking all the facts. Already the Kay report [the ISG Interim Report]
identified dozens of weapons of mass destruction-related program activities and
significant amounts of equipment that Iraq concealed from the United Nations.
Had we failed to act, the dictator’s weapons of mass destruction programs would
continue to this day. Had we failed to act, Security Council resolutions on Iraq
would have been revealed as empty threats, weakening the United Nations and
encouraging defiance by dictators around the world.”325

Letter Cannon to Adams, 14 January 2004, ‘Iraq: Prime Minister’s Video-conference with President
Bush, 14 January 2004’.
323 
Cabinet Conclusions, 15 January 2004.
324 
Minute Scarlett to Rycroft, 16 January 2004, ‘Iraq WMD: US Congressional Hearings’.
325 
The White House, 20 January 2004, State of the Union Address.
322 

539

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

585.  In January, with no timetable for the publication of the next ISG report,
Mr Howard proposed a number of options. He recommended that the best
approach might be to draw a line under the issue of WMD by summer 2004.
586.  On 21 January, after visiting the ISG in Qatar, Baghdad and Basra, Mr Howard
reported “a sense of uncertainty and lack of strategic direction” at the ISG headquarters
in Baghdad: Dr Kay’s successor had not been identified; the timing of future ISG
reports was not known; and there was continuing debate about the extent of the ISG
contribution on counter-terrorism.326 Security remained an issue, but ISG staff morale
seemed high and people were working “incredibly hard”.
587.  Mr Howard assessed that, despite the good work being done, the overall picture
was not fundamentally different to that described in the Interim Report.
588.  On the future of the ISG, Mr Howard suggested that the right option might be to
draw a line under the issue of Iraqi WMD by summer 2004. There was no guarantee that
the new Iraqi Government would be prepared to allow the ISG to continue after it took
office and there was a possibility that the ISG’s final analysis would look like the Interim
Report: clear Iraqi intent to preserve and conceal an ability to reconstitute programmes,
but no operational or current production capability.
589.  Mr Howard identified three options for the next ISG report:

•	
•	

a single, final report around June;

•	

a low-key report focused on context and operating environment in March, with a
substantive report in June.

the major substantive report in March or April, with loose ends tied up in June or
July; or

590.  On 22 January, Mr Scarlett produced a summary of the ISG’s findings and
possible points for Mr Blair to make in public.
591.  Mr Scarlett sent No.10 a paper summarising the “current understanding” of the
ISG’s findings on 22 January.327 The paper had been prepared within the Assessments
Staff, in consultation with Mr Howard, but it had been given a limited distribution. It was
not the result of a full JIC Assessment and had not been considered by a CIG.
592.  The paper summarised what had been found, what remained to be done and
questions raised by the ISG’s work:

Letter Howard to Scarlett, 21 January 2004, ‘Iraq WMD: Visit to Iraq Survey Group: 16-19 January’.
Minute Scarlett to Rycroft, 22 January 2004, ‘Iraq: WMD’ attaching Paper [unattributed],
22 January 2004, ‘Iraq: WMD’.
326 
327 

540

4.4  |  The search for WMD

“What has been established?
“Nuclear Programmes
“The ISG have found documents and equipment, related to Iraq’s pre-1991 nuclear
programme … not declared to the UN/IAEA … Iraqi scientists and senior officials
have stated that Saddam intended to reconstitute such a programme once sanctions
were lifted. There is no evidence however, that Saddam explicitly ordered that
research activity should continue for this specific purpose.
“Chemical and biological weapons
“The ISG have found documents and equipment at 13 undeclared laboratories and
facilities … There is no clear evidence of a link to a military programme.
“… Legitimate work on biopesticides and other BW stimulants meant that expertise
and production techniques … were maintained …
“The exact purpose of the two trailers discovered by the ISG in May 2003 has yet to
be determined …
“Delivery systems
“… ISG have found substantial evidence of research and design work on longer
range delivery systems (up to 1,000km range), and of substantial illegal procurement
for all aspects of Iraq’s missile programme …
“Concealment and destruction
“Iraq had failed to declare its programmes and equipment to the UN, and to comply
with its obligations under successive UNSCRs …
“In addition … the ISG have found substantial evidence of the targeted destruction
of documents, equipment and computer files …
“What is still to be done?
“… We do not have a complete picture; the ISG continues with its work despite the
difficult operational environment …
“What has not been established?
“The ISG have not found chemical or biological weapons, agents or precursors in
militarily significant quantities, nor any long range missiles. They cannot confirm the
existence of active programmes for the development or production of chemical or
biological weapons, or of steps to reconstitute the nuclear programme, after 1998.
They have found nothing to substantiate the repeated reports that WMD was moved
from Iraq into Syria, either before UNMOVIC arrived or immediately before, during
and after the conflict.

541

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

What major questions does this raise?

•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

Why is the account … different from the intelligence picture before the
conflict, which was broadly agreed by virtually all Western Governments …?
Why did the Iraqi regime undertake such an extensive programme of
concealment and deception at the UN? What were they trying to conceal
and what did they destroy?
Why, when UNMOVIC returned to Iraq in 2002, were so many obstacles
placed in its way …?
Was Saddam’s key aim … to preserve the capability to reconstitute his
programmes rapidly once UN sanctions were lifted …?
… Did the fear of appearing weak drive Saddam’s continuing denial and
deception of the international community?
Did Saddam, his colleagues and senior officials believe their own
disinformation?”

593.  Mr Scarlett suggested a list of points Mr Blair could make in public:

•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

The ISG had not so far found chemical or biological weapons or “evidence of the
continued production of such weapons, or that the nuclear weapons programme
was being reconstituted”.
It had found “evidence of efforts to maintain BW and nuclear capabilities”.
There was a “lot of evidence of planning and design work for missiles well
beyond the permitted range”.
The ISG had “also found evidence that equipment and documentation were
destroyed – including to deceive the UN inspectors in the final period before
the conflict – and that Iraq failed to declare activities or otherwise comply with
Security Council resolutions”.
The ISG had a lot of work still to do.

594.  Those points raised “some big questions including”:
“•	 What was Saddam trying to conceal and why did he take such risks to do it? …
Why did the regime continue to obstruct and defy the inspectors right up to the
last minute?

•	
•	
•	

Was Saddam Hussein trying to preserve his capabilities and programmes while
trying to get sanctions lifted as quickly as possible?
Were Saddam Hussein and the Iraqi leadership properly informed about
the state of their WMD facilities? Were they being told the truth by their
subordinates?
Why does what we have found (or not found) differ from the assessments
of Iraq’s WMD capabilities accepted by most major Governments and many
reputable institutes pre-conflict?”

542

4.4  |  The search for WMD

595.  Mr Scarlett wrote that, if asked whether the UK was still confident that weapons
would be found, the answer could be: “a lot of work has been going on, there is a lot of
work still to do, and a lot of questions still to answer. We do not know how it will turn out
in the end.”
596.  If asked whether the Government stood by the intelligence assessment in the
September 2002 dossier, the answer could be: “we stand by the dossier as our best
assessment on the information available at the time. Since September 2002 a great deal
has happened. Again, we do not know what the ISG’s eventual assessment will be.”
597.  Mr Scarlett described the purpose of the points offered as “a way of looking ahead
to the future”, building on Mr Blair’s comments in his interview with Sir David Frost on
11 January. If they were to be used, the UK “must warn the Americans first”.
598.  Mr Rycroft described Mr Scarlett’s note to Mr Blair as:
“The first draft of a narrative on WMD to move our position on slightly, by floating
possible explanations for the lack of WMD found so far, through questions rather
than assertions.”328
599.  In relation to Mr Scarlett’s point that the assessments pre-conflict had been
accepted by most major governments, Mr Rycroft drew Mr Blair’s attention to the
provisions of resolution 1441 (2002), which had included:
“Recognising the threat Iraq’s non-compliance with Council resolutions and
proliferation of WMD + long range missiles poses to international peace + security”.
600.  On 23 January, Mr Tenet announced Dr Kay’s resignation and the appointment of
Mr Charles Duelfer, who had been Deputy Executive Chairman of UNSCOM from 1993
to 2000, as the new Head of the ISG.329
601.  Mr Tenet wrote in his memoir that he continued to defend the independence of the
ISG under Mr Duelfer: “My guidance to Duelfer – just like my guidance to Kay – and to
everyone in the ISG was simply to go out and find the truth.”330
602.  Mr Duelfer wrote that Mr Tenet “made good on his commitment” and instructed that
the ISG should not be seeking to justify the NIE.331
603.  In late January, the Government highlighted to the US the sensitivity in the
UK of public comments in the US about the apparent absence of WMD in Iraq.
604.  UK officials suggested that the two countries should keep in close step over
their responses to calls for public inquiries into pre-conflict intelligence.
Manuscript comment Rycroft to Prime Minister on Minute Scarlett to Rycroft, 22 January 2004,
‘Iraq: WMD’.
329 
CIA News & Information, 23 January 2004, DCI Announces Duelfer to Succeed Kay as Special Advisor.
330 
Tenet G & Harlow B. At the Center of the Storm: My Years at the CIA. HarperPress, 2007.
331 
Duelfer C. Hide and Seek: The Search for Truth in Iraq. Public Affairs, 2009.
328 

543

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

605.  Dr Kay gave a number of briefings to US media before his testimony to the Senate
Armed Services Committee on 28 January.
606.  In an interview for Reuters shortly after his resignation, widely reported in the UK
media, Dr Kay stated:
“I don’t think they [WMD] existed. What everyone was talking about is stockpiles
produced after the end of the last Gulf War and I don’t think there was a large-scale
production program in the nineties.”332
607.  The UK media also gave extensive coverage to comments by Secretary Powell
on 24 January, including that it was an “open question” whether Iraq held any
stocks of WMD.333
608.  Speaking on BBC Television’s Breakfast with Frost, Mr Kennedy said:
“The more that we see the absence of weapons of mass destruction, the more we
see both the Prime Minister and the President of the United States qualify what it is
that the Iraq Survey Group may or may not uncover.”334
609.  Mr Rycroft spoke to the White House to underline the difficulties Secretary Powell’s
comments were causing in the UK.335 Dr Rice urged that, as soon as possible, all public
comments should refer back to resolution 1441: Saddam Hussein had WMD, had used
them in the past and had obligations to destroy them. Resolution 1441 had given him a
final opportunity to comply with his international obligations, which he had failed to take.
610.  In an interview for The New York Times published on 25 January, Dr Kay said that
Iraq had been “a dangerous place” with the ability to produce WMD, terrorist groups
“passing through” and no central control.336 But the CIA had missed signs of the “chaos”
in the Iraqi regime that had corrupted Iraq’s weapons capabilities. Iraqi scientists
and documents had revealed that Iraq had also been far more concerned about UN
inspections than Washington had ever realised.
611.  Mr Rycroft discussed Iraqi WMD with Mr Hadley on 26 January.337 Mr Rycroft set
out the timetable for the Hutton Inquiry and “underlined the sensitivities of any US public
comments particularly during this period”. The US and UK should keep in “very close
step” over their responses to growing calls in both countries for full public inquiries into

BBC News, 24 January 2004, US chief Iraq arms expert quit; The Guardian, 24 January 2004,
New WMD blow for Blair.
333 
BBC News, 25 January 2004, Powell casts doubt on Iraq WMDs.
334 
BBC News, 25 January 2004, Blair stands firm over WMD.
335 
Letter Rycroft to Adams, 25 January 2004, ‘Iraq: WMD: Conversation with Rice, Hadley, Bartlett, Fried,
24 January’.
336 
The New York Times, 25 January 2004, The Struggle for Iraq: Intelligence; Ex-Inspector Says CIA
Missed Disarray in Iraqi Arms Program.
337 
Letter Rycroft to Adams, 26 January 2004, ‘Iraqi WMD: Conversation with Hadley’.
332 

544

4.4  |  The search for WMD

the intelligence leading up to the war. The UK would continue to argue that, after the
FAC, ISC and Hutton inquiries, another was unnecessary.
612.  Mr Scarlett discussed Dr Kay’s statements with a senior US official later on
26 January.338 He reported to No.10 that Dr Kay’s comments might make Mr Tenet’s
appearance before the Senate Intelligence Committee in early March more difficult.
Mr Tenet was therefore considering a statement of his own on the intelligence
underlying the NIE.
613.  Mr Scarlett also reported that he had been told Mr Duelfer might pass through
London on his way to Baghdad in about a week, and that it looked likely that there would
be an interim ISG report in late March or early April.
614.  Under the headline “Bush Backs Away From His Claims About Iraq Arms”, The
New York Times reported on 27 January that, now Dr Kay was suggesting Iraq’s WMD
had been disposed of before the invasion, President Bush had declined to repeat his
earlier claims that WMD would be found.339
615.  Reporting on the public debate in the US on 27 January, Sir David Manning wrote:
“Kay is briefing the media extensively. His main theme is that, although the
Administration have acted with integrity and were correct to invade Iraq, there has
been a major intelligence failure on Iraq WMD.”340
616.  Sir David observed that President Bush’s public line had become “a little more
nuanced”, leading the press to claim the White House was “in retreat”. Sir David
reported that on 27 January:
“Bush was sounding a bit less bullish and a bit more nuanced (‘I think it’s very
important for us [the US Administration] to let the Iraq Survey Group do its work so
we can find out the facts and compare the facts to what was thought … [T]here is no
doubt in my mind that Saddam Hussein was a grave and gathering threat to America
and the world’).”
617.  Sir David concluded:
“From the point of view of a White House political strategist, Kay’s line looks
probably not too unhelpful: it is lowering public expectations of future WMD
finds, increasing the pressure for this issue to be brought to closure before the
election season gets going in earnest after Easter, and placing the blame for any
false prospectus for war firmly with the intelligence agencies rather than with
the Administration.”

Letter Scarlett to Rycroft, 26 January 2004, ‘Iraqi WMD: Conversation with [CIA]’.
The New York Times, 28 January 2004, Bush Backs Away From His Claims About Iraq Arms.
340 
Telegram 125 Washington to FCO London, 27 January 2004, ‘Iraq WMD: US Public Debate,
27 January’.
338 
339 

545

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

Dr Kay’s evidence to the Senate Armed Services Committee,
28 January 2004
618.  On 28 January, Dr Kay gave evidence to the Senate Armed Services Committee.341
In his opening remarks, he stated:
“A great deal has been accomplished by the [ISG] team … I think it important that it
goes on and it is allowed to reach its full conclusion. In fact, I really believe it ought
to be better resourced and totally focused on WMD …
“But I also believe that it is time to begin the fundamental analysis of how we got
here …
“It turns out that we were all wrong, probably in my judgement, and that is most
disturbing …
“In my judgement … Iraq was in clear violation of the terms of resolution 1441…
“We have discovered hundreds of cases, based on both documents, physical
evidence and the testimony of Iraqis, of activities that were prohibited under the
initial UN resolution 687 [1991] and that should have been reported under 1441, with
Iraqi testimony that not only did they not tell the UN about this, they were instructed
not to do it and they hid material.
“I had innumerable analysts who came to me in apology that the world we were
finding was not the world they had thought existed …
“I wish it had been undue influence, because we know how to correct that …
The fact that it wasn’t tells me we’ve got a much more fundamental problem of
understanding what went wrong …
“I regret to say that I think at the end of the work of the ISG there’s still going to be
an unresolvable ambiguity about what happened.
“A lot of that traces to the failure on April 9 [2003] to establish immediately physical
security in Iraq – the unparalleled looting and destruction, a lot of which was directly
intentional, designed by the [Iraqi] security services to cover the tracks of the Iraq
WMD program and their other programs as well …”
619.  Asked whether it was too early to pronounce that everyone had been wrong, that
weapons might still be hidden, Dr Kay replied:
“It’s theoretically possible … When the ISG wraps up its work … there are still going
to be people to say, ‘You didn’t look everywhere. Isn’t it possible it was hidden
someplace?” and the answer has got to be honestly, ‘Yes, it’s possible’ …
Centre for Research on Globalisation, 28 January 2004, Dr David Kay’s Testimony to the Senate
Armed Services Committee.
341 

546

4.4  |  The search for WMD

“But I agree, we’re not in disagreement at all. The search must continue.”
620.  Mr Blair discussed the ISG with President Bush on 28 January.342 Mr Blair said
that the first ISG Report showed that Saddam Hussein had been in breach of multiple
Security Council resolutions. When the next report came it would be necessary to
ensure that it was properly presented.
621.  Mr Duelfer wrote in his memoir that Dr Kay’s testimony, “We were all wrong”, had
sounded conclusive even though Dr Kay had been declaring that Iraq was violating UN
resolutions throughout the 1990s and in the lead-up to the war:
“Aside from angering the staff he left in Iraq, Kay’s declarations made it much
more difficult to collect information from Iraqi sources. Once the world had heard
the decrees of the former ISG leader, why should any of the Iraqis provide further
information?”343

The Hutton Report, 28 January 2004
622.  On 28 January, Lord Hutton published his report into the circumstances
surrounding the death of Dr Kelly.344 The principal conclusions of the Hutton Report
relating to the September 2002 intelligence dossier and the 45 minutes claim are
addressed in Section 4.2.
623.  Commenting on the Hutton Report at the meeting of the JIC on 28 January,
Mr Scarlett said:
“The JIC’s reputation had taken a knock in the short term but it was important to
keep things in proportion. There continued to be great respect for the JIC and what
it represented. The JIC’s higher profile as a result of the Hutton Inquiry carried
implications however that would need careful managing.”345
624.  Mr Scarlett also thanked the Committee members and the Assessments Staff for
their support.
625.  After the publication of the Hutton Report, the Government sent its deferred
response to the 11 September 2003 ISC report Iraqi Weapons of Mass Destruction –
Intelligence and Assessments.346
626.  In response to the ISC’s criticism that the 9 September 2002 JIC Assessment,
‘Iraqi Use of Chemical and Biological Weapons – Possible Scenarios’ (see Section 4.2),
did not highlight in the Key Judgements the uncertainties and gaps in UK knowledge
Letter Rycroft to Adams, 28 January 2004, ‘Prime Minister’s Conversation with Bush, 28 January’.
Duelfer C. Hide and Seek: The Search for Truth in Iraq. Public Affairs, 2009.
344 
Report of the Inquiry into the Circumstances Surrounding the Death of Dr David Kelly C.M.G.
by Lord Hutton, 28 January 2004, HC 247.
345 
Minutes, 28 January 2004, JIC meeting.
346 
Government Response to the Intelligence and Security Committee Report on Iraqi Weapons of Mass
Destruction – Intelligence and Assessments, 11 September 2003, February 2004, Cm6118.
342 
343 

547

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

about Iraq’s biological and chemical weapons, the Government stated that the JIC had
followed convention: “The Key Judgements section is not intended to be a summary of
the main facts in the paper.”
627.  The Government stated that the September 2002 dossier did present “a balanced
view of the Iraq’s CBW capability based on the intelligence available”, but acknowledged
that presentation of the 45 minutes issue “allowed speculation as to its exact meaning”.
628.  The Government took “careful note” of the ISC conclusion that the inhibiting effect
of UN inspections was not fully reflected in JIC Assessments, but observed that JIC
Assessments produced in October and December 2002 and in March 2003 did reflect
the point.
629.  In response to the ISC recommendation that, if individuals in the intelligence
community formally wrote to their line managers with concerns about JIC Assessments
those concerns should be brought to the attention of the JIC Chairman, the Government
stated that it was “important to preserve the line management authority of JIC members
in judging what should be brought to the attention of the JIC Chairman”.
630.  After the publication of the Hutton Report, the FCO also sent its deferred response
to the conclusions about the 45 minutes claim and the September dossier in the 7 July
2003 FAC report on the decision to go to war in Iraq.347 The FCO stated:
“We disagree that the 45 minute claim was given undue prominence. The
45 minutes claim came from an established, reliable and long-standing line of
reporting. It was included in an early September Joint Intelligence Committee
(JIC) Assessment as soon as the underlying intelligence had become available.
It was consistent with previous JIC judgements on Iraq’s command and control
arrangements. Other issues were given a similar level of prominence in the dossier:
for example the judgement that Iraq was building up its weapons of mass destruction
(WMD) capability and that it was concealing its programmes.
…
“Had Saddam used chemical and biological weapons (CBW) munitions during the
conflict we have no reason to doubt he could have deployed them in this timeframe.
…
“We welcome the Committee’s conclusion that the claims in the September dossier
were well founded … We also welcome the conclusion that allegations of politically
inspired meddling cannot credibly be established.”

Ninth Report from the Foreign Affairs Committee, Session 2002-2003, The Decision to go to War in
Iraq, Further Response of the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, Cm6123.
347 

548

4.4  |  The search for WMD

The decision to establish the Butler Review
631.  In late January, officials advised Mr Blair that there was “a clear risk” that
President Bush would set up an inquiry into Iraq intelligence before he was forced
to do so by Congress.
632.  Sir Nigel Sheinwald discussed the mounting pressure for inquiries in the UK
and the US with Dr Rice on 29 January.348 He recommended that No.10 and the
White House stay “in the closest touch” to ensure public lines were co-ordinated.
633.  Sir Nigel told Mr Straw’s office that the US Administration would prefer to make an
announcement itself rather than be pushed into one by Congress or the media. It was
clear that something was “stirring” in Washington. The announcement of an inquiry there
would make it very difficult to hold the line in the UK.
634.  Mr Powell sent a copy of Sir Nigel’s letter to Mr Blair with the advice:
“You must decide on this with Bush on Tuesday [3 February] before the
[Parliamentary] debate on Wednesday.”349
635.  In a minute to Sir Nigel Sheinwald on 30 January, Mr Scarlett set out his
understanding of developments in the US, including concern about a “Notification to
Congress that one piece of intelligence underpinning” Secretary Powell’s presentation to
the UN on 5 February 2003 “came from an unreliable source”, and that CIA analysts had
missed a “fabrication warning”.350
636.  Mr Scarlett commented:
“This discredited report was sent to SIS but not issued by them so it was not
reflected in our classified assessments or in the dossier. There is one reference in
the dossier (the Executive Summary) to mobile ‘laboratories’. This was a general
term to cover mobile facilities and was not meant to be distinct from ‘production’
units. In terms of any press lines it will be sufficient to say that the discredited report
was not issued by SIS.”
637.  Mr Scarlett added:
“The ground is audibly shifting in Washington. There is a clear risk that the
Administration will set up an Inquiry into the Iraq intelligence. This will take many
months to report and push the whole issue beyond November. It might have the side
effect of prompting an early winding up of the ISG.”

Letter Sheinwald to Adams, 30 January 2004, ‘Conversation with US National Security Adviser’.
Manuscript comment Powell to PM on Letter Sheinwald to Adams, 30 January 2004, ‘Conversation with
US National Security Adviser’.
350 
Minute Scarlett to Sheinwald, 30 January 2004, ‘Iraq WMD: Update from CIA’.
348 
349 

549

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

638.  On 31 January, Mr Rycroft informed Mr Blair that, during a visit to Washington
from 30 to 31 January, he had explained that recent comments from Mr Kay, Dr Rice
and Secretary Powell had been damaging in the UK.351 He had also argued against an
intelligence inquiry, and for maximum transparency and co-ordination if the US decided
to go down that route. There was a strong chance that the US would do so, possibly
very fast.
639.  Mr Rycroft advised Mr Blair: “You need to raise with Bush at Monday’s [2 February]
video conference.”
640.  On 31 January, Sir David Manning reported growing political pressure on President
Bush to admit intelligence failure and announce an inquiry.352 Asked for his views on
whether there should be an inquiry, President Bush had told the press:
“… I too, want to know the facts. I want to be able to compare what the Iraq Survey
Group has found with what we thought prior to going into Iraq. One thing is for
certain – one thing we do know from Mr Kay’s testimony, as well as from the
years of intelligence that we had gathered, is that Saddam Hussein was a …
growing danger.”
641.  Sir David Manning advised that President Bush’s remarks suggested he was
leaving himself room to set up an inquiry.
642.  Mr Blair set out his position on Iraq and WMD in a Note sent to President
Bush on 1 February.
643.  Mr Blair recognised the need to learn lessons about the difficulties of
gathering intelligence and that there was a legitimate issue about its accuracy, but
at that stage envisaged asking the ISC to address the issue.
644.  On 1 February, Sir Nigel Sheinwald sent Dr Rice a Note “by the Prime Minister” on
Iraq and WMD, to be shown to President Bush before the video conference with Mr Blair
on 2 February.353
645.  The Note addressed two issues:

•	
•	

“Iraq and WMD”; and
“WMD as a threat more generally”.

Minute Rycroft to Prime Minister, 31 January 2004, ‘Visit to Washington’.
Telegram 1 Washington to Cabinet Office, 31 January 2004, ‘Intelligence on Iraq WMD: US views,
30 January’.
353 
Letter Sheinwald to Rice, 1 February 2004, ‘Iraq and WMD’ attaching Note [Blair to Bush], ‘Note on
WMD’.
351 
352 

550

4.4  |  The search for WMD

646.  On the former, Mr Blair wrote:
“We know Saddam had WMD. We know the ISG has not yet found weapons, though
it has found evidence of programmes. The truth is that we anticipated finding the
weapons during or shortly after the conflict. So to say we are surprised at the ISG’s
findings is no less than the truth.
“The issue of US/UK good faith can be laid to rest. We received the intelligence. We
honestly believed it.
“The issue now is: was it right; and if it wasn’t, what can we learn about the
difficulties of gathering intelligence in these situations?
“What we can say is this:
“(a) there is no doubt that Saddam had WMD. It was not just US/UK intelligence
agencies that said so, it was many others around the world. In any event, Saddam
used them. The UN when it left in 1998 found stockpiles unaccounted for. That
is why UN resolution 1441 unanimously described his weapons as a threat to
world peace.
“(b) we should exercise some caution in saying definitely no stockpiles now exist. In
the 1990s despite intensive investigation, the full extent of his programmes remained
concealed for years. We know from intelligence pre-war that he intended to conceal
them. The ISG has found ample evidence of an intention to conceal. Look at what
we know now Libya is co-operating, compared with what we could speculate on, on
the basis of intelligence.
“I don’t concede there are no weapons. But I do concede we expected to find them
sooner and there is plainly a legitimate issue about the accuracy of the intelligence.
“(c) let us get it clear what the ISG has said so far and what Dr Kay has said.
“The ISG has found:

•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

Evidence of efforts to maintain BW and nuclear capabilities including
equipment, documents and organisms. Teams of scientists were retained to
work on them.
Planning and design work for missiles of up to 1,000km in range.
Equipment and documentation being systematically destroyed …
Undeclared laboratories and facilities that have a potential for BW and CW
production, that should have been declared to the UN.
In 2002, Iraq successfully tested an UAV with a range of 500km.

“All of these things are a breach of the UN resolutions.

551

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

“Therefore, though the ISG have not found evidence of actual weapons, they have
found evidence of programmes. Any of this would have triggered a justification for
conflict.
“Dr Kay has said:

•	
•	

He believes no major new production of weapons occurred post-1991.

•	

But some old stockpiles may well exist and the capabilities and
determination remained intact.

•	
•	
•	

He speculates that Saddam may have been told tales about the
programmes or that some stuff moved to Syria.

That Iraq was ‘a very dangerous place’.
That the conflict was justified, and
That the US/UK did not interfere with the intelligence.

“He makes a claim also that Saddam was trying to manufacture ricin up to the last
minute … but UK services at least don’t seem to know the provenance of this.
“(d) however, in view of the fact that we certainly thought production of new weapons
was continuing and it may be that it wasn’t, it is sensible to learn the intelligence
lessons.
“Therefore, the US is going to have a Commission of Experts look into it.
“The UK will refer the issue back to the Intelligence and Security Committee …
“Meanwhile the ISG will continue its work on the ground since there are at least
26 million pages of documents and many unvisited sites still to follow up.”
647.  On the wider threat from WMD, Mr Blair wrote:
“Whatever the intelligence from Iraq, let us be in no doubt about the threat.
“The threat of terrorism and proliferation of WMD continues. It would be disastrous if
doubts about the strength of intelligence in Iraq blinded us to the danger. We know
that Iran and North Korea are trying to develop nuclear weapons and it is only since
Iraq that real pressure on them has started to pay off.
“We now know that Libya was far closer then we thought to nuclear capability and on
CW than we thought; and, since Iraq they are working with us to eliminate it …”
648.  Mr Blair concluded:
“If we have to accept that some of the Iraq intelligence was wrong, we will do so.
But let us not either (a) lurch to the opposite extreme and start pretending Iraq
had nothing; or (b) let any intelligence inaccuracy move us off confronting the
WMD issue.

552

4.4  |  The search for WMD

“So we need:
To put ourselves in the right place on accepting some intelligence may have been
wrong and letting that be looked into.
To get across what Kay and the ISG are actually saying.
To reassert the importance of the WMD question.”
649.  On 1 February, US media reported that President Bush would shortly be
announcing “a bipartisan, independent commission to investigate apparent flaws in
intelligence used to justify the Iraq war”.354
650.  Mr Straw spoke to Secretary Powell on 1 February.355 Secretary Powell explained
that the US planned to make an announcement about the independent commission,
probably on 2 February. Mr Straw briefed Secretary Powell on the discussion in the UK.
It would be important, if possible, to make announcements at the same time.
651.  Following a discussion with Dr Rice that evening, Sir Nigel Sheinwald wrote to
Mr Geoffrey Adams, Mr Straw’s Principal Private Secretary, reporting that Mr Blair,
Mr Straw and others had been “reflecting on how to handle the issue of intelligence on
Iraqi and other WMD in the light of developing US plans”.356 Mr Blair would be chairing a
meeting the next morning to discuss the way forward.
652.  The following day, President Bush confirmed that he would make an
announcement once the details had been agreed.357
653.  The Executive Order establishing a “Commission on the Intelligence Capabilities
of the United States Regarding Weapons of Mass Destruction” was published on
6 February.358 It stated that the Commission should:
“… assess whether the Intelligence Community is sufficiently authorized, organized,
equipped, trained, and resourced to identify and warn in a timely manner of, and
support United States Government efforts to respond to, the development and
transfer of knowledge, expertise, technologies, materials, and resources associated
with the proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction, related means of delivery,
and other related threats of the 21st century and their employment by foreign
powers …”

The Washington Post, 1 February 2004, Bush to Announce Iraq Intelligence Probe This Week.
Letter Straw to Sheinwald, 2 February 2004, ‘Conversations with US Secretary of State, 30 January
and 1 February’.
356 
Letter Sheinwald to Adams, 1 February 2004, ‘Iraq and WMD: Conversation with US National Security
Adviser’.
357 
The White House, 2 February 2004, Press Briefing by Scott McLellan.
358 
The White House, 6 February 2004, Executive Order: Commission on the Intelligence Capabilities of
the United States Regarding Weapons of Mass Destruction.
354 
355 

553

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

654.  Mr Blair and Mr Straw met early on 2 February.359 Sir Andrew Turnbull (Cabinet
Secretary), Sir David Omand, Mr Scarlett, Sir Richard Dearlove, Dr David Pepper
(Director, GCHQ), Mr Ehrman, Mr Powell, Sir Nigel Sheinwald, Baroness Morgan
(No.10 Director of Political and Government Relations), and other officials from No.10
were present.
655.  The meeting concluded that the Government would set up a committee to review
the intelligence on WMD, and agreed its Terms of Reference and membership.
It “should be wider than the ISC”; and it “should look at intelligence on WMD in general,
not just Iraq”.
656.  In their video conference on 2 February, Mr Blair and President Bush discussed
their intentions to establish commissions to examine aspects of the pre-conflict
intelligence on Iraq and WMD.360 They also discussed the timescale for the ISG to
produce its final report and whether, in the meantime, further material from the ISG’s
Interim Report could be used in public.
657.  In Mr Blair’s view, the ISG had already found weapons programmes, plans to
restart programmes after the UNMOVIC inspectors left and hitherto undiscovered
breaches of UN resolutions. The public and media had not digested the implications
of the reports and Dr Kay’s remarks. There was enough in the ISG’s findings to justify
US/UK military action. When the findings were linked to the wider picture, it would
have been irresponsible not to take action on Iraq.
658.  Following the discussion, Sir Nigel Sheinwald sent draft Terms of Reference for
the UK committee to Dr Rice, stating that they had been revised in the light of the video
conference, but were “very much a working draft”.361
659.  In a subsequent letter, Sir Nigel wrote that he had made clear that the UK
Terms of Reference, which Dr Rice had not yet seen, were narrower that those
under consideration in the White House, and the aim was to complete the review
“as soon as possible”.362
660.  On 2 February, Mr Scarlett sent Mr Powell suggested amendments to Mr Blair’s
Note to President Bush on WMD.363 They were “Points of detail but some are important
to get right”.

Letter Rycroft to Adams, 2 February 2004, ‘Prime Minister’s Meeting on Review of Intelligence
on WMD’.
360 
Letter Cannon to Adams, 2 February 2004, ‘Iraq WMD: Prime Minister’s Video-conference with
President Bush, 2 February’.
361 
Letter Sheinwald to Rice, 2 February 2004, ‘WMD: UK Committee’.
362 
Letter Sheinwald to Rice, 2 February 2004, ‘Iraq and WMD: Conversation with US National Security
Adviser’.
363 
Manuscript comment Scarlett, 2 February 2004 on Paper [unattributed], [undated], ‘Note on WMD’.
359 

554

4.4  |  The search for WMD

661.  A revised version of the Note Mr Blair had sent to President Bush, with
Mr Scarlett’s amendments underlined, was passed to Mr Blair as part of the brief for his
appearance before the House of Commons Liaison Committee.364 The amendments
included:

•	
•	
•	
•	

“… The UN when it left in 1998 noted that large stockpiles of weapons and
agents were unaccounted for. They are still unaccounted for. That is why UN
resolution 1441 unanimously recognised the threat posed to international peace
and security by Iraq’s proliferation of WMD and long range missiles.”
“… Look at what we know about Libya’s CW weapons, now that they are cooperating compared with what we could obtain through intelligence.”
“… [T]hough the ISG has not found evidence of actual weapons, they have
found substantial evidence of prohibited activities”.
Three additions to the list of points made by Dr Kay:
{{ “Iraq

was in clear violation of the terms of UNSCR 1441”.

{{ “Iraq

deliberately waged a policy of destruction and looting”.

{{ “[T]he

ISG has learned things about Iraq’s WMD programmes that no UN
inspector could have learned”.

662.  On 2 February, UK news media reported the imminent announcement of a decision
to set up a UK inquiry into intelligence on WMD.365
663.  The Guardian described the forthcoming announcement as “a major u-turn”
which had been “forced upon” Mr Blair by President Bush’s decision to hold an inquiry
in the US.366
664.  In his evidence to the Liaison Committee on 3 February, Mr Blair stated:
“The whole reason why we took this action in Iraq was because of the risk posed by
an unstable state with weapons of mass destruction capability and the risk that at
some point, not necessarily immediately, but at some point in the future, that then
gets into the hands of those who are terrorists with terrorist intent.”367
665.  Mr Straw announced Mr Blair’s decision to establish a committee to review
intelligence on WMD in the House of Commons on 3 February.368 The Terms of
Reference of the committee, to be chaired by Lord Butler, would be:
“… to investigate the intelligence coverage available in respect of WMD programmes
in countries of concern and on the global trade in WMD, taking into account what
Manuscript comment Powell, 2 February 2004 on Paper [unattributed], [undated], ‘Note on WMD’.
BBC News, 2 February 2004, Iraq inquiry set to be launched.
366 
The Guardian, 3 February 2004, Iraq’s missing weapons: an inquiry is forced upon Blair.
367 
Liaison Committee of the House of Commons, Session 2003-2004, Oral evidence taken before the
Liaison Committee on Tuesday 3 February 2004, Q 16.
368 
House of Commons, Official Report, 3 February 2004, column 625.
364 
365 

555

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

is now known about these programmes; as part of this work, to investigate the
accuracy of intelligence on Iraqi WMD up to March 2003, and to examine any
discrepancies between the intelligence gathered, evaluated and used by the
Government before the conflict, and between that intelligence and what has been
discovered by the Iraq Survey Group since the end of the conflict; and to make
recommendations to the Prime Minister for the future on the gathering, evaluation
and use of intelligence on WMD, in the light of the difficulties of operating in
countries of concern.”
666.  Mr Straw explained that, while the ISC, FAC and Hutton inquiries had been
under way:
“… three proposals were put before the House in June, July and late October on
Opposition motions calling for wider inquiries into aspects of the Government’s
handling of events in the run-up to the Iraq war. At the time, the Government resisted
those calls, including on the ground that the inquiries already under way should be
allowed to complete their work. Later, both the Prime Minister and I also referred to
the continuing activities of the Iraq Survey Group.
“Over the past week, we have seen the publication of the Hutton Report and
the evidence of Dr David Kay, former head of the Iraq Survey Group, to a US
Congressional Committee. It has also emerged that the Iraq Survey Group may take
longer to produce a final report than we had all originally envisaged. All that has led
the Government now to judge that it is appropriate to establish this new inquiry of
Privy Councillors.”
667.  Mr Blair and President Bush discussed WMD on 4 February.369 Mr Blair said he
thought the public needed to be educated on the nature of intelligence: “not clear facts,
but patterns of information on which leaders had to make a judgement”.

Mr Tenet’s speech to Georgetown University, 5 February 2004
668.  Mr Tenet used a speech at Georgetown University on 5 February to set out his
position on Iraqi WMD and the October 2002 NIE.370
669.  The UK was invited to comment on a draft copy on 4 February.371

Letter Cannon to Adams, 4 February 2004, ‘Prime Minister’s Video-Conference with President Bush,
4 February’.
370 
Central Intelligence Agency, 5 February 2004, Remarks as prepared for delivery by Director of Central
Intelligence George J. Tenet at Georgetown University, 5 February 2004: Iraq and Weapons of Mass
Destruction.
371 
Manuscript comment Scarlett to Rycroft, 4 February 2004, on Speech (draft), Tenet, 3 February 2004,
‘Remarks for the Director of Central Intelligence George J Tenet at Georgetown University,
February 5, 2004’.
369 

556

4.4  |  The search for WMD

670.  Mr Powell informed Mr Blair that the draft included “Good defence for Iraq”.372
671.  Mr Blair asked for the speech to be circulated to MPs.373
672.  Mr Dowse, who had succeeded Mr Miller as Chief of the Assessments Staff in
November 2003, passed “two major comments” to the US Embassy in London:

•	
•	

The section of the draft speech on good news stories of intelligence work
against Libya and AQ Khan374 appeared to pre-empt plans for co-ordinated
speeches by President Bush and Mr Blair which had been under discussion for
some time.
The UK was uncomfortable with the draft’s presentation of the role played by
intelligence from allies in the US assessment. The implication was that it had
been the crucial factor: “Examples: ‘Now, did this information make a difference
in my thinking? You bet it did …’”375

673.  In his speech, Mr Tenet explained that intelligence analysts’ differences on several
important aspects of Iraq’s WMD programmes were spelt out in the NIE:
“They never said there was an ‘imminent’ threat. Rather, they painted an objective
assessment for our policy-makers of a brutal dictator who was continuing his efforts
to deceive and build programs that might constantly surprise us and threaten
our interests.”
674.  Mr Tenet compared the ISG’s interim findings with the October 2002 NIE,
emphasising that any comparison was provisional: the ISG’s work was “nowhere near
85 percent finished”. The ISG needed more time and more data.
675.  The references to the impact of intelligence received from foreign partners, on
which Mr Dowse had commented, remained unchanged. Mr Tenet stated:
“Several sensitive reports crossed my desk from two sources characterized by our
foreign partners as ‘established and reliable’.
…
“Now, did this information make a difference in my thinking? You bet it did. As
this and other information came across my desk, it solidified and reinforced the
judgements we had reached and my own view of the danger posed by Saddam
Hussein and I conveyed this view to our nation’s leaders.
Manuscript comment Powell to PM, 4 February 2004, on Speech (draft), Tenet, 3 February 2004,
‘Remarks for the Director of Central Intelligence George J Tenet at Georgetown University,
February 5, 2004’.
373 
Manuscript comment Blair on Speech (draft), Tenet, 3 February 2004, ‘Remarks for the Director of
Central Intelligence George J Tenet at Georgetown University, February 5, 2004’.
374 
Abdul Qadeer Khan, known as AQ Khan, the Pakistani nuclear proliferator. On 2 February 2004,
AQ Khan admitted on Pakistani television that he had sold nuclear secrets to other countries.
375 
Minute Dowse to Scarlett, 5 February 2004, ‘Iraqi WMD: Tenet Speech’.
372 

557

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

“Could I have ignored or dismissed such reports at the time? Absolutely not.”
676.  Mr Tenet concluded that, based on the data collected over the previous 10 years,
it would have been difficult for analysts to reach conclusions other than those in the NIE.
But the intelligence community needed to reflect on a number of questions, including:

•	
•	
•	
•	

Did the history of Saddam Hussein’s behaviour cause the intelligence
community to overlook alternative scenarios?
Did the failure to spot how close Saddam Hussein came to acquiring a nuclear
weapon in the early 1990s lead to over-estimation of his programmes in 2002?
Was the absence of information flowing from a repressive regime considered
carefully?
Were policy-makers told clearly what was and was not known?

The search for WMD, January to July 2004
677.  On 9 February, Mr Duelfer informed Mr Blair that:

•	
•	
•	

the ISG would now focus its effort on people rather than sites;
he was not yet prepared to conclude that there were no WMD in Iraq; and
he envisaged an interim report in March.

678.  Mr Blair remained concerned about the nature of the public debate on WMD.
679.  Mr Duelfer called on Mr Blair in London on 9 February.376 In answer to questions
from Mr Blair, he said that:

•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

The ISG had much work to do and had the resources it needed to get to the
bottom of the issue.
The ISG would now focus on people rather than sites. There were also “vast
mounds” of documents to examine.
The ISG “must examine the strategic intentions of Saddam’s regime.
His [Mr Duelfer’s] hypothesis was that the regime’s strategy was to outlast the
UN and sanctions. We could not make judgements until this was proven.”
He was not yet prepared to conclude that the weapons were not there.
He envisaged an interim report in March, but the final report was “some
time away”.

680.  Mr Rycroft’s record of the meeting stated that Mr Blair was:
“… content with the timing of late March for the next ISG interim report … provided
that it does not slip. Its handling will require military precision, since its content will
fix the debate on WMD for the months ahead.”

376 

Letter Rycroft to Baker, 9 February 2004, ‘Iraq Survey Group: Meeting with Duelfer’.

558

4.4  |  The search for WMD

681.  Mr Duelfer described the meeting in his memoir:
“Blair was very well informed on the WMD issue, and I had the opportunity to go
into greater depth about my plans and tactics than I had with President Bush or
Condoleezza Rice … I highlighted that I felt it was important to take this historic
opportunity to record the reasons for Saddam’s decisions on WMD and to
understand where the regime was headed …
“Prime Minister Blair asked questions about the sources of information and how
I would arbitrate between the views of differing experts. He did not make strong
suggestions, but carefully inquired where I was headed and asked about rough
estimates on timing. I said I felt … that when sovereignty was returned to Iraq
on 30 June, this would greatly affect ISG operations. I promised to keep the UK
Government fully informed.”377
682.  During a wider discussion on Iraq on 9 February, Sir Nigel Sheinwald told Dr Rice
about Mr Blair’s meeting with Mr Duelfer.378 Mr Blair remained concerned about the
nature of the public debate, which Sir Nigel stated was “either there were stockpiles
of WMD, or nothing at all. We needed to publicise the reality of the position. The next
interim ISG report … would be very important.” Dr Rice agreed the need to “keep
repeating our position”, and to work together on the next report.
683.  Mr Dowse updated Sir Nigel Sheinwald on the survey of five sites where
intelligence suggested WMD-related items had been hidden underwater.379 It had been
suggested during Mr Blair’s video conference with President Bush on 2 February that
the ISG was hopeful of finding objects hidden in the Tigris River. Mr Dowse reported
that specialist divers had failed to find six rectangular metal objects located by sonar
on 21 and 22 January and that the survey of a second site had not located anything
suspicious.
684.  Mr Scarlett discussed co-ordination between the UK and US with Mr McLaughlin
and Mr Hadley in Washington on 9 February.380 Mr Scarlett said that, from a London
perspective, there was an urgent need to get more detailed factual information about
the work of the ISG into the public domain. The next ISG report would need to be better
presented and less indigestible than the last.
685.  In a meeting the following day with Ms Jami Miscik, CIA Deputy Director of
Intelligence, Mr Scarlett set out “the broad gameplan for getting some balance back into
the public debate on WMD”.381 “The key was to get more facts into the public domain.”
Duelfer C. Hide and Seek: The Search for Truth in Iraq. Public Affairs, 2009.
Letter Sheinwald to Adams, 9 February 2004, ‘Iraq’.
379 
Minute Dowse to Sheinwald, 9 February 2004, ‘Iraq WMD: Search for Items in the Tigris’ attaching
Paper [unattributed], [undated], ‘Retrieval from the Tigris’.
380 
Telegram 2 Washington to Cabinet Office London, 10 February 2004, ‘Iraq WMD: JIC Chairman’s visit
to Washington, 9/10 February’.
381 
Letter Wood to Scarlett, 10 February 2004, ‘Your Meeting with Jami Miscik, 10 February’.
377 
378 

559

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

He stated that “[m]ore widely”, a “succession of speeches, articles and media events”
were needed “to highlight the wider proliferation problem”.
686.  Mr Scarlett commented on Mr Tenet’s “spotlighting” in his speech:
“… particular intelligence from a trusted intelligence partner (ie the UK). The
media of course were watching like hawks for any signs of UK/US splits. Some
had interpreted Tenet’s comments as laying the ground to shift the blame for faulty
intelligence to SIS.”
687.  Mr Scarlett also discussed the debate in Washington and its focus on whether
intelligence had been politicised, and whether the assessments had been wrong. On the
former, there were comments about the highly politicised environment and the extent
to which “very persistent lines of questioning” from politicians might have led analysts
“further towards particular judgements than they would have moved of their own accord”.
688.  Mr Wood, who accompanied Mr Scarlett to the meeting, commented afterwards
that, in the wake of Mr Tenet’s speech, there remained “ample potential for a serious
public CIA/White House blame game between now and the [US presidential] election”.
689.  Mr Blair described his meeting with Mr Duelfer to President Bush during their video
conference on 10 February.382 Mr Blair said that, if there were an ISG interim report
by the end of March, it would define the issue for some time. It therefore needed to be
detailed, with factual backing, and carefully handled. Mr Duelfer had a clear idea of
what was needed, including background on the Iraqi concealment effort, destruction of
documentation, and the compartmentalisation of the WMD programmes.
690.  SIS sent No.10 a copy of a senior officer’s speaking note dated 10 February for an
address to staff on the issue of why no WMD had been found in Iraq.383
691.  Sir Nigel Sheinwald drew Mr Blair’s attention to the note’s conclusion that critics
were unlikely to be proved wrong in the short term, but that the story of Iraq’s WMD
would come out in the end.384
692.  Mr Blair commented on the paper:
“But is Duelfer + ISG now working? That’s what we must press. But this is a
good paper.”385

Letter Cannon to Adams, 10 February 2004, ‘Prime Minister’s Video-Conference with President Bush,
10 February’.
383 
Paper [senior SIS officer’s speaking note for an address to staff], 10 February 2004, ‘Why have we
found no WMD in Iraq?’
384 
Manuscript comment Sheinwald on Paper [senior SIS officer’s speaking note for an address to staff],
10 February 2004, ‘Why have we found no WMD in Iraq?’
385 
Manuscript comment Blair on Paper [senior SIS officer’s speaking note for an address to staff],
10 February 2004, ‘Why have we found no WMD in Iraq?’
382 

560

4.4  |  The search for WMD

693.  In a speech in Washington on 11 February, President Bush highlighted recent
counter-proliferation successes, including the breaking of the AQ Khan nuclear
proliferation network and Libya’s agreement to end its nuclear and chemical weapons
programmes, and announced a package of proposals to strengthen international
counter-proliferation efforts.386
694.  On 13 February, the British Embassy Washington reported that, although
President Bush’s “big pitch on proliferation” had had some success in broadening the
political debate about WMD, a poll in The Washington Post suggested that a majority
of Americans believed the President had intentionally exaggerated evidence that Iraq
had WMD.387
695.  The Embassy also reported that the Senate Intelligence Committee had decided
to broaden its investigation, previously restricted to the performance of the intelligence
community, to include whether policy-makers’ statements were substantiated by
intelligence.388 The Embassy concluded that the way was probably now clear for the
Committee to release a report at the end of March which criticised the intelligence
community.
696.  The Embassy also reported that:

•	

•	

•	

The CIA had released an internal speech by Ms Miscik to The Washington
Post, which had reported on 12 February that “an internal review revealed
several occasions when analysts mistakenly believed that Iraq weapons data
had been confirmed by multiple sources when in fact it had come from a single
source” and that Mr Tenet had “ordered an end to the long-standing practice of
withholding from analysts details about the clandestine agents who provide the
information”.
The New York Times on 13 February had quoted “senior intelligence officials”
as saying that analysts had not been told that much of the information came
from defectors linked to exile organisations that were promoting an American
invasion.
Newsweek had reported on 12 February that the CIA was “re-examining the
credibility of four Iraq defectors” and had already “acknowledged that one of the
defectors had been previously branded a fabricator by another US intelligence
agency”.

The White House, 11 February 2004, President Announces New Measure to Counter the Threat
of WMD.
387 
Telegram 220 Washington to FCO London, 13 February 2004, ‘Iraq WMD: US Debate, 13 February’.
388 
The Intelligence Committee’s first report was published on 9 July 2004. The “Phase II” report on the
broader investigation announced in February 2004 was published in five parts between September 2006
and May 2008. Both are addressed later in this Section.
386 

561

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

697.  The Washington Post article was also reported by the UK media on 12 February,
including by the BBC under the headline “Iraq ‘prompts CIA method change’”.389
698.  Ms Miscik’s speech was released publicly by the CIA in March 2004.390
699.  On 17 February Mr Dowse sent SIS3 the draft of a speech on WMD to be made
by Mr Blair at some time in the next six to eight weeks.391 It was “very different from
the version” they had been discussing. Mr Blair had reworked the text himself over the
weekend and it focused “much more [on] the justification for the war in Iraq”.
700.  The No.10 briefing for Mr Blair’s video conference with President Bush on
17 February stated that the President’s speech on proliferation had not had the impact
he seemed to have expected.392 Mr Blair should inform President Bush that he was
working on his own speech “to produce a philosophical rationale for our action on WMD
(and terrorism)”.
701.  Mr Blair told President Bush on 17 February that he wanted his own speech to get
across the linkages between WMD, rogue states and terrorism.393 Recent investigations
were uncovering further details of the AQ networks in the UK.394 Mr Blair added that,
in dealing with WMD, it was impossible for the political leadership to err on the side
of caution.

Preparation of the ISG Status Report
702.  Preparations for the ISG Status Report began in late February.
703.  Mr Duelfer made it clear to the UK that he would not accept “joint drafting”.
704.  Mr Scarlett sent to Mr Duelfer “nuggets” from the September 2003 ISG
Interim Report that he considered might be relevant to the next ISG report.
He assured Mr Duelfer that these were not drafting proposals.
705.  Mr Blair stated that Mr Duelfer must be in charge of production of the report,
but that it must be handled better than the last.
706.  Mr Duelfer set out his plans for the next ISG report during a video conference on
24 February.395 The report, later known as the ISG Status Report, would be no more
than 25-30 pages, avoid conclusions or assessments, identify the issues remaining to
BBC News, 12 February 2004, Iraq prompts CIA method change.
Speech DDI, 11 February 2004, DDI’s State of Analysis Speech.
391 
Letter Dowse to SIS3, 17 February 2004, ‘Prime Minister’s Speech on WMD’.
392 
Minute Cannon to Prime Minister, 16 February 2004, ‘Video-Conference with Bush, 17 February’.
393 
Letter Cannon to Adams, 17 February 2004, ‘Prime Minister’s Video-Conference with President Bush,
17 February’.
394 
The Government has provided evidence indicating that the reference in the record to “AQ networks
in the UK” was an error. The record should have referred to the networks of the Pakistani nuclear
proliferator AQ Khan.
395 
Minute [DIS] to DCDI, 24 February 2004, ‘Iraq/ISG: Senior Level UK/US VTC 24 February 2004’.
389 
390 

562

4.4  |  The search for WMD

be addressed and highlight the intentions of the regime. There would be no detailed
annexes. Any annexes that had been prepared in his absence would be included in the
final report.
707.  Mr Howard explained the wish at the highest political level in the UK for the report
to include as much detail as possible. He offered to host a seminar in London bringing
together experts from the ISG, London and Washington. Mr Duelfer was not averse
to including detail as long as there were no piecemeal conclusions, and was fully
committed to consulting capitals on the interim and final reports. He was not attracted to
the idea of a seminar.
708.  Mr Scarlett advised Sir Nigel Sheinwald that getting “the right balance of detail”
into the next ISG report might not be as simple as the record of the video conference
suggested. He was pressing for immediate sight of the latest draft.396
709.  Mr Scarlett reported separately that, during a video conference on 2 March,
Mr Duelfer had explained that he did not intend to share the draft of the next interim
report with capitals in advance, but was willing to discuss detail.397 He had emphasised
the importance of the report being seen to be the independent work of the ISG.
Mr Scarlett and Mr Howard had stressed the importance of capturing some of the
detail from the September 2003 Interim Report, which underpinned public statements.
They had been invited to submit areas of the 2003 Interim Report they would like
to see reflected.
710.  The Op ROCKINGHAM weekly update for 27 February to 4 March reported
that the ISG’s pace of operations could not be sustained in March.398 Limiting factors
included a reduction in the number of already scarce interpreters and a requirement to
train US units arriving on troop rotation.
711.  In early March, Mr Blair requested weekly updates on the ISG.399
712.  During a video conference on 2 March, Mr Scarlett stressed to Mr Duelfer the
need for his forthcoming report to capture some of the detail from the September 2003
ISG Interim Report.400 Mr Duelfer invited Mr Scarlett to submit “nuggets” which the UK
believed were “relevant” to the forthcoming report.
713.  On 4 March, Mr Scarlett told Sir Nigel Sheinwald that discussions with Mr Duelfer
would need careful handling. Mr Duelfer had made it clear that he owned the report and
would not accept “joint drafting”. Mr Scarlett advised that, whatever assurances were
received from the US, the UK would have to work hard to avoid “surprises”.
Manuscript comment Scarlett to Sheinwald, 26 February 2004, on Minute [DIS] to DCDI,
24 February 2004, ‘Iraq/ISG: Senior Level UK/US VTC 24 February 2004’.
397 
Minute Scarlett to Sheinwald, 4 March 2004, ‘Iraq: The ISG’ attaching Paper [unattributed], [undated],
‘Iraq ISG Issues’.
398 
Op ROCKINGHAM Weekly No.36, 27 February – 4 March 2004.
399 
Minute Scarlett to Sheinwald, 4 March 2004, ‘Iraq: The ISG’.
400 
Minute Scarlett to Duelfer, 8 March 2004, ‘ISG Report’.
396 

563

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

714.  Sir Nigel Sheinwald commented to Mr Blair:
“It is going to be difficult to get the sort of interim ISG report we want … I’ve asked
the FCO + SIS to press on their channels. I’ll talk to Condi [Rice], and you should
raise again with the President next week.”401
715.  On 8 March, Mr Scarlett sent Mr Duelfer “nuggets” from the September ISG Interim
Report for inclusion in the forthcoming report.402 Mr Scarlett explained:
“Without knowing the details of your current draft it is difficult to judge where these
‘nuggets’ would fit in. But I am confident their inclusion will:

•	
•	
•	

establish the context for the latest developments which your functional teams
are preparing for inclusion in your new report;
help to set out clearly where the ISG have established Iraqi breaches of
UNSCRs;
explain the current state of the ISG’s key, most important lines of enquiry.

“They do not require you or your report to come to conclusions about these lines of
enquiry. You explained your approach on this point when you were in London last
month and, as you know, it is one with which we agree.”
716.  The material proposed for inclusion by Mr Scarlett included:

•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

BW. Quotes from Iraqi scientists to the effect that Iraq was still actively pursuing
ricin for weaponisation and that as of March 2003 it was being developed into
stable liquid to deliver as aerosol in small rockets, cluster bombs and smoke
generators.
CW. The Iraqi declaration in December 2002 that it had imported 11,500 tonnes
of white phosphorous, a potential precursor for nerve and blister agents.
Nuclear. Remarks attributed to Mr Tariq Aziz (Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister from
1979 to 2003) and Mr al-Huwaish on the strategic intentions of the Iraqi regime.
Missile. Material that had already been used by the BBC on the designs for longrange missiles using SA-2/Volga engines.
Sanitisation and destruction. Further material on the deliberate sanitisation and
destruction witnessed by the ISG to help reinforce the message on the difficult
operational environment.

717.  Mr Scarlett concluded:
“The above is designed to point you to particular areas in the classified September
[Interim] Report which appear to be of relevance to your work now. They are
Manuscript comment Sheinwald to Prime Minister on Minute Scarlett to Sheinwald, 4 March 2004,
‘Iraq: The ISG’.
402 
Minute Scarlett to Duelfer, 8 March 2004, ‘ISG Report’.
401 

564

4.4  |  The search for WMD

not intended as drafting proposals. I am also aware that the precise drafting of
items which comprise potential intelligence must take account of the need not to
undermine lines of continuing operational investigation.”
718.  Mr Scarlett sent a copy to Mr Rycroft, explaining that it:
“… does no more than draw his [Mr Duelfer’s] attention to items already written up
by Kay in classified form, in September. But I have made it clear I was not trying to
do his drafting for him.”403
719.  In his memoir, Mr Duelfer described the relationship with Mr Scarlett:
“I met … John Scarlett … and stayed in touch with him and his office throughout the
process … He wanted to be certain that the ISG had access to the same data that
the United Kingdom had …
“I valued the direct involvement of Scarlett. Some questioned his suggestions for
ISG. I found it helpful to hear and evaluate his ideas.”404
720.  Mr Duelfer also wrote:
“Scarlett and I had spoken in person in London and I had requested that he bring
to my attention any aspects that I might have overlooked. The particular points
he recalled from the earlier Kay Report had been further investigated since their
publication and found to be without consequence. The nuggets were fool’s gold,
but I was reassured to have examined them.”
721.  Mr Blair raised the ISG during a video conference with President Bush
on 9 March.405
722.  Mr Blair said that Mr Duelfer must remain in charge of production of the next
report, but it was vital that it was handled better than the last. There was a better story
to be told. Much material in October’s secret Interim Report could be drawn on publicly
next time, such as transcripts of interviews with scientists. By including detailed material,
the next report should lead people to the conclusion that “something” was going on in
Iraq in breach of UN resolutions, even if the material did not lead to concrete evidence of
actual weapons. The next step, probably in a further report, would be to set out exactly
what had been happening.
723.  Mr Rycroft described the conversation as “A good exchange.”
724.  On 11 March, Sir Nigel Sheinwald sent Mr Blair a note from Mr Scarlett on
the progress of his discussions with Mr Duelfer.406 Sir Nigel informed Mr Blair that
Minute (handwritten) Scarlett to Rycroft, 8 March 2004, ‘ISG’.
Duelfer C. Hide & Seek: The Search for Truth in Iraq. Public Affairs, 2009.
405 
Letter Rycroft to Adams, 9 March 2004, ‘Iraq Survey Group: Prime Minister’s Conversation with
President Bush, 9 March’.
406 
Manuscript comment Sheinwald to Prime Minister on Minute Scarlett to Sheinwald, 11 March 2004, ‘ISG’.
403 
404 

565

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

Mr Scarlett’s “nuggets” would be included in Mr Duelfer’s report, although the timing
would be “tight, + difficult”.
725.  Mr Blair asked: “But can they also include the transcripts of interviews which I
found v[ery] persuasive in the Oct 2003 background draft?”407
726.  In a note to No.10 officials on 15 March, Mr Blair wrote:
“As for the ISG, the problem is that they don’t seem to understand that, at present,
opinion thinks there is either a WMD finding or nothing. Actually there is a mystery
as to what happened to the physical evidence but it was plain much was going on
in breach of UN resolutions. It is the latter point that the further interim report could
deal with, eg by disclosing transcripts of interviews with Iraqi scientists and officials
as per the background paper in October. We need to work intensively on this with
the US this week.”408
727.  Mr Blair’s initial view of the draft ISG Status Report was that it was better
than expected.
728.  Mr Blair was clear that the principal messages – that Saddam Hussein had
been in breach of Security Council resolutions and that his behaviour had raised
“immense suspicions” – must stand out.
729.  The first copy of the draft ISG Status Report was received in London on
15 March.409 Mr Scarlett described it as:
“•	 short

•	
•	
•	

a summary of developments since the September [Interim] Report
focused on strategic intentions of the regime
careful to avoid conclusions”.

730.  Mr Scarlett drew attention to material in the section on new developments:

•	
•	
•	
•	

Nuclear – “Some useful new detail here which strengthens the previous
comment.”
BW – “This is weaker and lacking detail. Almost all the points from Kay’s
report, which we proposed for inclusion are not here. Although the draft avoids
‘conclusions’, some negative assessment points in that direction, especially on
the mobile labs.”
CW – “Again, this lacks detail including the ‘nuggets’ proposed by us …”
Missiles – “As before, some useful detail but there could be significantly more,
again including our proposals from the previous report.”

Manuscript comment Blair on Minute Scarlett to Sheinwald, 11 March 2004, ‘ISG’.
Note [Blair], 15 March 2004, [untitled].
409 
Minute Scarlett to Cannon, 16 March 2004, ‘ISG Draft Report’.
407 
408 

566

4.4  |  The search for WMD

731.  Mr Scarlett wrote that Mr Duelfer had included only a few of the UK’s suggestions
and seemed to be trying to avoid going into detail, especially if it came from Dr Kay’s
Interim Report. There were “numerous instances” where Mr Duelfer could have brought
out breaches of resolutions, but did not.
732.  Mr Scarlett concluded:
“Overall, this is a carefully written, ‘strategic’ document designed to restore or to
reinforce the credibility of the ISG and to lay the groundwork for future conclusions in
a final report …”
733.  Addressing tactics, Mr Scarlett added:
“We will concentrate on repeating our previous proposals for inclusion of further
detail … We will also point up the many opportunities for emphasising breaches of
UNSCRs …”
734.  Mr Scarlett reported that his US interlocutors were:
“… very clear that ‘comments’ must come from the intelligence community and not
the policy makers … Duelfer is already feeling sensitive to ‘pressure’ from London …”
735.  Mr Blair and President Bush discussed the impact of the next ISG interim report
on 16 March.410 Mr Blair said that the first draft was better than expected. Although it
contained nothing completely new, it showed that Iraq had been in clear breach of UN
resolutions. It was important to keep some of the “colour” in the report, but even as it
stood it was quite powerful: “it helped attack the argument that the Coalition should find
physical evidence or the war was unjustified”.
736.  Mr Blair chaired a meeting to discuss the ISG on 17 March, attended by
Mr Scarlett, Mr Howard, Mr Dowse, a senior SIS official and officials from No.10.411
737.  In response to Mr Scarlett’s advice on the timetable for the next interim report,
Mr Blair commented:
“There could be no question of our seeking to influence the material in the report.
Mr Duelfer must set out the facts as he saw them.
“But (a) an interim report was necessary (b) the material should be set out clearly
(c) presentation of the report was important.”

Letter Cannon to Adams, 16 March 2004, ‘Iraq WMD: Prime Minister’s Video-conference with President
Bush, 16 March’.
411 
Minute Cannon to Scarlett, 18 March 2004, ‘Iraq Survey Group’.
410 

567

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

738.  Mr Blair’s initial view of the draft was that it was:
“… better than expected. The whereabouts of the physical evidence remained
unresolved. But an unbiased reader could only conclude that Saddam had been in
breach of SCRs and that he was involved in highly suspicious activities.”
739.  In discussion of the detailed text, the following points were identified:

•	
•	

Mr Blair thought the section on procurement needed more detail and clarity.

•	

Mr Blair “wanted background explanations on ‘dual use goods’: the regime had
gone to elaborate lengths to obtain material allegedly for fertiliser or insecticide
production and the suspicious nature of this should be picked up”.

•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

Mr Scarlett thought the points on Iraq’s nuclear activities were “too firm”. The
report “needed to point out the possible non-nuclear dual use potential for some
of this equipment”.

The report should make clear that “deception and concealment operations
continued right up to the outbreak of the conflict” and ask “why such elaborate
deception was needed if there was nothing to hide”.
The need to “underline that Blix had been systematically hindered”, including
over interviews with scientists.
“Quotations from interviewees would add verisimilitude to the report.”
“We should underline the deliberate destruction of evidence and sanitisation of
sites eg repairing of buildings during the conflict.”
There should be more material on Korean missile technology.

740.  Mr Scarlett said that the interim report would “flag up problems over eg the alleged
BW mobile laboratories and the unexpected absence of battlefield CW”.
741.  Mr Blair concluded that Mr Duelfer “needed to be clear about the ‘top line’ of his
report”. Based on the draft, that was that Saddam Hussein:
“(a) had been in clear breach of SCRs and (b) his behaviour raised immense
suspicions, even if we had yet to pin down the exact nature of his machinations …
[T]here could be no question of influencing the material that appeared in the report.
But it was important that, as a document, it held together as a logical, coherent and
well-documented whole.”
742.  Mr Scarlett discussed the ISG report in a video conference with Mr Duelfer,
Maj Gen Dayton and the CIA on 18 March.412
743.  Mr Scarlett told Sir Nigel Sheinwald that Mr Duelfer felt the report would need to
be “heavily sanitised” to avoid public exposure of operational details of lines of enquiry

412 

Minute Scarlett to Sheinwald, 18 March 2004, ‘ISG’.

568

4.4  |  The search for WMD

being pursued by the ISG. Two options were under consideration: sanitising the draft for
public release, or producing a three- to five-page executive summary.
744.  Mr Rycroft commented to Mr Blair that Mr Duelfer’s suggested approach was
“worrying”, and that Mr Scarlett and Sir Nigel Sheinwald would be pursuing the issue
with the US.413
745.  On 22 March, Mr Scarlett told Sir Nigel Sheinwald that the ISG had reported the
previous day that Mr Duelfer had decided that the sanitised version of the full report
would need to remove all the paragraphs on the direction of future investigation, as
well as the items that were policy and source sensitive.414 As a result, he had directed
that work should focus on a short summary, which was “broadbrush” and gave “little
supporting detail”.
746.  Mr Scarlett added that the points which stood out were:

•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

“a focus on the use of illicit funds for procurement” although there was “a big
gap between the funds raised (several billion dollars) and those allocated to the
Military and Intelligence Commission ($500m)”;
“no CBW weapons found nor any agent production facilities”;
“unresolved questions over research into CBW agents and planned chemical
agent production, but little detail given”;
“items on the high speed rail gun and explosive test facilities which have
possible nuclear weapons implications”;
“little new information in the section on delivery systems”.

747.  Mr Scarlett “wondered” whether the change in Mr Duelfer’s position reflected
“advice from Washington”, but he had “no evidence”, and it might well have been
“generated within the ISG on operational grounds”.
748.  Mr Scarlett wrote that he had “made it clear” to Mr Duelfer and to the CIA in
Washington “that the clear preference for policy makers in London is for publication
of a sanitised version of the full report”.
749.  On instruction from Mr Blair, Sir Nigel Sheinwald raised UK concerns about the
drafting of the report with Dr Rice on 22 March.415 Sir Nigel told Dr Rice that:
“Duelfer now seemed to have decided against publishing any of the report itself,
and had circulated a five page summary in the form of his intended Congressional
testimony. This was in fact similar to the technique used last October by David Kay,
which had not worked at the time. But Kay’s unclassified summary was a good deal
more detailed than Duelfer’s draft. We seemed to be going backwards.”
Manuscript comment Rycroft on Minute Scarlett to Sheinwald, 18 March 2004, ‘ISG’.
Minute Scarlett to Sheinwald, 22 March 2004, ‘ISG Interim Report’.
415 
Letter Sheinwald to Adams, 22 March 2004, ‘Conversation with US National Security Adviser’.
413 
414 

569

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

750.  Sir Nigel explained that the UK was “not asking for the report to be over-egged. We
should be honest and say that there were no clear answers on what had happened.” But
it was important that Mr Duelfer should be able to conclude that, at the very least, Iraq
was in breach of UN resolutions.
751.  Sir Nigel commented:
“The problem is that the draft is getting worse, not better from our point of view; and
it will be difficult to secure a substantial change of direction at this stage. But we will
try. John Scarlett is in touch separately with the CIA.”
752.  Mr Scarlett discussed the ISG draft report at a video conference on 23 March with
Mr McLaughlin, Ms Miscik, Mr Duelfer, Maj Gen Dayton, Mr Howard and an Australian
representative.416 Mr Duelfer was working on three documents: the classified report; an
unclassified summary; and his personal statement to the Congressional Committees.
The UK had seen the first two and was expecting the third shortly. Mr Duelfer
emphasised that his personal statement would make clear that Iraq had been in breach
of UN resolutions.
753.  Mr Duelfer also reported that three senior analysts had left the ISG, unhappy with
what they expected the report to cover. They had felt that Mr Duelfer’s reluctance to
draw conclusions reflected political interference rather than his stated position that he
needed to familiarise himself with his new responsibilities first. There were concerns that
the three might make their views public.
754.  Sir Nigel Sheinwald discussed the draft report with Dr Rice later on 23 March.417
He said that the “key” was “a clear message that, whatever construction was to be
placed on what the ISG had found or not found, UNSCRs had been breached and
suspicious activity was continuing under Saddam”.
755.  Sir Nigel commented that the discussion had been more encouraging than might
have been expected. It could still prove difficult to persuade Mr Duelfer “to change tack
completely”, but Sir Nigel’s contacts with Dr Rice and Mr Scarlett’s with the CIA seemed
to have “shaken up” the CIA to some extent. There should now be an opportunity to
strengthen the text to some degree.
756.  Mr Duelfer visited London on 26 March to discuss the ISG Status Report.418
He met Mr Howard’s WMD Task Force and Mr Scarlett and Sir Nigel Sheinwald.

Minute Scarlett to Sheinwald, 23 March 2003, ‘ISG’.
Letter Sheinwald to Adams, 23 March 2004, ‘Iraq: ISG’.
418 
Minute Scarlett to Sheinwald, 26 March 2004, ‘ISG’.
416 
417 

570

4.4  |  The search for WMD

757.  Mr Scarlett reported that the position had moved on significantly. Two documents
had been prepared:

•	
•	

the full, classified Status Report, addressed to Mr Tenet and to be copied to
Congress; and
Mr Duelfer’s testimony to the Congressional Committee hearings on 30 and
31 March.

758.  Mr Scarlett wrote that the testimony replaced an earlier unclassified summary
of the Status Report. It was a “more forceful” document and would need only light
adjustment for public release.
759.  Mr Scarlett also reported that Mr Duelfer intended to draft a final report over the
summer and was looking to “surge” additional staff. Mr Howard was considering how the
UK might help.
760.  Mr Blair, who was shown Mr Scarlett’s report by Sir Nigel Sheinwald, commented
in the margin that the additional staff were “obviously vital”.419
761.  Sir Nigel Sheinwald advised Mr Blair that the text of Mr Duelfer’s testimony was
an improvement on earlier texts, but the media was “still likely to judge it thin” and the
points Mr Duelfer intended to emphasise were “very process-oriented”.420
762.  Sir Nigel wrote:
“… our pressure should now shift from the substance of the report (where we have
made little headway) to the handling. If you agree I suggest the following steps on
Monday [29 March]:

•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
419 
420 

We need to ensure that the CIA take as little as possible out for the sanitised
version. We need all the detail we can secure.
Duelfer should prepare a short summary … This must include a clear
statement of breach of SCRs … The summary needs to bring out new and
suspicious evidence.The Assessments Staff should pass a draft to the
Americans.
… [H]e needs to prepare a clear brief statement for the broadcast media …
We need supporting media appearances in both the US and UK, in parallel.
The Foreign Secretary is being lined up here. We need to ensure that the
Americans have made a similar plan – last time it was all last minute.
This will require action on several fronts: Hill/Bartlett, Scarlett/CIA, me/
Condi, possibly Jack [Straw]/Powell. It will be too late by the time you speak
to the President on Tuesday [30 March].
…

Manuscript comment Blair on Minute Scarlett to Sheinwald, 26 March 2004, ‘ISG’.
Minute Sheinwald to Prime Minister, 26 March 2004, ‘Iraq: ISG’.

571

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

“Do you agree that these are the main things we should be focusing on?”
763.  Mr Blair replied: “Yes but if the report is weak it will be v[ery] hard to succeed.”421
764.  No.10 sent a separate record of the meeting between Mr Duelfer and Sir Nigel
Sheinwald and Mr Scarlett to Mr Straw’s Private Office.422 The record stated:
“•	 Duelfer said that he hoped to put together a ‘compelling case’ that the Saddam
regime had put in place a system to ‘sustain the intellectual capital’ for a
WMD programme, with a ‘break-out capacity’ once a decision to reinstate the
programme was taken.

•	
•	
•	
•	

•	
•	
•	

Duelfer said that, while he was slightly more optimistic than when he took up
the job that actual WMD might be found, the odds were still that they would not
be located. He was looking into the possibility that some had been smuggled
into Syria.
He had not realised the extent of the fears of potential interviewees, either of
prosecution by the Americans or of assassination by former colleagues.
If stocks of WMD did not exist, then they would have been destroyed long before
the Iraq campaign.
The core group around Saddam had been remarkably successful in eroding
sanctions up to 9/11, including by manipulating some members of the Security
Council. He believed that the ISG would be able to demonstrate that the regime
had been thwarting UN sanctions and making plans to resuscitate its WMD
programmes … It was clear that the regime’s ultimate goal had been to obtain
nuclear weapons. There had been a policy of continuing WMD development
under the cover of ‘dual use’ programmes.
…
Duelfer said that Washington might have misled us about his touchiness about
UK advice: in fact he welcomed advice although he could not guarantee he
would take it. He would take into account advice on public perceptions in the UK.
The interim report would be a status report, with no new revelations, and a
forward look … Duelfer would certainly not be pulling back on Kay’s fundamental
contention that Saddam had been in clear breach of resolution 1441.”

765.  Mr Blair commented that Mr Duelfer “still needs to list any UN breaches with
supporting evidence”.423

Manuscript comment Blair on Minute Sheinwald to Prime Minister, 26 March 2004, ‘Iraq: ISG’.
Letter Cannon to Adams, 26 March 2004, ‘Iraq Survey Group’.
423 
Manuscript comment Blair on Letter Cannon to Adams, 26 March 2004, ‘Iraq Survey Group’.
421 
422 

572

4.4  |  The search for WMD

766.  The meeting of the JIC Sub-Committee on Iraq/WMD on 29 March, chaired by
Mr Scarlett, discussed plans for responding to Mr Duelfer’s testimony, including a draft
summary of key points which had been sent to Mr Duelfer.424
767.  The key points included:

•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

“Iraq was remarkably successful in eroding UN sanctions. Containment strategy
was being systematically undermined by several countries including key
members of the UNSC.”
“Iraq derived billions of dollars between 1999 and 2003 from oil smuggling,
kickbacks and abuse of the Oil-for-Food [OFF] programme. This was outside the
control of the UN and free for the regime to spend without restriction.”
“ISG has information regarding dual-use facilities and ongoing research suitable
for a capability to produce CBW at short notice.”
“ISG has also found evidence to indicate Iraqi interest in preserving and
expanding the knowledge needed to design and develop nuclear weapons.”
“In addition … the ISG has continued to uncover very robust programmes for
delivery systems.”
“The ISG is focusing on the broader picture of regime intent and how the
technical developments fit into this picture in an integrated manner.”

The ISG Status Report, 30 March 2004
768.  Mr Blair and President Bush discussed the impact of the ISG Status Report on
30 March.425 Mr Blair said that the draft he had seen was quite good and certainly better
than it might have been. Expectations in the UK were low. The more detail that could be
declassified and put into the text the better. Mr Duelfer’s methodology was better than
Dr Kay’s, which had not been rigorous.
769.  Mr Duelfer delivered his testimony to Congress later on 30 March, explaining:
“This Report is very limited in scope. It is intended to provide a status report of my
efforts at steering the ISG. It is not a preliminary assessment of findings.”426
770.  The Status Report incorporated many of the key points sent to Mr Duelfer
by the UK:

•	

Challenges. Iraqi managers, scientists and engineers were extremely reluctant
to speak freely and documents were not easy to interpret. The ISG still did not
fully understand regime intentions.

Minute Scarlett to Howard, 29 March 2004, ‘JIC Sub-Group Meeting on Iraq WMD’ attaching Paper
[unattributed], [undated], ‘ISG Report – Summary of Key Points’.
425 
Letter Quarrey to Owen, 30 March 2004, ‘Prime Minister’s VTC with Bush, 30 March: Iraq’.
426 
Central Intelligence Agency, 30 March 2004, Testimony by Charles Duelfer on Iraqi WMD Programs.
424 

573

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

Procurement. Iraq derived billions of dollars between 1999 and 2003 from oil
smuggling, kickbacks and abuse of OFF, money which was outside the control
of the UN. Iraq imported banned military weapons and technology and dual-use
goods through OFF contracts.
Denial and deception. The ISG had uncovered more details about Iraq’s efforts
to deceive UNSCOM and then UNMOVIC right up to the invasion in March 2003.
Biological and chemical weapons. The ISG had new information on Iraq’s dualuse facilities and research into short-notice production of CBW. “Iraq did have
facilities suitable for the production of biological and chemical agents needed for
weapons. It had plans to improve and extend and even build new facilities.”
Nuclear weapons. ISG analysis suggested “Iraqi interest in preserving and
expanding the knowledge needed to design and develop nuclear weapons”.
Delivery systems. The ISG had continued to uncover “a very robust program for
delivery systems that were not reported to the UN. New information has been
discovered relating to long range ballistic missile development and Unmanned
Aerial Vehicles (UAVs).”
Regime intent. Mr Duelfer had instilled a new focus on the question of regime
intent. It was “critically important to understand the intentions of the regime”
when putting other activities into context.

771.  Mr Blair commented on the absence of media coverage of Mr Duelfer’s testimony:
“Amazing it got no publicity. Sh[oul]dn’t we now publicise it? What is our Iraq SCU
[Strategic Communications Unit] doing?”427
772.  Sir Nigel Sheinwald advised that the Government “sh[oul]d not try to publicise this
Report now”. He asked Mr David Quarrey, a Private Secretary in No.10, to discuss the
issue with Mr Scarlett, the MOD and the FCO before putting advice to Mr Blair.428
773.  On 8 April, Mr Quarrey advised Mr Blair:
“The Report received little coverage, although it did usefully get some information
into the public domain. But things have moved on now. In current circumstances
(ie the security situation) it would be extremely difficult to get further coverage in
anything other than negative terms.”429

Manuscript comment Blair on Minute Scarlett to Sheinwald, 30 March 2004, ‘ISG’.
Manuscript comment Sheinwald on Minute Scarlett to Sheinwald, 30 March 2004, ‘ISG’.
429 
Minute Quarrey to Prime Minister, 8 April 2004, ‘ISG’.
427 
428 

574

4.4  |  The search for WMD

774.  Also on 8 April, Mr Wood reported from Washington that there were likely to be
three UK angles to the Report of the Senate Intelligence Committee into pre-conflict
intelligence on Iraq:

•	
•	
•	

the reference to yellowcake in President Bush’s State of the Union speech in
2003, on which the Committee was likely to be more critical of the US than
the UK;
the “45 minute claim” on which the Report would conclude that there was a basis
in intelligence for the public claim; and
[…].430

The transfer of power to the Iraqi Interim Government
775.  On 29 March, a senior SIS officer sought guidance from Mr Ehrman on the
responsibilities of the future Government of Iraq for counter-proliferation and “the legacy
of CBRN related capabilities”.431 The Coalition had had a difficult year. Questions to
consider included:

•	
•	

where responsibility for those issues would lie in the CPA and its successors;

•	

the point at which international organisations would be brought in to help Iraq
and the amount of preparatory work that would be necessary with the US.

how policy-makers saw the UK helping Iraq solve the “CBRN riddles remaining
from the past”; and

776.  Mr David Landsman, Mr Dowse’s successor as the Head of FCO CounterProliferation Department, co-ordinated Whitehall discussion.432 On 31 March, he sought
views on:

•	
•	
•	
•	

how long the ISG would be needed;

•	

when to bring in international agencies.

the legal basis for ISG operations after the transfer of sovereignty;
how the UK would engage with Iraq on other counter-proliferation activities;
what sort of co-operation programmes and assistance should be
established; and

777.  A DIS official replied on 3 April.433 He reported that US thinking on the future of the
ISG was fluid. The ISG’s work had not been included in Iraq’s Transitional Administrative
Law (TAL) (see Section 9.2) and it was not yet possible to advise on the legal basis for
the ISG’s work in Iraq after the transfer of sovereignty. The WMD Task Force had told
Mr Duelfer that it hoped it would be possible to produce a final report within the next
Letter Wood to Scarlett, 8 April 2004, ‘Iraq WMD: Activity in the Senate Intelligence Committee’.
Letter SIS [senior officer] to Ehrman, 29 March 2004, [untitled].
432 
Letter Landsman to Howard, 31 March 2004, ‘Iraq: Implementing Counter-Proliferation Policy
After June’.
433 
Letter [DIS] to Peters, 3 April 2004, ‘Iraq: Implementing Counter-Proliferation Policy After June’.
430 
431 

575

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

few months but, in practice, the UK would have to continue to support the ISG until
Mr Duelfer was ready to produce his report.
778.  The Op ROCKINGHAM weekly update for 2 to 7 April stated that deteriorating
security in Baghdad and Basra was affecting ISG operational planning.434 A shortage
of vehicles with armoured protection was complicating efforts to complete outstanding
collection activities before the end of June.
779.  On 13 May, Mr Howard wrote to Mr Scarlett about the future of the ISG.435 He
advised that the ISG still had much work to complete, including collection activities at
suspect sites, interviews of HVDs, and analysis of millions of documents. Its ability to
continue those tasks after 30 June was uncertain and future command and control
arrangements were in a state of “flux”.
780.  Mr Howard reported that Mr Duelfer expected to “produce a detailed report” in the
late summer/early autumn. While that would “not necessarily draw the line underneath
the question of WMD in Iraq” it was “likely to make provisional conclusions”. That would
“almost certainly signify in the public mind the ‘final word’ from the ISG on Iraq WMD”.
781.  After the transfer of sovereignty on 30 June, the ISG would focus increasingly
on analysis of Iraq’s intentions and future WMD programmes, and decision-making
in Saddam Hussein’s regime. The report was “unlikely to focus on whether Iraq has
disarmed, which was of course UNMOVIC’s focus”.
782.  Mr Howard also wrote that:

•	
•	
•	

The ISG was “likely to survive” to deal with other tasks after the release of its
“final report” on WMD.
The UK had “benefited considerably” from having the ISG Deputy Commander
post.
Deteriorating security in Iraq had impeded the ISG’s effectiveness. The UK
continued to fulfil its duty of care to staff and would monitor closely the posttransfer of sovereignty security situation.

783.  At No.10’s request, Mr Dowse prepared an update on the ISG on 21 May.436
784.  Mr Dowse covered much the same ground as Mr Howard. He wrote:

•	
•	

ISG planning since March had been hampered significantly by poor security
throughout Iraq, high staff turnover, difficulty in filling posts and some equipment
shortages.
A major part of current ISG activity was “combating the efforts of insurgent
networks to develop and use chemical weapons against Coalition forces”.

Op ROCKINGHAM Weekly No.41, 2-7 April 2004.
Letter Howard to Scarlett, 13 May 2004, ‘Iraq: Future of the Iraq Survey Group (ISG)’.
436 
Minute Dowse to Quarrey, 21 May 2004, ‘Iraq Survey Group’.
434 
435 

576

4.4  |  The search for WMD

•	

The ISG believed insurgent groups were “looking to draw on the knowledge and
experience of people previously engaged with Iraq’s CW programme”, although
the scale of that effort was “unclear”. The use of mustard and sarin artillery
shells in two recent improvised explosive devices was “not a reliable indicator”.
Those using the weapons were “probably unaware of their nature”. The rounds
were in “a very poor condition and almost certainly part of Iraq’s pre-1991
stockpile”.
Two consistent themes were emerging from the debriefing of HVDs:
{{ “CW

was used in the Iran-Iraq war, but remaining stocks had been
destroyed in 1991, without records”; and

{{ after

•	
•	

1991 Saddam Hussein was “determined to maintain scientific
expertise for post-sanctions reconstruction of WMD programmes”.

The US had stated that the ISG mission would not change after 30 June, the
end of the CPA, but Maj Gen Dayton would be replaced by a one-star US Marine
Corps officer.
The next report would be the ISG’s last. Mr Duelfer’s aim was to have a draft
ready by the end of June, to be worked on during July and released in August.
It was likely to focus on:
{{ “Iraqi

contravention of sanctions in the procurement of goods that could be
used to support WMD programmes”;

{{ diversion
{{ a

of OFF funds; and

broader picture of the regime’s “strategic intent” towards WMD.

785.  In his note to No.10 officials on 23 May, Mr Blair wrote in relation to the ISG that it:
“… seems to be doing nothing. Surely it is absurd that they will say nothing is found,
though there was strategic intent; when, in reality, they have been unable to look.
They need to leave actual WMD an open issue. Also can I have an assessment of
the conventional stockpiles in Iraq at the end of the war.”437
786.  In response to the update from Mr Dowse, Mr Blair commented:
“… the ISG should not just conclude that there was strategic intent but no WMD
were found, when it is clear that they have been unable to look. They need to leave
WMD as an open issue.”438
787.  No.10 asked the “JIC/MOD” for advice on how to get the result Mr Blair wanted.
788.  In his discussion with President Bush on 26 May (see Section 9.2), Mr Blair stated
that the ISG should not be forgotten and that proper reporting on what it was up to
was needed.439
Note Blair to Powell, 23 May 2004, ‘Iraq Note’.
Letter Quarrey to Owen, 24 May 2004, ‘Iraq’.
439 
Letter Quarrey to Owen, 26 May 2004, ‘Iraq: Prime Minister’s VTC with Bush, 26 May’.
437 
438 

577

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

789.  Mr Duelfer called on Mr Scarlett and Mr Tony Pawson, Mr Howard’s successor
as DCDI, on 28 May.440 Mr Scarlett reported the main points from both discussions to
Sir Nigel Sheinwald:

•	

•	
•	

•	
•	

ISG work. Interviews with HVDs, including Saddam Hussein, remained a priority
but were yielding little specific information. The ISG was still trying to establish
whether there were specific Iraqi policies to maintain or develop industrial
capacity with an embedded or inherent WMD production capability. High priority
was being given to work on terrorists’ and insurgents’ capacity to obtain or
produce WMD for immediate use.
ISG status. Mr Tenet had assured Mr Duelfer that the ISG’s status would not
change while Mr Duelfer remained in charge. For legal purposes, after 30 June
the ISG would have to fall under the remit of the Multi-National Force – Iraq
(MNF-I). Day-to-day operational command should remain with CENTCOM.
ISG report. Mr Duelfer envisaged that a first draft would be ready by June but
a final text would “not be ready until August”. This would be a “comprehensive”
report, but not a “final” one. It would have much to say on regime intent and
would make clear many questions remained open. Mr Duelfer would not commit
to specific dates for publication or his departure from the ISG.
Management. Mr Duelfer was anxious to work with the UK. He was open to
comments and views on content and presentation, but was clear that the report
would be his own. Mr Pawson and Mr Dowse would stay in close touch with
Mr Duelfer and Washington.
Release of HVDs. There was concern that, with the release of most HVDs
before 30 June, some might go to the press to allege mistreatment and
press the case that WMD had never existed. There was a danger that could
undermine the authority of the ISG report.

790.  In his memoir, Mr Duelfer explained that support for the ISG was at its highest
during June 2004, in the weeks leading up to the transfer of sovereignty:
“ISG analysts developed new targeting packages … Planning for a final pulse of
raids was accelerated … All the agencies in Washington and the military in the field
understood the importance of getting to the bottom of the WMD question.”441
791.  Maj Gen Dayton handed over command of the ISG to Brigadier General
Joseph McMenamin on 12 June.442
792.  Before his departure, Maj Gen Dayton discussed the future of the ISG with
Mr Pawson. Mr Pawson reported to Mr Scarlett that, while some reconfiguring of the ISG

Minute Scarlett to Sheinwald, 3 June 2004, ‘Iraq Survey Group: Update’.
Duelfer C. Hide and Seek: The Search for Truth in Iraq. Public Affairs, 2009.
442 
Letter Pawson to Scarlett, 9 June 2004, ‘Iraq: WMD: Future of the Iraq Survey Group’.
440 
441 

578

4.4  |  The search for WMD

was inevitable with the release of HVDs, there was no reason to think that a separation
of its component parts was imminent.

Mr Tenet’s resignation
Mr Tenet announced his resignation as Director of Central Intelligence (DCI) on 3 June.443
Mr McLaughlin was appointed Acting Director.
Mr Tenet stepped down formally on 11 July.444
In his memoir, Mr Duelfer wrote:
“McLaughlin recognized my position and stepped in to make sure I was not left
dangling. He would provide, as he had been all along, direct personal attention to the
ISG on an almost daily basis”.445

793.  On 6 June, the Security Council adopted resolution 1546 (2004) (see Section 9.2).
The resolution welcomed the beginning of a new phase in Iraq’s transition to a
democratically elected government, and looked forward to the end of the Occupation
by 30 June 2004.446
794.  In operative paragraph (OP) 21, the Security Council decided that the prohibition
on the sale and supply of arms to Iraq would “not apply to arms or related material
required by the Government of Iraq or the multinational force to serve the purposes of
this resolution”.
795.  In OP22, the Council noted that OP21 did not affect material prohibited by or
the obligations in paragraphs 8 and 12 of resolution 687 (1991) and paragraph 3(f)
of resolution 707 (1991). It also reaffirmed “its intention to revisit the mandates” of
UNMOVIC and the IAEA.
796.  A letter from Secretary Powell to the President of the Security Council was
annexed to the resolution. Secretary Powell confirmed that:
“… the MNF stands ready to continue to undertake a broad range of tasks
to contribute to the maintenance of security and to ensure force protection.
These include … the continued search for and securing of weapons that
threaten Iraq’s security.”
797.  On 24 June, Mr Douglas Feith, US Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, informed
Mr Simon Webb, MOD Policy Director, of the post-30 June arrangements for the ISG.447
Resolution 1546 envisaged that the MNF-I would have the task of searching for and
The New York Times, 3 June 2004, ‘Time is Right to Move On’, CIA Director Tells Employees.
CIA News & Information, 8 July 2004, CIA Director Honored at Farewell Ceremony.
445 
Duelfer C. Hide and Seek: The Search for Truth in Iraq. Public Affairs, 2009.
446 
UN Security Council resolution 1546 (2004).
447 
Minute Thornton to Policy Director, 24 June 2004, ‘Conversation with Doug Feith about the future of
the ISG’.
443 
444 

579

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

securing weapons that threatened Iraq’s security. The ISG would therefore move from
CENTCOM to MNF-I command.
798.  Mr Webb said that the UK would continue to support the ISG, though resources
were strained. The problem would get worse in the autumn, when reductions of scale
might be desirable.
799.  Mr Webb also told Mr Feith that Mr Duelfer’s report would be “a significant political
event in the UK”, in which Mr Blair took a personal interest. The UK looked forward to
seeing a draft in advance.
800.  Control of the ISG transferred from CENTCOM to the MNF-I after the transfer of
sovereignty on 28 June.448
801.  At the end of June, the ISG comprised 1,787 personnel: 1,722 from the US,
54 from the UK and 11 from Australia.449
802.  On 1 July, Mr Straw was advised that the only grounds for internment after 30 June
should be “imperative reasons of security or criminal activity”.450 FCO legal advice made
clear that internment for intelligence exploitation alone was not sufficient. The British
Embassy Washington had already been instructed to raise with the US UK concerns
about the basis for continued US internments that did not fall into the two categories
recognised by the UK.
803.  The FCO stated that restrictions on the activities of UK personnel in the ISG were
unlikely to affect its overall operational capability, but were likely to be unwelcome to the
US military at a time when US and UK resources were under considerable pressure.
There was a risk that, during a critical time for the preparation of the next ISG report, the
UK might be fully involved only in the ISG’s assessment work and missions compatible
with UK policy.
804.  The FCO also reported that Dr Ayad Allawi, the Iraqi Prime Minister, had expressed
strong support for the ISG which he hoped would remain active for the next six months
or so. There had not, however, been detailed discussions between the ISG and the Iraqi
Interim Government (IIG) about how the ISG would operate. Prime Minister Allawi was
reported to be “convinced that WMD will be found”.
805.  Mr Ehrman advised Mr Straw’s Private Office:
“We pressed the US to address the future of ISG operations when SCR 1546 was
being negotiated. They did not want to do so. Eventually they agreed to the phrase
in [Secretary] Powell’s letter [‘the continued search for and securing of weapons
that threaten Iraq’s security’] … The UK contingent makes up only 3% of the ISG’s

Op ROCKINGHAM Daily, 29 June 2004.
Minute Smith to PS [FCO], 1 July 2004, ‘Iraq – Detention Issues and the ISG’.
450 
Minute Smith to PS [FCO], 1 July 2004, ‘Iraq – Detention Issues and the ISG’.
448 
449 

580

4.4  |  The search for WMD

strength. Its activities will now need to be circumscribed … This will be unwelcome
to the US but that is the consequence of the arrangements put in place by 1546.”451
806.  The Op ROCKINGHAM weekly update of 1 July reported that:

•	
•	

The UK element of the ISG had withdrawn from all debriefing activity while
discussions continued on the legal basis for future ISG operations.
Prime Minister Allawi had nominated Dr Mowaffak al-Rubaie, his National
Security Adviser, as the IIG point of contact for the ISG.452

The Butler and Senate Intelligence Committee Reports,
July 2004
807.  In a Note for President Bush on 16 June, Mr Blair stated that the truth on
Iraq’s WMD was probably that Saddam Hussein:
“ … was developing long range ballistic missile capability in breach of UN
resolutions; he probably had no or no large stockpiles of tactical CW or
BW weapons; but he retained the capability and expertise to recommence
production as soon as he could, again in breach of UN resolutions.”
808.  Mr Blair’s “hunch” was that the Butler Review would reach similar
conclusions. Both Lord Butler and the Senate Intelligence Committee were
“bound to be critical … in certain respects”.
809.  On 16 June, Sir Nigel Sheinwald sent Dr Rice a Note written by Mr Blair for
President Bush about the need for a strategic plan for Iraq (see Section 9.2).453
810.  In relation to the need “to deal with any WMD/intelligence issues”, Mr Blair wrote
that he remained “deeply concerned” about WMD:
“The public need an explanation and there will linger a real trust/truth issue …
“At present the public debate lurches between the two extremes: pro-war people
insist the intelligence was right, but the plain fact is no WMD has been found; antiwar people claim it was all a fraud, as if Saddam never really had any WMD, which
is plainly fatuous … [T]he ISG thinking, and probably the truth, is somewhere in
between. He was developing long range ballistic missile capability in breach of
UN resolutions; he probably had no or no large stockpiles of tactical CW or BW
weapons; but he retained the capability and expertise to recommence production as
soon as he could, again in breach of UN resolutions. And, of course, with the missile
capability, he could fit any warhead he wanted at the appropriate time.

Manuscript comment Ehrman, 2 July 2004, on Minute Smith to PS [FCO], 1 July 2004, ‘Iraq – Detention
Issues and the ISG’.
452 
Op ROCKINGHAM Weekly No.53, 25 June – 1 July 2004.
453 
Letter Sheinwald to Rice, 16 June 2004, [untitled], attaching [Blair to Bush] Note.
451 

581

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

So he had strategic intent and capability on WMD; and an active programme on
ballistic missiles.
“Such an explanation would mean that some of the intelligence upon which we acted
was wrong; but that nonetheless the threat was there, as was the breach of UN
resolutions. It would also explain why the picture was so confused and why, whilst
the exact basis of action was not as we thought, the action was still justified.”
811.  Mr Blair’s “hunch” was that the Butler Review would reach similar conclusions.
Both Lord Butler and the Senate Intelligence Committee were “bound to be critical …
in certain respects”. But the US and UK had “to avoid the absurd notion that therefore
there was no threat at all, as if 12 years of history and UN resolutions never existed”.
812.  Mr Blair suggested that, if Mr Duelfer were thinking along those lines, it made
sense urgently to investigate the possibility of publishing the ISG report at the same
time as the Senate and Butler Reports. That would “provide the clear evidential basis for
saying there was indeed a threat, even if it was not the threat that had been anticipated”.
813.  Mr Blair added:
“It may be impossible but if at all possible we should have this issue dealt with and
lanced all at the same time.”
814.  During a video conference with President Bush on 22 June, Mr Blair said that
Mr Duelfer seemed to be planning to publish in August. That was up to him, but with
other WMD reports due to be published earlier, it might make sense to bring the
date forward.454
815.  Reporting on a meeting in London on 2 July, Mr Landsman wrote that Mr Duelfer
had been insistent that there was still plenty for ISG to do and that he had “repeatedly
mentioned CW/terrorism”.455
816.  Mr Duelfer was reported to have said:

•	
•	

The timing for his next report “could slip a little”.

•	
•	

He “wanted to use his report to challenge assumptions”.

•	

454 
455 

There was “potentially a good story to tell on the Saddam regime strategic
intent”, but he was “unhappy about the quality of the drafting produced in
the ISG”.
Saddam Hussein’s regime was “highly arbitrary and personalised: we should not
expect to find carefully set out plans and consultation exercises”.
He “hoped to be able to point to a ‘sharp breakout capability’”.

Letter Quarrey to Owen, 22 June 2004, ‘Prime Minister’s VTC with Bush, 22 June: Iraq’.
Minute Landsman to FCO [junior official], 5 July 2004, ‘Iraq WMD: Meeting with Duelfer, 2 Jul’.

582

4.4  |  The search for WMD

•	
•	
•	
•	

He was “surprised” by Prime Minister Allawi’s optimism that “WMD were there
to be found”.
UNMOVIC’s “excellent information base was ‘about an Iraq which no longer
existed’”.
“[W]e should begin to consider to what extent responsibility could eventually go
to the Iraqis themselves”.
A possible cache in Syria was “not out of the question”, but “Syria was ‘well
covered’ and something should have come to light by now”.

817.  Mr Blair discussed Iraq with President Bush again during a video conference
on 6 July.
818.  The briefing for Mr Blair advised that President Bush might raise the Butler
and Senate Intelligence Committee Reports, but that there was “no point in pushing
again on the ISG – Duelfer will not report before August and further pressure will not
change this”.456
819.  The record of the video conference between Mr Blair and President Bush on
6 July did not include any reference to discussion of the ISG or to the Butler and Senate
Intelligence Committee Reports.457

Mr Blair’s evidence to the Liaison Committee, 6 July 2004
820.  During his appearance before the Liaison Committee on 6 July, Mr Blair was asked
about the implications of the failure to find WMD.458
821.  In his responses, Mr Blair made a number of points, including:

•	

•	
•	
•	

He had “to accept that we have not found them [stockpiles of WMD] and that
we may not find them. What I would say very strongly, however, is that to go to
the opposite extreme and say, therefore, that no threat existed from Saddam
Hussein would be a mistake. We do not know what has happened to them; they
could have been removed, they could have been hidden, they could have been
destroyed.”
The ISG had already indicated “quite clearly that there have been breaches” of
UN resolutions.
The purpose of military action “was in order to enforce” the UN resolutions.
It was “absolutely clear from the evidence that has already been found … that
he [Saddam] had the strategic capability, the intent and that he was in multiple
breaches”.

Minute Quarrey to Prime Minister, 6 July 2004, ‘VTC with President Bush, 6 July’.
Letter Quarrey to Owen, 6 July 2004, ‘Prime Minister’s VTC with Bush, 6 July: Iraq’.
458 
Liaison Committee of the House of Commons, Session 2003-2004, Oral evidence taken before the
Liaison Committee on Tuesday 6 July 2004, Qs 236-271.
456 
457 

583

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

•	

•	
•	
•	

He genuinely believed “that those stockpiles of weapons were there; I think
that most people did, and that is why the whole of the international community
came together and passed the United Nations resolution it did [1441 adopted in
November 2002], but that is a very different thing from saying that Saddam was
not a threat; the truth is he was a threat, to the region and to the wider world,
and the world is a safer place without him.”
He “would not accept” that Saddam Hussein “was not a threat and a threat in
WMD terms”.
He did “not believe we would have got the progress on Libya, on AQ Khan, on
Iran and on North Korea” without Iraq.
In his view, “the reason … it was important that we took a stand on the WMD
issue, and the place … to take that stand was Iraq because of the history of
breaches of UN resolutions and the fact that they used WMD … is that if you
carry on with this proliferation of WMD with these highly repressive states
developing it … at some point you would have this new form of global terrorism
and those states with WMD coming together.”

The Senate Intelligence Committee Report, 9 July 2004
822.  On 9 July, the Senate Committee on Intelligence published its report on the
U.S. Intelligence Community’s Prewar Intelligence Assessments on Iraq.459 The main
conclusions included:

•	

•	
•	

Most of the key judgements in the October 2002 US National Intelligence
Estimate (NIE), ‘Iraq’s Continuing Programs for Weapons of Mass Destruction’,
either overstated, or were not supported by, the underlying intelligence
reporting. A series of failures, particularly in analytic tradecraft, led to the
mischaracterisation of the intelligence.
The intelligence community did not accurately or adequately explain to policymakers the uncertainties behind the judgements in the October 2002 NIE.
The intelligence community suffered from a collective presumption that Iraq
had an active and growing WMD programme. This “group think” led intelligence
community analysts, collectors and managers both to interpret ambiguous
evidence as conclusively indicative of a WMD programme and to ignore or
minimise evidence that Iraq did not have active and expanding weapons of
mass destruction programmes. This presumption was so strong that formal
mechanisms established to challenge assumptions and group think were
not used.

Select Committee on Intelligence, 9 July 2004, Report of the Select Committee on Intelligence on the
U.S. Intelligence Community’s Prewar Intelligence Assessments on Iraq.
459 

584

4.4  |  The search for WMD

•	

In a few significant instances, the analysis in the NIE suffered from a “layering”
effect, with assessments built on previous judgements without carrying forward
the uncertainties of the underlying judgements.

823.  Between September 2006 and June 2008, the Senate Intelligence Committee
published additional detail on many of the issues addressed in the July 2004 Report.460
The five parts of its “Phase II” Report covered the expanded investigation into
pre‑conflict intelligence announced by the Committee in February 2004:

•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

‘The Use by the Intelligence Community of Information Provided by the Iraqi
National Congress’ (September 2006);
‘Postwar Findings About Iraq’s WMD Programs and Links to Terrorism and How
They Compare With Prewar Assessments’ (September 2006);
‘Prewar Intelligence Assessments about Postwar Iraq’ (May 2007);
‘Report on Whether Public Statements Regarding Iraq by US Government
Officials Were Substantiated by Intelligence Information’ (June 2008);
‘Report on Intelligence Activities Relating to Iraq Conducted by the Policy
Counterterrorism Evaluation Group and the Office of Special Plans Within the
Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy’ (June 2008).

CIG Assessment, 13 July 2004: ‘A Review of Intelligence on
Possible Links Between Al Qaida and Saddam’s Regime’
On 13 July, at the request of the Cabinet Office, the CIG produced an Assessment
reviewing the links between Al Qaida and Saddam Hussein’s regime.461
The Key Judgements were:
“•	 Nothing we have learnt since the fall of Saddam Hussein’s regime has invalidated
previous JIC judgements on the possible links between the regime and Al Qaida.

•	

There were some contacts between the regime and Al Qaida during the 1990s,
but they did not progress beyond the exploratory stage and the degree of practical
co‑operation, if any, was limited.

•	

Some sources … asserted that Al Qaida was seeking chemical and biological (CB)
expertise. But the intelligence is not strong. Al Qaida did not receive CB material
from Iraq.

•	
•	

Saddam Hussein’s regime was not involved with the 9/11 attacks.
Al Qaida associates such as [Abu Musab] al-Zarqawi and members of Ansar al-Islam
were known by the regime to be operating in Iraq and the Kurdish Autonomous Zone
(KAZ) before Coalition action in 2003, but the exact relationship between the regime
and Al Qaida-linked terrorists remains unclear.

US Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, 5 June 2008, Senate Intelligence Committee Unveils
Final Phase II Reports on Prewar Iraq Intelligence.
461 
CIG Assessment, 13 July 2004, ‘A Review of Intelligence on Possible Links Between Al Qaida and
Saddam’s Regime’.
460 

585

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

•	

Al-Zarqawi made Iraq his base for jihad on his own initiative, but with plans in line
with the Al Qaida global jihadist agenda.”

The additional points in the Assessment included:
Pre 9/11

•	

After its defeat in 1991, the Iraqi regime “sought to make contact with a number of
Islamist groups”.

•	

“Senior Al Qaida detainees have revealed that Bin Laden was personally against any
formal alliance with the Iraqi regime, but that others … believed some contact would
be useful.”

•	
•	
•	

The exact nature of early contacts remained “unclear”.
Intelligence indicated that “further contacts took place in the late 1990s”.
There was doubt about the reliability of some of the reporting, but “sufficient
intelligence to assess there was some contact throughout the 1990s”.

Post 9/11

•	

After the fall of the Taliban in Afghanistan, “reports suggested that Iraq was being
used as a transit route for Islamist terrorists”, and: “By 2002 Al Qaida-linked terrorists
had established a presence … some involved in the development of CB substances
at a facility near Halabjah, run by Ansar al-Islam.”

•	

It was “likely that the regime knew these Islamist terrorists were operating in Iraq,
though it would not have been able to act against them in the KAZ”.

•	

“Post war intelligence” suggested that “in Baghdad and elsewhere some effort … was
made to arrest Al Qaida-linked terrorists”.

The Butler Report, 14 July 2004
824.  In its meeting on 7 July, the JIC discussed the forthcoming publication of the Butler
Report.462 Sir David Omand stated that it “would be the first time that such an extensive
list of JIC reports had been made public”. It was “in the JIC’s interests that the Report
showed that the right kind of warnings” had been given, and that “there was a depth
to the intelligence and assessment on Iraq”. There were, however, “serious security
implications” and the danger of setting precedents. Redactions to the extracts from
JIC Assessments would need to be agreed before publication.
825.  The Butler Report was published on 14 July.463
826.  In the House of Commons, Mr Blair assessed the Report’s implications for two
questions that had persisted throughout the debate on Iraq:
“One is an issue of good faith – of integrity. This is now the fourth exhaustive
inquiry that has dealt with the issue. This Report, the Hutton Inquiry, the Report of

462 
463 

Minutes, 7 July 2004, JIC meeting.
Review of Intelligence on Weapons of Mass Destruction [“The Butler Report”], 14 July 2004, HC 898.

586

4.4  |  The search for WMD

the Intelligence and Security Committee before it, and that of the Foreign Affairs
Committee before that, found the same thing. No one lied. No one made up the
intelligence. No one inserted things into the dossier against the advice of the
intelligence services. Everyone genuinely tried to do their best in good faith for
the country in circumstances of acute difficulty. That issue of good faith should
now be at an end.
“But there is another issue. We expected – I expected – to find actual usable
chemical or biological weapons shortly after we entered Iraq … Lord Butler, in his
Report, says: ‘We believe that it would be a rash person who asserted at this stage
that evidence of Iraqi possession of stocks of biological or chemical agents, or even
of banned missiles, does not exist or will never be found.’ However, I have to accept
that, as the months have passed, it has seemed increasingly clear that, at the time
of invasion, Saddam did not have stockpiles of chemical or biological weapons ready
to deploy. The second issue is therefore this: even if we acted in perfectly good faith,
is it now the case that in the absence of stockpiles of weapons ready to deploy, the
threat was misconceived and therefore the war was unjustified?
“I have searched my conscience … to answer that question. My answer would
be this: the evidence of Saddam’s weapons of mass destruction was indeed less
certain and less well founded than was stated at the time … However … he retained
complete strategic intent on WMD and significant capability … He had no intention
of ever co-operating fully with the inspectors, and he was going to start up again
the moment the troops and the inspectors departed, or the sanctions eroded. I say
further that if we had backed down in respect of Saddam, we would never have
taken the stand that we needed to take on weapons of mass destruction, we would
never have got the progress on Libya, for example, that we achieved, and we would
have left Saddam in charge of Iraq, with every malign intent and capability still
in place, and with every dictator with the same intent everywhere immeasurably
emboldened.”464
827.  Mr Blair commented on the Butler Report’s statement that:
“… with hindsight making public that the authorship of the dossier was by the JIC
was a mistake. It meant that more weight was put on the intelligence than it could
bear, and put the JIC and its chairman in a difficult position. It recommends in
future a clear delimitation between Government and the JIC, perhaps by issuing
two documents. I think this is wise, although I doubt that it would have made
much difference to the reception of the intelligence at the time. The Report also
enlarges on the criticisms of the ISC in respect of the greater use of caveats about
intelligence both in the dossier and in my foreword, and we accept that entirely.

464 

House of Commons, Official Report, 14 July 2004, column 1431.

587

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

“The Report also states that significant parts of the intelligence have now been
found by the Secret Intelligence Service to be in doubt. The Chief of the SIS,
Sir Richard Dearlove, has told me that it accepts all the conclusions and
recommendations of Lord Butler’s Report that concern the Service. The SIS will
fully address the recommendations that Lord Butler has made about its procedures
and about the need for the Service properly to resource them. The Service
has played and continues to play, a vital role in countering worldwide the tide
of proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Indeed, its successes are evident in
Lord Butler’s Report.
“I accept the Report’s conclusions in full. Any mistakes should not be laid at the
door of our intelligence and security community. They do a tremendous job for
our country. I accept full personal responsibility for the way in which the issue was
presented and therefore for any errors that were made.”465
828.  The Inquiry cites the findings of the Butler Review at a number of points in
Sections 4.1, 4.2 and 4.3 where they best illuminate the issues under discussion,
rather than attempting to summarise them in one place. Those include:

•	
•	
•	
•	

Findings relating to the intelligence underpinning individual JIC Assessments
and the quality of those Assessments;
Findings on the way in which intelligence and JIC Assessments were used to
underpin public statements by the Government, and in particular the September
2002 dossier and statements to Parliament;
Findings on the reporting issued in September 2002 about the production of
chemical agent; and
Findings on the serious doubts about other lines of reporting and the eventual
withdrawal of that reporting, including reports about mobile facilities for the
production of biological agent and the claim that chemical and biological
munitions could be moved into place for an attack within 45 minutes.

The ISG Comprehensive Report, 6 October 2004
829.  Mr Blair discussed the ISG Comprehensive Report with President Bush in
late July.
830.  Mr Blair stated to officials that the Comprehensive Report needed to indicate
the degree of certainty that Iraq had not possessed WMD and how far the security
situation in Iraq had affected the search.
831.  Officials warned of the need to avoid any repeat of allegations that the UK
had exerted improper pressure on the preparation of the previous ISG report.

465 

House of Commons, Official Report, 14 July 2004, column 1435.

588

4.4  |  The search for WMD

832.  Mr Blair raised the ISG report during a video conference with President Bush on
22 July.466 He said that Mr Duelfer needed to prove that Saddam Hussein had been
“procuring the means to develop WMD, had missiles to deliver it, and the intent to
use it”. The ISG report could prove to be a powerful argument in support of the war.
833.  Mr Blair suggested that, with the ISG report and the Butler Review, which had
made clear that Al Qaida had been present in Iraq, “we could clearly argue that it would
have been wrong to let Saddam go unchecked”. The timing of the ISG report had to be
right. Sir Nigel Sheinwald noted that early September looked realistic.
834.  Mr Dowse discussed the ISG report with Mr Duelfer at a meeting hosted by the
US Embassy in London on 31 August.467 Mr Duelfer stated that he did not expect the
report to satisfy those wanting evidence of WMD, but thought it would disappoint those
who said that sanctions and containment had been working. There would be plenty of
very clear evidence that Iraqi abuse of OFF had allowed the regime to siphon off “huge
amounts” of money.
835.  Mr Dowse reported that it was Mr Duelfer’s “firm intention” to deliver the report to
Mr McLaughlin by the end of September in a form suitable for immediate publication.
A draft should be ready for review by governments in Washington, London and
Canberra in about two weeks.
836.  Mr Blair commented that Mr Duelfer needed:
“… a conclusion on WMD weapons themselves. How clear is it that they didn’t exist;
is it an open question; how has the security situation post May 03 & now affected the
search? He will need answers to this.”468
837.  Mr Dowse responded on 10 September. The UK had not seen the latest text, but
Mr Duelfer was expected to say that:

•	
•	

the ISG had “not been able to determine conclusively whether Saddam
possessed WMD in 2003”; and
the likelihood was that “even if some did exist, they were not of military
significance”.469

838.  Mr Dowse reported that Mr Duelfer remained “extremely (and rightly) sensitive” to
leaks of the report before publication, and particularly to any suggestion that he may be
influenced by Washington or London. Mr Dowse advised: “we must avoid a repeat of the
allegations that HMG exerted improper pressure on the last report”.

Letter Phillipson to Adams, 22 July 2004, ‘Prime Minister’s VTC with President Bush, 22 July: Iraq and
MEPP’.
467 
Minute Dowse to Ehrman, 31 August 2004, ‘Next Iraq Survey Report’.
468 
Manuscript comment Blair on Minute Dowse to Ehrman, 31 August 2004, ‘Next Iraq Survey Report’.
469 
Minute Dowse to Phillipson, 10 September 2004, ‘Next Iraq Survey Group Report’.
466 

589

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

839.  The JIC Sub-Committee on Iraq/WMD, chaired by Mr Ehrman, who took up his
appointment as Chairman of the JIC at the end of August, discussed Mr Duelfer’s draft
Comprehensive Report on 17 September.470
840.  The meeting was also informed that Washington planned to reduce the size of the
ISG in Baghdad, culminating in its merger with MNF-I. During the drawdown period it
could follow up a number of lines “including reporting on the chemical laboratory network
and links with Syria”.
841.  Mr Ehrman reported to Sir Nigel Sheinwald that the DIS had received five of the
six chapters of the draft Comprehensive Report, which would be considered for factual
accuracy and intelligence source protection.471 Mr Duelfer had made it clear he would
not accept any attempt to alter the judgements in the Report. Mr Ehrman stated that no
such attempts were being made.
842.  Mr Ehrman explained that the JIC was:
“… preparing a table showing key conclusions set against what the dossier and
JIC assessments said before the war … [T]he headline points can be summarised
as follows:
a) Strategic intent
Duelfer concludes that Saddam wanted to recreate Iraq’s WMD capability after
sanctions were removed. Though there was no formal written strategy or plan for
this, the ISG say they have clear evidence of his intent to do it. Saddam aspired to
develop a nuclear capability but intended to focus on ballistic missile and tactical
CW capabilities.
Iraq never intended to meet the spirit of the UNSC’s resolutions … By mid-2000
elements within Saddam’s regime boasted that the UN sanctions regime was slowly
eroding.
b) WMD capabilities
Duelfer judges that Iraq’s WMD capability was mostly destroyed in 1991 …
Saddam’s perceived requirement to bluff about WMD … made it too dangerous to
reveal this to the international community …
Duelfer says that the ISG has not judged conclusively whether or not Saddam
possessed WMD in 2003 …

470 
471 

Minutes, 17 September 2004, JIC Sub-Committee on Iraq/WMD meeting.
Minute Ehrman to Sheinwald, 17 September 2004, ‘Iraq Survey Group (ISG) Report’.

590

4.4  |  The search for WMD

c) CW
… There are no indications that Baghdad resumed production of chemical munitions
[after 1991] …
… the Iraqi Intelligence Service maintained from 1991 to 2003 a set of undeclared
covert laboratories to research and test various chemicals and poisons, primarily for
intelligence operations …
The ISG judges that Iraq had a capability to produce large quantities of sulphur
mustard agent within three to six months.
d) Nuclear
Saddam ended the nuclear programme in 1991. The ISG found no evidence to
suggest concerted efforts to restart the programme …
The ISG has uncovered no information to support allegations of Iraqi pursuit of
uranium from abroad in the post-Operation Desert Storm era …
e) Delivery systems
The ISG has uncovered no evidence that Iraq retained SCUD-variant missiles
(ie Al Husseins) …
… The ISG assesses that Saddam clearly intended to reconstitute long range
delivery systems and that the systems were potentially for WMD.
The ISG has substantial documentary evidence and source reporting indicating that
the regime intentionally violated various international resolutions and agreements in
order to pursue its delivery systems programmes.”
843.  Mr Ehrman recommended that the Government’s public lines on the
Comprehensive Report should focus on:

•	
•	

the Report’s confirmation of Saddam Hussein’s breaches of resolution 1441;

•	

the conclusion that sanctions and therefore containment were becoming
progressively less effective.

Saddam Hussein’s strategic intent to reconstitute his WMD when sanctions were
lifted; and

844.  Mr Ehrman advised that many of the ISG’s points had already been covered in
the Butler Report, but the ISG’s “central judgement, that Iraq’s WMD capability was
essentially destroyed in 1991 and not reconstituted by March 2003”, was “firmer than the
judgement Lord Butler had reached”.

591

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

845.  On 21 September, Mr Ehrman informed Sir Nigel Sheinwald that the UK had
received the final, BW, chapter of the draft Comprehensive Report.472 He explained
that the JIC had also been able to look at the detail of the section on illicit finance and
procurement.
846.  Mr Ehrman wrote that, on BW:

•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

•	
•	
•	

The ISG judged that Iraq appeared “to have destroyed its undeclared stocks of
BW agent”, but it lacked “evidence to document complete destruction”.
“Iraq retained some BW-related seedstocks until their discovery after Operation
Iraqi Freedom.”
After Operation Desert Storm, in 1991, Iraq “sought to save what it could of
its BW infrastructure and covertly to continue BW research, as well as to hide
evidence of that and earlier efforts”.
The ISG judged that Iraq “abandoned its existing BW programme, destroying the
facility at al Hakam” when the Iraq economy was “at rock bottom in 1995”.
The ISG had “found no direct evidence that Iraq, after 1996, had plans for a new
BW programme or was conducting BW-specific work for military purposes”.
The ISG judged that BW applicable research since 1996 “was not conducted in
connection with the development of a BW programme”.
“The Iraqi intelligence service had a series of laboratories that conducted
biological work including research into BW agents for assassination purposes
until the mid-1990s.” Experiments had been conducted on human beings,
who died, but there was “no evidence to link these tests with the development
of BW”.
“In spite of exhaustive investigation”, the ISG had “found no evidence that Iraq
possessed or was developing, BW agent production systems mounted on road
vehicles or railway wagons”.
The ISG judged that “the two trailers captured in 2003” were “almost certainly
designed and built exclusively for the generation of hydrogen”.
The ISG judged that “Iraq could have re-established an elementary BW
programme within a few weeks to a few months of a decision to do so, but it has
discovered no indications that the regime was pursuing such a course”.

847.  On illicit finance and procurement, Mr Ehrman reported that the findings included:

•	
•	

472 

Private companies from Jordan, India, France, Italy, Romania and Turkey
appeared to have engaged in possible WMD-related trade with Iraq.
The Governments of Russia, Syria, Belarus, North Korea, the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia and Yemen directly supported or endorsed private companies’

Minute Ehrman to Sheinwald, 21 September 2004, ‘Iraq Survey Group (ISG) Report’.

592

4.4  |  The search for WMD

•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

efforts to assist Iraq with conventional arms procurement, in breach of UN
sanctions.
The Governments of Jordan, China, India, South Korea, Bulgaria, Ukraine,
Cyprus, Egypt, Lebanon, Georgia, France, Poland, Romania and Taiwan
allowed private and/or state-owned companies to support Iraq’s conventional
arms procurement programmes.
The number of countries supporting Iraq’s schemes to undermine sanctions
increased dramatically between 1995 and 2003.
A number of bilateral trade agreements with “neighbouring” countries, including
Jordan, Syria, Turkey, Egypt and Yemen, eventually led to sanctions violations.
France was one of the top three countries with companies or individuals
receiving secret oil vouchers.
There was a significant amount of captured documentation showing contracts
between Iraq and Russian companies “close to government”.

Mr Blair’s speech to the Labour Party conference,
28 September 2004
In his speech to the Labour Party conference on 28 September, Mr Blair raised the issue
of trust and the decisions he had made on future security in the preceding three years.473
Mr Blair said that he wanted to deal with the issue of Iraq “head on”. He stated:
“The evidence about Saddam having actual biological and chemical weapons, as
opposed to the capability to develop them, has turned out to be wrong.
“I acknowledge that and accept it.
“I simply point out, such evidence was agreed by the whole international community,
not least because Saddam had used such weapons against his own people and
neighbouring countries.
“And the problem is, I can apologise for the information that turned out to be wrong,
but I can’t, sincerely at least, apologise for removing Saddam.
“The world is a better place with Saddam in prison not in power.”
Mr Blair challenged the “belief that the basic judgement I have made since September
11th [2001], including on Iraq, is wrong, that by our actions we have made matters worse
not better”. He acknowledged that the issue had “divided the country”, but set out his view
of the need to deal with the threat from the “wholly new phenomenon of worldwide global
terrorism”, including in Iraq, and the importance of the alliance with the US.

473 

BBC News, 28 September 2004, Full text of Blair’s Speech.

593

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

848.  On 28 September, Mr Ehrman sent Sir Nigel Sheinwald draft “lines to take” on the
ISG Comprehensive Report, excluding the section on illicit finance and procurement,
which Mr Duelfer was reported to be rewriting.474
849.  Mr Ehrman proposed that the focus should be on the three themes he had
identified in earlier minutes:
“•	 Saddam’s strategic intent to reconstitute his WMD when sanctions were lifted;

•	
•	

his repeated breaches of Security Council resolutions, including 1441;
the ISG conclusions on the progressive erosion of sanctions.”

850.  Mr Ehrman added:
“The lines to take also seek to deal with the main point which many will make (put
crudely ‘no WMD’) – mainly by reference to Lord Butler’s conclusions. We will be
asked: ‘Do you endorse/accept the ISG Report?’ I recommend that we stick to the
reference back to Butler, whose conclusions were very close to the ISG’s, and to the
fact that the Government accepted these. We cannot go further because we do not
accept Duelfer’s conclusion on uranium and Niger, which is the opposite of Butler’s.
Nor has Duelfer in most cases made clear the full reasoning behind his conclusions.”
851.  Mr Ehrman sent a further update on 1 October, explaining that the chapter on
procurement was still being worked on.475
852.  Mr Anthony Phillipson, Mr Blair’s Private Secretary for Foreign Affairs, sent
Mr Blair a minute on developments later the same day.476 Formal publication of the ISG
Comprehensive Report would be at 1500 UK time on 6 October. The US Government
would brief the US press at 1900 UK time on 5 October. The FCO was leading on UK
press handling and intended to take “a low-key, defensive, approach”. It was not a UK
report and there would be no UK pre-briefing. Mr Straw would issue a Written Statement.
853.  Mr Phillipson wrote that Mr Blair would:
“… want to discuss this on Monday [4 October], particularly if you want to take a
more proactive approach to get across the positive aspects of the Report regarding
Saddam’s strategic intent to develop WMD.”
854.  Mr Phillipson added that the US had decided that there would be two printed
versions of the Comprehensive Report, not one:

•	
•	

a “not for publication” version for Congress and the US Government; and
an online version with references to US companies and individuals excised for
legal reasons.

Minute Ehrman to Sheinwald, 28 September 2004, ‘Iraq Survey Group (ISG) Report’ attaching Paper
[unattributed], [undated], ‘Duelfer’s Comprehensive Report: Lines to Take’.
475 
Minute Ehrman to Sheinwald, 1 October 2004, ‘Iraq Survey Group (ISG) Report’.
476 
Minute Phillipson to Prime Minister, 1 October 2004, ‘ISG Report: Publication’.
474 

594

4.4  |  The search for WMD

855.  Mr Phillipson wrote that the US Government had rejected Mr Duelfer’s argument
that it should be sufficient to issue a disclaimer stating that naming companies in the
Report was not an indication of guilt or complicity; a published official CIA report could
not mention named US individuals or entities. The UK had pressed for the exclusion of
all such references, but the US position was that the legal restriction did not apply to
non-US entities. Presentationally, that approach was better than removing only US and
UK names; it emphasised that it was not the UK’s report.
856.  The other issue still to be addressed was the withdrawal of intelligence used
before the invasion to support assessments about Iraqi WMD programmes. No.10 was
discussing handling, including informing the ISC, with SIS.
857.  Sir Nigel Sheinwald and Dr Rice discussed the ISG Comprehensive Report on
4 October.477 Sir Nigel said that there had been good co-ordination between the US and
UK. He set out Mr Blair’s view on handling: the failure to find WMD stockpiles it should
be presented as “yesterday’s story” and the media should be encouraged to focus on the
new material about strategic intent, concealment and sanctions busting.
858.  Mr Blair raised the ISG Comprehensive Report with President Bush during a video
conference on 5 October.478
859.  Mr Blair’s brief for the conversation suggested that he tell President Bush that
the UK was focusing on the positive aspects of the ISG Report rather than the lack
of WMD.479
860.  During his wider discussion with President Bush on Iraq on 5 October (see
Section 9.3), Mr Blair stated that the ISG Report “showed that Saddam had a clear
strategic intent to develop WMD” and that “terrorists had now chosen to make
Iraq the battleground”.480 It would be naive to say that Iraq had been stable and
non-threatening before March 2003 and would still be so if no action had been taken.
Mr Blair concluded that:
“We needed to focus on the fact that sanctions had not been working, Saddam had
strategic intent to rebuild his capability, and even if he had no deployable weapons,
the enforcement regime wasn’t working and Saddam was gearing up for when it was
removed. We had to focus on the whole story.”
861.  The ISG Comprehensive Report was published on 6 October 2004.

Letter Sheinwald to Adams, 4 October 2004, ‘Conversation with US National Security Adviser,
4 October’.
478 
Letter Phillipson to Adams, 5 October 2004, ‘Prime Minister’s VTC with President Bush, 5 October:
US Elections, Iraq, Iran, MEPP’.
479 
Minute Phillipson to Prime Minister, 4 October 2004, ‘VTC with President Bush, 5 October’.
480 
Letter Phillipson to Adams, 5 October 2004, ‘Prime Minister’s VTC with President Bush, 5 October:
US Elections, Iraq, Iran, MEPP’.
477 

595

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

862.  In the ‘Scope Note’ introducing The Comprehensive Report of the Special Advisor
to the DCI on Iraq’s WMD (the ISG Comprehensive Report), Mr Duelfer stated that
the Report covered the ISG’s findings between June 2003 and September 2004.481
Since there remained “the possibility (though small) of remaining WMD”, reports of
WMD-related material in the future would continue to be investigated.
863.  The Comprehensive Report was divided into six sections, each opening with a
summary of key findings.482 Those included:
Regime Strategic Intent:

•	
•	

“Saddam Hussein so dominated the Iraqi regime that its strategic intent
was his alone. He wanted to end sanctions while preserving the capability
to reconstitute his weapons of mass destruction (WMD) when sanctions
were lifted.”
“Saddam wanted to recreate Iraq’s WMD capability – which was essentially
destroyed in 1991 – after sanctions were removed and Iraq’s economy
stabilized, but probably with a different mix of capabilities to that which
previously existed. Saddam aspired to develop a nuclear capability – in
an incremental fashion, irrespective of international pressure and the
resulting economic risks – but he intended to focus on ballistic missile
and tactical chemical warfare (CW) capabilities.”

Regime Finance and Procurement:

•	

•	

“Saddam directed the regime’s key ministries and governmental agencies to
devise and implement strategies, policies and techniques to discredit the UN
sanctions, harass UN personnel in Iraq, and discredit the US. At the same time,
according to reporting, he also wanted to obfuscate Iraq’s refusal to reveal
the nature of its WMD and WMD-related programs, their capabilities, and his
intentions.”
“Iraq under Saddam successfully devised various methods to acquire and import
items prohibited under UN sanctions …”

Delivery Systems:

•	
•	

“Desert Storm and subsequent UN resolutions and inspections brought
many of Iraq’s delivery programs to a halt.”
“While other WMD programs were strictly prohibited, the UN permitted Iraq to
develop and possess delivery systems provided their range did not exceed
150km. This freedom allowed Iraq to keep its scientists and technicians

Central Intelligence Agency, 30 September 2004, The Comprehensive Report of the Special Advisor to
the DCI on Iraq’s WMD, Volume I, ‘Scope Note’.
482 
Central Intelligence Agency, 30 September 2004, The Comprehensive Report of the Special Advisor to
the DCI on Iraq’s WMD.
481 

596

4.4  |  The search for WMD

•	

•	
•	

employed and to keep its infrastructure and manufacturing base largely intact …
This positioned Iraq for a potential breakout capability.”
“ISG uncovered Iraqi plans or designs for three long range ballistic
missiles with ranges from 400 to 1,000km and for a 1,000km-range cruise
missile, although none of these systems progressed to production and
only one purportedly passed the design stage. ISG assesses that these
plans demonstrate Saddam’s continuing desire – up to the beginning of
Operation Iraqi Freedom (OIF) – for a long range delivery capability.”
“Procurements supporting delivery system programs expanded after the
1998 departure of the UN inspectors. Iraq also hired outside expertise to
assist development programs.”
“… ISG assesses that Saddam clearly intended to reconstitute long range
delivery systems and the systems potentially were for WMD.”

Nuclear:

•	
•	
•	

“Iraq Survey Group (ISG) discovered further evidence of the maturity and
significance of the pre-1991 Iraqi Nuclear program but found that Iraq’s
ability to reconstitute a nuclear weapons program progressively decayed
after that date.”
“In the wake of Desert Storm, Iraq took steps to conceal key elements of
its program and to preserve what it could of the professional capabilities
of its nuclear scientific community.”
“As with other WMD areas, Saddam’s ambitions in the nuclear area were
secondary to his prime objective of ending UN sanctions.”

Chemical:

•	
•	
•	
•	

“Saddam never abandoned his intentions to resume a CW effort when
sanctions were lifted and conditions were judged favourable …”
“While a small number of old, abandoned chemical munitions have been
discovered, ISG judges that Iraq unilaterally destroyed its undeclared
chemical weapons stockpile in 1991. There are no credible indications that
Baghdad resumed production of chemical munitions thereafter …”
“The way Iraq organized its chemical industry after the mid-1990s allowed
it to conserve the knowledge-base needed to restart a CW program …”
“Iraq’s historical ability to implement simple solutions to weaponization
challenges allowed Iraq to retain the capability to weaponize CW agent
when the need arose …”

Biological:

•	

“ISG judges that Iraq’s actions between 1991 and 1996 demonstrate that
the state intended to preserve its BW capability and return to a steady,
methodical progress toward a mature BW program when and if the
opportunity arose.”

597

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

•	
•	
•	
•	

“ISG found no direct evidence that Iraq, after 1996, had plans for a new BW
program or was conducting BW-specific work for military purposes.”
“Nevertheless, after 1996 Iraq still had a significant dual-use capability
– some declared – readily useful for BW if the regime chose to use it to
pursue a BW program. Moreover, Iraq still possessed its most important
BW asset, the scientific know-how of its BW cadre.”
“Depending on its scale, Iraq could have re-established an elementary
BW program within a few weeks to a few months of a decision to do so,
but ISG discovered no indications that the regime was pursuing such a
course.”
“The IIS [Iraqi Intelligence Service] had a series of laboratories that
conducted biological work including research into BW agents for
assassination purposes until the mid-1990s. ISG has not been able … to
determine whether any of the work was related to military development of
BW agent.”

864.  In his memoir, Mr Duelfer wrote:
“I [did not] want the Report to tell people what to think up front: There was no
executive summary with a predetermined conclusion. The story of Iraq, sanctions,
and WMD was too intricate for that: It deserved to be seen in its entirety, without
single aspects being taken out of context.”483

The Government’s response to the ISG Comprehensive Report
865.  In the House of Commons on 12 October, Mr Straw described the ISG
Comprehensive Report as providing “chapter and verse as to why the policy of
containment was not working”.
866.  The following day, Mr Blair told the Commons:
“Those people who want to pray in aid the Iraq Survey Group in respect
of stockpiles of weapons must also accept the other part of what the
Iraq Survey Group said, which is that Saddam retained the intent and the
capability … and was in breach of United Nations resolutions. That is what
Mr Duelfer expressly said.”
867.  In the House of Commons on 12 October, Mr Straw stated:
“The [ISG] Report concludes that by the mid-1990s, Iraq was essentially free
of weapons of mass destruction, but it goes on to describe a sophisticated and
systematic campaign by Saddam Hussein to bring down the United Nations
sanctions regime and to reconstitute his weapons programme.
…
483 

Duelfer C. Hide and Seek: The Search for Truth in Iraq. Public Affairs, 2009.

598

4.4  |  The search for WMD

“The Report provides chapter and verse as to why the policy of containment was not
working.”484
868.  At PMQs on 13 October, Mr Blair stated:
“We know from the Iraq Survey Group that he [Saddam Hussein] indeed had the
intent and capability and retained the scientists and desire, but that he might not
have had stockpiles of actually deployable weapons. We have accepted that
and I have already apologised for any information that subsequently turned
out to be wrong.
…
“Those people who want to pray in aid the Iraq Survey Group in respect of stockpiles
of weapons must also accept the other part of what the Iraq Survey Group
said, which is that Saddam retained the intent and the capability – the teams of
scientists and so on – and was in breach of United Nations resolutions. That is what
Mr Duelfer expressly said. It was the breach of UN resolutions and their enforcement
that was and is the reason for going to war.”485
869.  On 28 October, in response to a Written Parliamentary Question from
Mr Llew Smith (Labour) asking for a list of the conclusions of the ISG Comprehensive
Report with which the Foreign Secretary did not agree, Mr Denis MacShane,
Foreign Office Minister, set out three principal areas of disagreement:
“The Iraq Survey Group (ISG) Report concludes that there is no evidence to suggest
that Iraq sought to procure uranium from Africa in the 1990s. The Government
continues to believe that credible evidence exists to support the assertion made in
the September 2002 dossier. Lord Butler of Brockwell’s Review upheld that belief.
The UK was not in a position to share all the intelligence on this issue with the ISG.
“The ISG also expressed doubt that the aluminium tubes referred to in the
September dossier were evidence of a resumption of Iraq’s nuclear programmes.
Again, Lord Butler’s Review assessed this, and concluded that the Joint Intelligence
Committee were right to include reference to the tubes in the dossier and that
it properly reflected doubts about the use of the tubes in the caution of its
assessments. The Government fully accepts the findings of Lord Butler’s Review.
“The ISG also report that they found no evidence to support the claim in the dossier
that Iraq ‘is almost certainly seeking an indigenous ability to enrich uranium’ based
on gas centrifuge technology. They do, however, admit that elements of useful and
relevant technologies were being developed.”486

House of Commons, Official Report, 12 October 2004, columns 151-152.
House of Commons, Official Report, 13 October 2004, column 278.
486 
House of Commons, Official Report, 28 October 2004, column 1386W.
484 
485 

599

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

Closure of the ISG and Addendums to the
Comprehensive Report
870.  Mr Duelfer visited London on 15 October on his way back to Iraq.487 He told a
DIS official that he expected to remain in Baghdad until about Christmas to work on
the remaining unresolved issues, including cross-border movement into Syria.
871.  In his memoir, Mr Duelfer described the energy for ISG activities as “almost
completely extinguished”.488 Mr McLaughlin and the White House supported the idea
of the ISG collecting more information to “close out the remaining uncertain issues”,
including the reported movement of WMD to Syria before the invasion, but most ISG
staff were now focused on the insurgency.
872.  On 28 October, Op ROCKINGHAM reported that the ISG continued to investigate:

•	
•	
•	

remaining stocks of CBW agents;
WMD infrastructure and associated individuals of concern; and
the Syrian connection.489

873.  The ISG was also revisiting priority WMD-related sites to document and secure
equipment of proliferation concern.
874.  On 8 November, two US military protection officers were killed in a convoy taking
Mr Duelfer and his deputy to a meeting in Baghdad to discuss the Syrian connection.490
After the incident, the US instructed that all ISG data-gathering missions should stop.
875.  Mr Duelfer left Baghdad on 16 December.491
876.  In April 2005, the ISG published additional material as Addendums to the
Comprehensive Report.
877.  On 23 December 2004, Mr Ehrman informed Sir Nigel Sheinwald that Mr Duelfer
planned to publish a version of the Comprehensive Report with a number of new
annexes, in the second half of January.492 The UK had received four annexes for factual
checking. The key points in the annexes included:

•	
•	

Residual proliferation risks from people and equipment/materials. Mr Duelfer had
concluded that the threat of proliferation of WMD skills beyond Iraq was “small”.
The value of Iraqi detainees to the ISG investigation. If the US agreed to
publication, this could cause the most interest. The draft annex stated that
pre‑conflict intelligence on people in the WMD programme was as inaccurate

Minute [DIS] to DCDI, 15 October 2004, ‘Iraq/ISG: Lunch with Charles Duelfer’.
Duelfer C. Hide and Seek: The Search for Truth in Iraq. Public Affairs, 2009.
489 
Op ROCKINGHAM Weekly, No.70, 21-28 October 2004.
490 
Op ROCKINGHAM Weekly No.74, 18-24 November 2004’.
491 
Duelfer C. Hide and Seek: The Search for Truth in Iraq. Public Affairs, 2009.
492 
Minute Ehrman to Sheinwald, 23 December 2004, ‘ISG Report on Iraq WMD’.
487 
488 

600

4.4  |  The search for WMD

•	
•	

as intelligence on WMD infrastructure and was very critical of the US debriefing
process.
Residual pre-1991 stocks in Iraq. The ISG believed that any remaining chemical
munitions did not pose a militarily significant threat to Coalition Forces. Iraq
had “never successfully formulated” BW agents “for long term storage”. Any
remaining BW agents thus posed little or no risk to Coalition Forces or civilians.
Iraq’s Military Industrial Commission. Reports that Qusay Hussein had asked
for a list of Iraqi BW experts to be compiled for him to pass to Syria and that an
Iraqi computer hacker claimed to be able to hack into US military satellites might
arouse some interest.

878.  A fifth annex containing an outline plan for future investigation of possible WMD
links with Syria was under consideration.
879.  Mr Ehrman did not expect publication of the annexes to attract major media
interest. He advised that the ISG would “effectively wind up” in January 2005, with
responsibility for WMD issues passing to the MNF in Baghdad.
880.  The ISG continued into 2005 as Mr Duelfer completed work, in Washington, on the
Addendums to the September 2004 Comprehensive Report.493
881.  On 25 February 2005, Mr Ehrman reported to Sir Nigel Sheinwald that the text had
been sent to the printers and was expected to be published in early to mid-March.494
He explained that the final version included an additional one-page annex on possible
pre-conflict movement of WMD out of Iraq. The ISG had been unable to rule out
unofficial movement of limited WMD materials, but judged it unlikely that an official
transfer had taken place.
882.  Mr Ehrman attached draft press lines prepared by the FCO and the MOD.
He advised that the main points remained unchanged:

•	
•	
•	

“Saddam had strategic intent to reconstitute Iraq’s WMD programmes when
sanctions were lifted”.
“Iraq repeatedly breached Security Council Resolutions, including 1441”.
“[S]anctions were progressively eroding before the conflict”.

883.  Mr Ehrman advised:
“If asked about the Report’s conclusion that, by the mid-1990s Iraq was essentially
free of WMD, we will refer to the Prime Minister’s statement of 28 September 2004
in Brighton that ‘evidence about Saddam having actual BW and CW weapons, as
opposed to the capability to develop them, has turned out to be wrong’.”
Op ROCKINGHAM Weekly No.94, 20-27 April 2005.
Minute Ehrman to Sheinwald, 25 February 2005, ‘ISG Report on Iraq WMD’ attaching Paper [MOD and
FCO], [undated], ‘The Publication of the Iraq Survey Group Final Report’.
493 
494 

601

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

884.  The DIS reported on 2 March that the ISG was to be deactivated by 18 April.495 It
would be absorbed into the Combined Intelligence and Operations Centre (CIOC), which
would retain WMD as a secondary role, after counter-insurgency and counter-terrorism.
885.  Shortly before the eventual publication of the final edition of the Comprehensive
Report on 25 April, Mr Ehrman sent Mr Sheinwald draft press lines, which had been sent
to the US for “one last check” that they did not conflict with US lines.496
886.  The main points included:

•	
•	
•	

“… [S]ix new addenda … do not fundamentally alter the findings of the earlier
Report”.
“Government has already accepted the ISG conclusion that by the mid-1990s,
Iraq was effectively free from WMD.”
“But have set out repeatedly why existence or otherwise of WMD does not affect
the legal basis for going to war.”

887.  Mr Duelfer ceased to be Special Advisor to the DCI on 21 April.497
888.  On 25 April, the final edition of the ISG Comprehensive Report, including six
Addendums, was published by the US Government.498
889.  The Addendums covered:

•	
•	
•	
•	

‘Prewar Movement of WMD Material Out of Iraq’. The ISG reported that declining
security had halted the investigation and the results remained “inconclusive”.
The ISG judged it “unlikely” that there had been an official transfer of WMD
material from Iraq to Syria.
‘Iraqi Detainees: Value to Investigation of Iraq WMD and Current Status’.
Detainees had provided “a vital primary source of information” on Iraq’s WMD
programmes and the regime’s strategic intent.
‘Residual Proliferation Risks: People’. There remained a danger that hostile
governments, terrorists or insurgents might seek Iraqi expertise. The number of
individuals was small, but they remained “an important concern”.
‘Residual Pre-1991 CBW Stocks in Iraq’. The ISG assessed that small numbers
of degraded pre-1991 chemical weapons would continue to be found, but did
not pose “a militarily significant threat to Coalition forces”. Any biological agents
that had survived would “probably have significantly decreased pathogenicity

Op ROCKINGHAM Weekly No.87, 23 February – 2 March 2005.
Minute Ehrman to Sheinwald, 21 April 2005, ‘ISG Report on Iraq WMD’ attaching Paper [unattributed],
21 April 2005, ‘The Publication of the Iraq Survey Group Final Report’.
497 
Op ROCKINGHAM Weekly No.93, 13-20 April 2005.
498 
US Government Publishing Office, 25 April 2005, The Comprehensive Report of the Special Advisor to
the DCI on Iraq’s WMD with Addendums.
495 
496 

602

4.4  |  The search for WMD

•	
•	

because Iraq never successfully formulated its biological agents for long-term
storage.”
‘Residual Proliferation Risk: Equipment and Materials’. The ISG judged
that Iraq’s remaining chemical and biological infrastructure did not pose a
proliferation concern. Some potential nuclear-related dual-use equipment was
missing, but the ISG had not established its “ultimate disposition”.
‘Iraq’s Military Industrial Capability – Evolution of the Military Industrialization
Commission’. Additional information on the MIC based principally on custodial
interviews with former senior members.

Report of the US Commission on the Intelligence Capabilities of the
United States Regarding Weapons of Mass Destruction, 31 March 2005
890.  The Commission on the Intelligence Capabilities of the United States Regarding
Weapons of Mass Destruction, established by President Bush on 6 February 2004,
published its Report on 31 March 2005.499
891.  In their covering letter to President Bush, the members of the Commission wrote:
“We conclude that the Intelligence Community was dead wrong in almost all of its
pre-war judgments about Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction. This was a major
intelligence failure. Its principal causes were the Intelligence Community’s inability
to collect good information about Iraq’s WMD programs, serious errors in analyzing
what information it could gather, and a failure to make clear just how much of its
analysis was based on assumptions, rather than good evidence …
“After a thorough review, the Commission found no indication that the Intelligence
Community distorted the evidence regarding Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction.
What the intelligence professionals told you about Saddam Hussein’s programs was
what they believed. They were simply wrong.”

JIC Assessment, 28 September 2006: ‘Iraqi Chemical Weapons:
Implications of Recent Finds’
892.  In September 2006, the JIC issued an Assessment considering recent US recovery
of chemical munitions, ‘Iraqi Chemical Weapons: Implications of Recent Finds’.500
It addressed:

•	
•	

a series of US-led operations to purchase chemical weapons in MND(SE);

•	

occasional individual finds.

recent US discoveries of canisters from a previously unidentified site at Taji,
a large military complex north of Baghdad; and

The Commission on the Intelligence Capabilities of the United States Regarding Weapons of Mass
Destruction, 31 March 2005, Report to the President of the United States.
500 
JIC Assessment, 28 September 2006, ‘Iraqi Chemical Weapons: Implications of Recent Finds’.
499 

603

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

893.  The Assessment stated that, in southern Iraq, “Some 545 sarin nerve agent
warheads for 122mm rockets had been recovered.” The UK did not know the original
sources or the sites from which the weapons had been recovered. The Assessment
judged that they had been produced before 1991 and were probably from forward
ammunition supply points, not the principal CW storage depot at Al Muthanna or any
other large depot. The warheads did “not constitute evidence of a concerted Iraqi
plan to retain chemical weapons covertly post-1991 in a viable state for future
use”. Their existence could be explained by a number of reasons, including careless
disposal, poor accounting or simple loss or abandonment. The Assessment also stated
that Iraqi sarin “had a relatively short shelf life”.
894.  The munitions recovered at Taji were “CW-capable” but no CW agents had been
identified.
895.  The Assessment stated that small numbers of munitions designed to carry agents
other than sarin had been recovered, “including 11 or 12 155mm mustard-based artillery
rounds”. None contained “more than residual traces of mustard”.
896.  The Assessment also stated:
“It is unlikely ever to be possible to reconcile the tens of thousands of 122mm
chemical weapons that the former regime declared it had manufactured, used and
destroyed with figures from UNSCOM or the findings of the Iraq Survey Group.
We judge that further recoveries of sarin-based chemical weapons are highly
likely, but we cannot estimate how many will be found in total.”

Conclusions
897.  This Section has considered the impact of the failure to find stockpiles
of WMD in Iraq in the months immediately after the invasion, and of the ISG’s
emerging conclusions, on:

•	
•	

the Government’s response to demands for an independent judge-led
inquiry into pre-conflict intelligence on Iraq; and
the Government’s public presentation of the nature of the threat from
Saddam Hussein’s regime and the decision to go to war.

898.  The Inquiry has not sought to comment in detail on the specific conclusions
of the ISC, FAC, Hutton and Butler Reports, all of which were published before the
withdrawal by SIS in September 2004 of a significant proportion of the intelligence
underpinning the JIC Assessments and September 2002 dossier on which UK
policy had rested.
899.  In addition to the conclusions of those reports, the Inquiry notes the
forthright statement in March 2005 of the US Commission on the Intelligence
Capabilities of the United States Regarding Weapons of Mass Destruction.

604

4.4  |  The search for WMD

Reporting to President Bush, the Commission stated that “the [US] Intelligence
Community was dead wrong in almost all of its pre-war judgments about Iraq’s
weapons of mass destruction. This was a major intelligence failure.”
900.  The evidence in this Section shows that, after the invasion, the UK
Government, including the intelligence community, was reluctant to admit, and to
recognise publicly, the mounting evidence that there had been failings in the UK’s
pre-conflict collection, validation, analysis and presentation of intelligence on
Iraq’s WMD.
901.  Despite the failure to identify any evidence of WMD programmes during preconflict inspections, the UK Government remained confident that evidence would
be found after the Iraqi regime had been removed.
902.  Almost immediately after the start of the invasion, UK Ministers and officials
sought to lower public expectations of immediate or significant finds of WMD
in Iraq.
903.  At the end of March 2003, Mr Scarlett informed No.10 that the Assessments Staff
considered that:

•	
•	

most sites associated with WMD production had been “cleansed over the last six
to nine months”; and
“the best prospect of exposing the full extent of the WMD programmes rests
in free contact with scientists, and other individuals, involved in the WMD
programmes and the (extensive) concealment activity”.

904.  On 21 April, Mr Straw expressed concern to Mr Blair that the Government was
being pushed into a position where it accepted that war would only have been justified if
there was a significant find of WMD.
905.  The post-invasion search for WMD did not start well. XTF-75, the US-led military
unit responsible for locating and securing personnel, documents, electronic files, and
material, achieved little on WMD. It failed to make significant finds or to prevent the loss
of potentially valuable information.
906.  By May, when the US announced the creation of the ISG to take over the search
for WMD, the absence of significant finds in Iraq was already generating critical media
comment on the nature of the pre-invasion intelligence.
907.  The UK Government employed the same arguments used to explain the
inspectors’ lack of finds – the regime’s skill at cheating and concealment and the need to
conduct interviews with key personnel – to explain the lack of any significant finds from
the early post-invasion searches.
908.  The Government sought to emphasise the complexity of the exercise and the time
needed for work to be completed.

605

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

909.  The early discovery of two mobile trailers was the most significant find, but the
trailers’ use for BW production remained unproven.
910.  The lack of evidence to support pre-conflict claims about Iraq’s WMD
challenged the credibility of the Government and the intelligence community, and
the legitimacy of the war.
911.  The Government and the intelligence community were both concerned about
the consequences of the presentational aspects of their pre-war assessments
being discredited.
912.  Although the US proposed the creation of the ISG in April, it was not launched
until 30 May. Mr Tenet appointed Dr Kay as the ISG’s first Head on 11 June and it was
another two months before Mr Scarlett was able to inform No.10 on 10 August that the
ISG was “fully operational”.
913.  By June, the Government had acknowledged the need for a review of
the UK’s pre-conflict intelligence on Iraq. It responded to demands for an
independent, judge-led inquiry by expressing support for the reviews initiated by
the ISC and the FAC.
914.  The announcement of the Hutton Inquiry into the circumstances surrounding
the death of Dr David Kelly on 18 July reinforced the Government’s position that
additional reviews were not needed.
915.  The Government maintained that position until January 2004, backed
by three votes in the House of Commons (on 4 June, 15 July and 22 October)
rejecting a succession of Opposition motions calling for an independent inquiry
into the use of pre-war intelligence.
916.  Mr Blair’s initial response to growing criticism of the failure to find WMD was
to counsel patience.
917.  In Washington on 17 July, Mr Blair told the media that he believed “with every
fibre of instinct and conviction” that he would be proved right about the threat from Iraqi
WMD, but that it was important to wait for the ISG to complete its work.
918.  In his Interim Report to Congress on 2 October, Dr Kay stated that the ISG had
not found stocks of weapons. He judged that, although it was “far too early” to reach
definitive conclusions, Saddam Hussein “had not given up his aspirations and intentions
to continue to acquire weapons of mass destruction”.
919.  Despite finding that Saddam Hussein had breached Security Council resolutions
and that he had intended to restart his WMD programmes as soon as he was able, the
ISG Interim Report did not change the tone of the public debate.
920.  After the publication of the ISG Interim Report, the Government’s focus
shifted from finding stockpiles of weapons to emphasising evidence of the Iraqi
regime’s strategic intent.

606

4.4  |  The search for WMD

921.  Mr Blair sought to redefine the public debate, shifting focus away from the failure
to find WMD and concerns about the reliability of intelligence towards efforts to counter
global proliferation and what he assessed to be the positive impact of military action in
Iraq on those efforts.
922.  On 5 October, in response to the failure to find “enough on WMD” and the
deteriorating security situation in Iraq, Mr Blair outlined to President Bush a new strategy
“to get us back on the high ground and get the public … to focus on the big picture”.
He concluded:
“WMD/terror remains the 21st century threat. Our global agenda is the only way to a
better future not just for us but for the world. We’re not going soft on it. We’re going
to be utterly determined on it, because it’s right.”
923.  In autumn 2003, the ISG faced increasing obstacles to its WMD investigations,
caused mostly by the deteriorating security situation, including:

•	
•	

constraints on ISG staff mobility;

•	

growing pressure from Washington to transfer resources from the search for
WMD to counter-insurgency.

a reluctance among Iraqi experts to talk openly about Saddam Hussein’s WMD
programmes; and

924.  The diversion of resources from WMD to counter-insurgency was reported to have
contributed to Dr Kay’s decision in December to resign as Head of the ISG.
925.  On 11 January 2004, in an interview with Sir David Frost, Mr Blair drew attention
to emerging evidence from the ISG of “clandestine operations that should have been
disclosed to the United Nations”. Mr Blair still believed weapons would be found, but
commented that “we just have to wait and see”.
926.  Points made in a Cabinet discussion on Iraq on 15 January included the
observation that public opinion continued to focus on the absence of WMD, while
the broader counter-proliferation story was inadequately covered.
927.  Pressure for an independent inquiry in the UK continued to grow.
928.  Secretary Powell’s comment on 24 January that it was an “open question”
whether Iraq held any stocks of WMD, widely reported in the UK media, caused the
UK Government considerable difficulty.
929.  The Government’s response was to try to keep “in very close step” with the US.
As late as 26 January, UK officials informed their US counterparts that the Government
would continue to argue that, after the ISC, FAC and Hutton, there was no need for a
further inquiry on intelligence.

607

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

930.  Once President Bush made clear his decision to set up an independent
inquiry, Mr Blair’s resistance to a public inquiry became untenable.
931.  By 29 January, the day after the publication of the Hutton Report, it was clear
to Mr Blair that President Bush intended to set up an independent US inquiry into
pre‑conflict intelligence before he was forced to do so by Congress.
932.  In his ‘Note on WMD’, sent to President Bush on 31 January, Mr Blair concluded
that, if it proved necessary to accept that some of the intelligence on Iraqi WMD was
wrong, it would be important not to “start pretending” that Iraq had nothing, or to
allow inaccuracies in the intelligence to distract the UK and US from “confronting the
WMD issue”.
933.  On 2 February, the same day as President Bush confirmed the imminent
announcement of a “bipartisan independent commission”, Mr Blair agreed to set up
a committee of Privy Councillors with wider Terms of Reference than the ISC inquiry,
looking at “intelligence on WMD in general, not just Iraq”.
934.  Mr Straw announced the creation of the Butler Review to Parliament on 3 February,
three days before President Bush signed the Executive Order establishing the
US Commission.
935.  After the announcement of the Butler Review, the UK Government’s focus
shifted to the content of the next ISG report, the Status Report.
936.  The Government, still concerned about the nature of the public debate on
WMD in the UK, sought to ensure that the Status Report included existing ISG
material highlighting the strategic intentions of Saddam Hussein’s regime and
breaches of Security Council resolutions.
937.  Mr Duelfer began work on the ISG Status Report shortly after replacing Dr Kay as
Head of the ISG on 23 January.
938.  During his call on Mr Blair in London on 9 February, Mr Duelfer stated that it was
his hypothesis that the regime’s strategy had been to outlast UN sanctions. He did not
believe that any judgements could be made until that was proven.
939.  In his memoir, Mr Duelfer recorded that, at that meeting, Mr Blair had been “very
well informed on the issue of WMD” and had given him the opportunity to go into the
issue in more depth than had been possible with President Bush or Dr Rice. Mr Duelfer
stated that Mr Blair had not made strong suggestions.
940.  Sir Nigel Sheinwald reported to Mr Blair on 4 March that Mr Duelfer had made it
clear that he would not accept “joint drafting” of his report. Sir Nigel had asked the FCO
and SIS to press their US counterparts and said that he and Mr Blair and he should raise
the issue with President Bush and Dr Rice.

608

4.4  |  The search for WMD

941.  Mr Scarlett sent Mr Duelfer “nuggets” from the September 2003 ISG Interim
Report, including on strategic intent, explaining that they were not intended as
drafting suggestions, but to identify existing ISG material worth highlighting. Many of
Mr Scarlett’s suggestions were incorporated into Mr Duelfer’s testimony to Congress
on 30 March.
942.  Mr Duelfer’s testimony received little publicity. Mr Blair was advised that, given
the security situation in Iraq, it would be extremely difficult to get further coverage in
anything other than negative terms.
943.  Mr Blair remained concerned about continuing public and Parliamentary
criticism of the pre-conflict intelligence, the failure to find WMD and the decision
to invade Iraq. After the reports from the Hutton Inquiry, the ISG and the US
Commission, he sought to demonstrate that, although “the exact basis for action
was not as we thought”, the invasion had still been justified.
944.  Mr Blair told President Bush on 16 June that he remained “deeply concerned”
about WMD. He expressed the wish that “if at all possible”, the reports of the Senate
Intelligence Committee, the Butler Review and the ISG “should have this issue dealt with
and lanced all at the same time”.
945.  Mr Blair suggested to President Bush that the truth on Iraq’s WMD was probably
that Saddam Hussein:
“… was developing long range ballistic missile capability in breach of UN resolutions;
he probably had no or no large stockpiles of tactical CW or BW weapons; but he
retained the capability and expertise to recommence production as soon as he
could, again in breach of UN resolutions …
“Such an explanation would mean that some of the intelligence upon which we acted
was wrong; but that nonetheless the threat was there, as was the breach of UN
resolutions. It would also explain why the picture was so confused and why, whilst
the exact basis of action was not as we thought, the action was still justified.”
946.  Mr Blair suggested that it might make sense to publish the ISG Comprehensive
Report at the same time as the Senate Intelligence Committee and Butler Reports to
“provide the clear evidential basis for saying there was indeed a threat, even if it was not
the threat that had been anticipated”.
947.  Immediately before and after the publication of the Senate Intelligence Committee
and Butler Reports on 7 and 14 July respectively, Mr Blair restated his conviction that
Iraq had posed a threat and that military action had been necessary to make progress in
Libya and elsewhere.
948.  On 6 July, Mr Blair told the Liaison Committee of the House of Commons that he
had to accept that stockpiles of WMD “might not be found”, but it was “absolutely clear”
that Saddam Hussein had the “strategic capability, the intent” and that he had committed
multiple breaches of UN sanctions.
609

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

949.  Mr Blair said that he still believed that Saddam Hussein had posed a threat.
Without military action against Iraq, there would not have been the progress there had
been on Libya, AQ Khan, Iran and North Korea.
950.  In his statement to the House of Commons after the publication of the Butler
Report, Mr Blair said that Saddam Hussein “retained complete strategic intent on WMD
and significant capability”.
951.  In July, Mr Blair told President Bush that the forthcoming ISG Comprehensive
Report could be a powerful argument in support of the war.
952.  Sir Nigel Sheinwald set out Mr Blair’s views on handling to Dr Rice on 4 October:
that the failure to find stockpiles of WMD should be presented as “yesterday’s story” and
the media encouraged to focus on new material about strategic intent, concealment and
sanctions busting.
953.  Mr Blair told President Bush on 5 October that the ISG Comprehensive Report
“showed that Saddam Hussein had a clear strategic intent to develop WMD” and that
“terrorists had chosen to make Iraq the battleground”.
954.  The ISG Comprehensive Report was published on 6 October. It stated that it had
been Saddam Hussein’s strategic intent to “end sanctions while preserving the capability
to reconstitute his weapons of mass destruction (WMD) when sanctions were lifted”, and
that in seeking to preserve that capability his regime had breached UN sanctions.
955.  Addressing the state of Iraq’s WMD programmes in the years between the 1991
Gulf Conflict and the 2003 invasion of Iraq, the Report concluded that:

•	
•	

Iraq’s WMD capability had mostly been destroyed in 1991.

•	

There was “no direct evidence” that, after 1996, Saddam Hussein had plans
for a new BW programme or was conducting BW-specific work for military
purposes.

•	
•	

There were “no credible indications” that Iraq had resumed production of
chemical munitions after 1991.

Iraq’s ability to reconstitute a nuclear weapons programme had “progressively
decayed” after 1991.
The 1991 Gulf War and subsequent UN resolutions and inspections had brought
many of Iraq’s delivery programmes to a halt, but because the UN had permitted
development and possession of delivery systems with a range of up to 150km,
Iraq was “positioned … for a potential breakout capability”.

956.  Mr Blair told the House of Commons on 13 October that:
“Those people who want to pray in aid the Iraq Survey Group in respect of stockpiles
of weapons must also accept the other part of what the Iraq Survey Group
said, which is that Saddam retained the intent and the capability – the teams of

610

4.4  |  The search for WMD

scientists and so on – and was in breach of United Nations resolutions. That is what
Mr Duelfer expressly said. It was the breach of UN resolutions and their enforcement
that was and is the reason for going to war.”
957.  The ISG’s findings were significant, but did not support past statements by
the UK and US Governments, which had focused on Iraq’s current capabilities and
an urgent and growing threat.
958.  The explanation for military action put forward by Mr Blair in October 2004
was not the one given before the conflict.

611

