ANNEX 5
HOW TO READ AND NAVIGATE THE REPORT
Structure of the Report
1.  The Executive Summary contains the Inquiry’s key findings and conclusions.
2.  The 17 Sections of the Report contain accounts of the relevant decisions and events,
the Inquiry’s full analysis and conclusions, and, where appropriate, lessons for the
future.
3.  The Sections address separate themes arising from the sequence of events between
2001 and 2009. In each Section the Inquiry draws on the available evidence to provide
an account of events, policy discussions and decision-making processes.
4.  The Inquiry does not present all its conclusions in the same way. Different topics
benefited from different approaches. In the Sections covering the period before the
invasion, conclusions are placed alongside the main evidence in a single Section. In
the majority of post-invasion material, the conclusions appear in separate analytical
Sections.

Use of bold text
5.  Bold text is used in the pre-invasion Sections of the Report to highlight Inquiry
comment and analysis, and to signpost or summarise key events. Bold text is not used
in post-invasion Sections. Throughout the Report, bold text is retained in quotes as it
appeared in the original.

Cross-referencing
6.  Cross-references to other Sections are used where an issue or event referred to in
one Section is addressed in more detail elsewhere.

Duplication of text
7.  Identical, or very similar, material can appear in two or more Sections where that aids
comprehension or is necessary for an accurate description of events.

Use of evidence
8.  The Report draws on material from a wide range of sources, including:

•	
•	
•	

UK Government documents;
transcripts of the Inquiry’s public and private hearings;
written submissions to the Inquiry;
325

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

•	
•	
•	
•	

Parliamentary records;

•	

meetings in the UK with Service Personnel and their families, and with UK
civilians who worked in Iraq; and

•	

documents published by the US Government and international organisations;
published memoirs and diaries;
academic papers, including papers produced to inform the two seminars
organised by the Inquiry;

views heard during visits to Iraq, the US and France by members of the Inquiry.

9.  The Inquiry presents that material in the form of gists, which summarise the key
points of a document or part of a document, and quotes. The source of each gist and
quote is given in a footnote.
10.  The Report quotes extensively from the full range of sources. To aid comprehension
the Inquiry has sought to standardise spellings, abbreviations and acronyms and the
representation of numbers, dates and times within quotes. All bold and italic text and
underlining appearing within a quote has been retained from the original.
11.  Where the meaning of a quote is uncertain or ambiguous, explanatory material has
been added in square brackets.
12.  US spellings are used for all US job titles and for US and international organisations
using US spellings in their names, and are retained in all quotes from US sources.

Documents published by the Inquiry
13.  Whole documents and extracts declassified by the Government, transcripts of the
Inquiry’s hearings and written submissions to the Inquiry are published on the Inquiry
website, with redactions where necessary.
14.  Where the Government has declassified a gist or quote from a document, but not
the whole document or an extract from it, there is no further material available to the
reader beyond the gist or quote in the Report.
15.  In the online version of the Report, hyperlinks in the footnotes take the reader to
documents published on the Inquiry website.
16.  The footnotes in the printed version of the Report do not distinguish between those
documents which have been published on the Inquiry website and those which have not.
17.  The Report does not include links to other published sources.
18.  The legibility of a small number of government documents published on the Inquiry
website is poor. In each case, the Inquiry has published the clearest copy available.

326

Annex 5  |  How to read and navigate the Report

Redacted evidence
19.  The Government has required redactions to certain documents under the terms
of the Protocol between the Iraq Inquiry and Her Majesty’s Government regarding
Documents and Other Written and Electronic Information. Those redactions appear
in three forms:

•	
•	
•	

as thick black lines in the transcripts of oral evidence given in private;
as blank white space in whole documents published by the Inquiry; and
as an ellipsis (three dots) within quotations in the text.1

20.  Certain categories of information have been withheld from publication under the
terms of the Protocols agreed between the Inquiry and the Government:

•	
•	
•	

views expressed by President Bush in conversations with Mr Blair;

•	

certain material on the activities of UK Special Forces and the names of
successive Directors of Special Forces, who are identified in the Report as
DSF1 to DSF3; and

•	

the reference numbers of JIC Assessments;
the names of SIS officers (other than C), who are identified in the Report as
SIS1 to SIS10;

a small number of other identities and capabilities that require protection and are
identified in the text by ciphers.

21.  The Inquiry has received some evidence which it has agreed to publish
anonymously in accordance with the criteria in paragraphs 4a and 4b of the Protocol for
hearing evidence by the Iraq Inquiry in public, and for identifying witnesses.

Unusual document types
22.  The Inquiry has published and makes reference to a wide range of written material.
Less familiar categories of official document include:

FCO telegrams
23.  Telegrams were electronically transmitted reports sent between the FCO in London
and British Embassies, Missions and Consulates overseas. Very occasionally they were
transmitted to or from other government departments and between overseas posts.
24.  All telegrams from the FCO in London were attributed to the Foreign Secretary.
The most important were seen by the Foreign Secretary in draft. All telegrams from
posts were signed, and almost always seen in draft by, the Head or acting Head of Post.
25.  All telegrams formed part of the FCO official record.
Not all ellipses represent a redaction. Some represent text omitted by the Inquiry for reasons of
relevance. All ellipses in square brackets represent redacted text.
1 

327

The Report of the Iraq Inquiry

26.  Telegrams to and from individual posts were numbered sequentially through the
calendar year, starting with “TELNO 1” on 1 January.
27.  All telegrams included a date time group using Greenwich Mean Time (GMT).
A telegram from the British Embassy Washington sent on “170356Z JULY 03” refers to
a telegram sent at 3.56am GMT on 17 July 2003 (11.56pm on 16 July in Washington;
4.56am on 17 July in London).
28.  A precedence marking signified the urgency of the telegram. “FLASH” indicated
a telegram to be seen immediately by the recipient. A telegram marked “DESKBY
170600Z” was to be available to the recipient at 6.00am GMT. The other designations
were “IMMEDIATE”, “PRIORITY” and “ROUTINE”.
29.  The FCO phased out telegrams during 2005. They were replaced by eGrams.

FCO eGrams
30.  The eGram, which replaced FCO telegrams during 2005, was used for significant
communications and formed part of the FCO official record. It offered much of the
flexibility of an email, including the ability to add attachments.
31.  Unlike telegrams, each eGram was assigned a unique number in a single FCO-wide
sequence starting at midnight GMT on 31 December. Paris eGram 127/06 to the FCO
was not the 127th eGram from Paris, but the 127th eGram sent on the system in 2006.

FCO teleletters
32.  Letters between named individuals sent electronically using the FCO telegram
system. Phased out in 2005.

Valedictories
33.  Reports from officials at the end of a tour of duty as the head of an overseas post.

Hauldown reports
34.  Valedictories sent by UK military commanders at the end of a tour of duty in Iraq.

Private Secretary letters
35.  Routine formal communication between government departments is often
conducted by means of a letter from one Ministerial Private Secretary to another. Such
letters should be interpreted as reflecting the views of the Minister, not of the signatory.
The importance of an issue can often be inferred from the seniority of the Private
Secretary. For instance, a letter from one Principal Private Secretary to another would
usually hold more weight than a letter from one junior Minister’s Private Secretary
to another.

328

Annex 5  |  How to read and navigate the Report

Names and ranks
36.  All names, honours, military ranks and job titles in the Report reflect the individual’s
position at the time of the event in question.
37.  Where the Report quotes written or oral evidence from a witness to the Inquiry, the
witness is identified according to their status at the time they gave evidence.

329

