UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775207 Date: 08/31/2015
RELEASE IN FULL
"The Giving Pledge" At-A-Glance
WHAT: Launched by Warren Buffett during the Summer of 2010, the Giving Pledge is an effort
to invite the wealthiest individuals and families in America to commit to giving the majority of their
wealth to the philanthropic causes and charitable organizations of their choice either during their
lifetime or after their death. Each person who chooses to pledge will make this statement publicly,
along with a letter explaining their decision to pledge. At an annual event, those who take the pledge
will come together to share ideas and learn from each other.
The Pledge is a moral commitment to give, not a legal contract. It does not involve pooling money
or supporting a particular set of causes or organizations. While the Giving Pledge is specifically
focused on billionaires, the idea takes its inspiration from efforts in the past and at present that
encourage and recognize givers of all financial means and backgrounds. We are inspired by the
example set by millions of Americans who give generously (and often at great personal sacrifice) to
make the world a better place.
WHO: The Pledge currently has forty participants, listed below in alphabetical order. To date, all
are American, although a dinner is scheduled in Beijing for September 29, 2010, in hopes of
generating interest for the Pledge among wealthy Chinese.
Bernie and Bill Marcus
Bernie Marcus
Thomas S. Monaghan
Tashia and John Morgridge
Pierre and Pam Omidyar
Bernard and Barbro Osher
Ronald 0. Perelman
Peter G. Peterson
T. Boone Pickens
Julian H. Robertson, Jr.
David Rockefeller
David M. Rubenstein
Herb and Marion Sandler
Vicki and Roger Sant
Walter Scott, Jr.
Jim and Marilyn Simons
Jeff Skoll
Tom Steyer and Kat Taylor
Jim and Virginia Stowers
Ted Turner
Sanford and Joan Weill
Shelby White
Paul G. Allen
Laura and John Arnold
Michael R. Bloomberg
Eli and Edythe Broad
Warren Buffett
Michele Chan and Patrick Soon-Shiong
Barry Diller and Diane von Furstenberg
Ann and John Doerr
Larry Ellison
Larry Ellison
Bill and Melinda Gates
Bill and Melinda Gates
Barron Hilton
Jon and Karen Huntsman
Joan and Irwin Jacobs
George B. Kaiser
Elaine and Ken Langone
Ken Langone
Gerry and Marguerite Lenfest
Lorry I. Lokey
George Lucas
George Lucas
Alfred E. Mann
UNCLASSIFIED U.S. Department of State Case No. F-2014-20439 Doc No. C05775207 Date: 08/31/2015
