W IN C K W Q R T B SHE R W O O D                                                                            35 Great Peter Street
                                                                                                            Westminster
SOLICITORS           ANO
                                                                                                            London SW 1P 3LR

Our ref:            SVm4332/\%                                                                              Telephone: 0207 593 5000
                                                                                                            Fax: 0207 593 5099
                                                                                                            DX: 2312 V IC T O R IA
                                    DEP/^S
Lord Williams of Mostyn QC                                                                                  Direct Line:                 0207 593 5107
                                                                                                            Direct Fax:                  0207 593 5044
The Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers
                                                                                                            Email: sbeastwood@winckworths.co.uk
Attomey-Generals Chambers
9 Buckingham Gate
London SW1E6JP                                                                                              13 October 1999




Dear Sir

HILLSBOROUGH PRIVATE PROSECUTION
ADLINGTON v DU CKENFIELD

We write with the benefit of Mr William Clegg QC’s advice, on behalf of David
Duckenfield to invite you to enter a nolle prosequi in relation to two counts of an indictment
he faces at the Crown Court sitting at Leeds.

The defendant was the senior police officer in charge of the Hillsborough Stadium at the
time of the disaster in April 1989 when 95 supporters died as the result of crushing. He has
been committed for trial on three counts by the Magistrates Court, two counts of
manslaughter and one of misfeasance in public office. We do not invite you to enter a nolle
prosequi in relation to these counts.

The remaining two counts of the indictment contain allegations of falsely telling persons
inquiring into the causes of the disaster, that the crush had been caused by spectators who
had broken down a gate, and of failure to correct the false belief relating to that cause,
induced by the alleged statements. Two counts are based on these allegations, firstly, a
charge of making statements tending and intended to pervert the course of justice, and
secondly, misconduct in public office. It is the history of these allegations that prompt this
invitation.

Originally the defendant was summoned on four charges, the three now represented by the
first three counts of the indictment and a fourth charge alleging that Duckenfield did an act
which had a tendency to pervert the course of justice.

On the 1st July 1998 we invited the Director of Public Prosecution to take over the conduct
of the proceedings under Section 6 of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 and to
discontinue them under Section 23. On the 18th December 1998 the Crown Prosecution
Service wrote indicating that they would not take over the proceedings and discontinue. We
sought further information in a letter of the 23 rd December and received a reply on the 1st




PARTNERS                       S T E P H E N W IG G S       R O G E R FITTO N     T IM W A T T S             The firm is a m em b e r of!
                               H U G H M ACDOUGALD          PA UL I R V I N G     JO H N HUDSON              an international netw o rk o f lawyers.
N IC H O L A S O W S T O N
B R IA N H O O D               J O H N REES                 RO N A LD FARRANTS    R A N JE E V RA I          The firm is regulated by The Law Society
PA U L M O R R I S             P E T E R WIL LIAM S         R O B E R T BOTKAI    CONSULTANTS                in the conduct o f investment business.
M IC H A E L T H A T C H E R   ANDREW MURRAY                SIM O N EA STW OO D   FRA N K R O B S O N OBE
A L IS O N G O R L O V         C H R I S T O P H E R VINE   NAOM I GOODE          G E O R G E BU LL*         *Non-solicitor tax consultant
Continued

February 1999 which stated, in reference to the allegations that Duckenfield had done an act
attempting to pervert the course of justice:-

       “I had formed the view that there was clearly no case to answer on that charge.”

There followed an application for judicial review before the High Court, judgment being
given on the 30th March 1999. Mr Newell writing on behalf of the Director swore an
affidavit that dealt with the position of partial intervention at paragraph 5 and 6. The Court
having considered the matter quashed the decision of the Director so far as it related to the
charge of attempting to pervert the course of justice.

Thereafter the Director reconsidered the question of intervention and discontinuance of that
charge and by letter dated the 12th April 1999 concluded:-

       “I have decided that the C.P.S. should take over that single charge in order to
       discontinue it... The reason is that there is clearly no case to answer on that charge”.

The committal then proceeded on the three remaining charges and Duckenfield was
committed for trial on the 20th July 1999. Thereafter an indictment was settled which
included the original charge discontinued by the Director and a further charge relating to the
same allegation.

It is against this background that the request is made for a nolle prosequi in relation to those
two counts.

The decision to discontinue the proceedings was made by the Director in the context of the
judicial review decision after hearing lengthy representations by both sides. It was not a
decision that was subject to any further application for judicial review, by the prosecutor.

If the only charge being faced by Duckenfield had been the charge discontinued by the
Director then clearly there could be no question of any indictment embracing those
allegations and the effect of the decision to discontinue would be to end the proceedings in
relation to that allegation. This, I anticipate, was the expectation of the Director.

To permit the prosecutor to reinstate those charges in the form of counts four and five in the
indictment would be to permit the prosecutor to effectively negate the decision of the
Director to discontinue. It is only the fact that in respect of other charges, not the subject of
this application, Duckenfield happened to be committed for trial independently of the
charges discontinued, that rendered this course of action possible. Clearly the ability to
indict a person ought not to be dependant upon circumstances such as those found in this
case.

We do not believe that there has ever been a case in the past where an indictment has been
drawn including charges previously the subject of a decision by the Director to discontinue.
It is submitted that the situation is unique and ought to be remedied by the entering of a
nolle prosequi in relation to counts 4 and 5 of the indictment. This would have the effect of
preserving the decision of the Director in relation to the allegations that are reflected in the
Continued

charges that he discontinued while permitting a trial to proceed in relation to the three
remaining charges that were not discontinued by the Director.

Enclosed with this letter is a copy of the indictment, a copy of the representation made by
each of the parties to the Director, the first decision of the Director and his subsequent
reasoned decision, the Affidavit of Mr Newell, the judgment of the Divisional Court and the
subsequent decision of the Director pursuant to that ruling.

A copy of this letter is being sent personally to Ms A. Adlington the prosecutor. She has
not instructed solicitors in private practice to act for her but is herself an employed solicitor
with the Liverpool City Council. We ask for an opportunity to respond to any
representations she chooses to make as in the past representations by the prosecutor have
inadvertently contained factual inaccuracies.

Yours faithfully




WINCKWORTH SHERWOOD




                                                3
L0198
