'$ 2 / ^ '            12:16                                                                                         NO.141         D01

                                                                                                                    053- $
                                                  The Rt   Hon J oh n M o m s QC MP
                                                                                                  9 B U C K IN G H A M GA TE

                                                                                                      LONDON S W t £ BJP
                                              H r     ? u iL
                                  1 5         - tik e tAl o CcrvfV.                          C        -   <k\j
 O i 71 6 2 8 1B8-*
                                                                                                          My
                                                                                                                                   <
     The Rt Hon Ja c k Straw MP       f                                         O c j< -
     Secretary of S tate for the Home Depart                                                f4r
     Home Office
     50 Q ueen Anne's Gate                                                                  {W/~ f c ? U v u ^ J Q ^
     LONDON SW1H9AT
                                                                                                          Cit^K'cA-
      12 February 1998


                                                                                                                               ■




                                                                                            ‘ flS C a v c D B Y
                                                                                                              n to
                                                                                                          M FEB 1998
                                                                                                   'i l £ 6F
     HILLSBOROUGH

     T hank you for your letter of 9 February 998 about the Report by Lord Ju stice
     S tuart-S m ith following his review of the evidence relating to the Hillsborough
     D isaster. You invited me to agree the im posed handling,

     The Report Is impressive and will, I be Hewe, command respect even though th e
     families of the Hillsborough victims are )ound to be disappointed. The Report
     clearly confirms that there is no basis for an application to the High Court
     u n d er Section 13 of the Coroners Act V\ 88 and I am content th at you should
     say th a t on my behalf whilst recognising; that l would have an ongoing duty to
     consider any fresh and cogent evidence which might later emerge. The sam e
     goes for th e DPP tn relation to her dec! ion on prosecution.

     The proposal to place tn the Library at t: le House of Commons the legal advice
     received by the DPP does, however, give rise to difficulty. Such advice attracts
     legal professional privilege and It is the firm policy of the DPP not to publish
     su ch detailed docum entation relating t< the merits of individual cases which
     have not been before the courts. T hen; are cogent reasons for not doing so
     w hich were recognised by the Philips Ro; -aI C om m ission on criminal procedure
     * not the least being the potential unfalrpess to those In respect of whom there
     h as been a decision not to prosecute.

      So far as the rem aining points in youi litter are concerned. I can see no basis
      for disagreeing with the view expressed tty Lord Ju stice S tuart-Sm ith about the
      preparation of evidence by the South Yorkshire police and would certain
      endorse the view that there is no >asls for revisiting the question of
      disciplinary proceedings or considering prosecution. 1 am content too with
      w hat you propose to say about aetioi, to eliminate
      A U / 1102/2
                                                                                                  r- ?i   tV:j St
                                                                                             ■"       '   '  e-
                                                                                                      G3A13b3H
                              t   -»a t m
                                        i »                nchrt i r i i i n   aa          ..r r r t it n tu'ShJVWHad Q1S1
2 4402/90/            12:16                                                           NO.141   P02




             between public inquiries and inquejj ts; you have already signalled your
             intention to tackle die abuse by polled officers who take advantage of medical
             retirem ent to avoid disciplinary proce;<dings.

             My officials will be happy to discuss       yours exactly w hat should be said
             about the reasons for not publishing ,t ie CPS docum ents referred to above. !
             should be grateful to see your pro]•dosed statem ent m draft and for the
             opportunity to comment.

             ™        ^ / T ' th,s lettor ,n drafl    asks that It be treated as a response
             on her behalf also.




                                                     ORRIS




       A O /1 102/2
DRAFT LETTER FROM THE ATTORNEY GENERAL TO:
The Rt Hon Ja c k Straw MP
Secretary of State for the Home D epartm ent
Home Office                                  C
50 Q ueen Anne’s Gate                         f
LONDON SW1H9AT

         February 1998




HILLSBOROUGH


T hank you for your letter of 9 February 1998 about the Report by Lord Ju stice
Stuart-Sm ith following his review of the evidence relating to the Hillsborough
D isaster. You invited m e to agree the proposed handling.


The Report is impressive and will, I believe, command respect even though the
families of the Hillsborough victims are bound to be disappointed. The Report
clearly confirms th a t there is no basis for an application to th e High Court
u n d er Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 and I am content th a t you should
say th a t on my behalf w hilst recognising th a t I would have an ongoing duty to
consider anyjxuly fresh and cogent evidence which m ight later emerge. The
sam e goes for the DPP in relation to h er decision on prosecution.


The proposal to place in the Library a t the House of Commons the legal advice
received by the DPP does, however, give rise to difficulty. Such advice attracts
legal professional privilege and it is the firm policy of the DPP not to publish
su ch detailed docum entation relating to the m erits of individual cases which
A G / 1 1 0 2/2
    have not been before the courts. There are cogent reasons for not doing so
K   w hich were recognised by the P hilips Royal Commission on crim inal procedure
    - not th e least being the potential unfairness to those in respect of whom there
    h as been a decision not to prosecute.


    So far as th e rem aining points in your letter are concerned, I can see no basis
    for disagreeing with the view expressed by Lord Ju stice S tuart-Sm ith about the
    preparation of evidence by the South Yorkshire police and would certain
    endorse th e view th a t there is no basis for revisiting the question of
    disciplinary proceedings or considering prosecution. I am content too with
    w hat you propose to say about action to eliminate or reduce the overlap
    between public inquiries and inquests; you have already signalled your
    intention to tackle the abuse by police officers who take advantage of medical
    retirem ent to avoid disciplinary proceedings.


    My officials will be happy to discuss with yours exactly w hat should be said
    about the reasons for not publishing the CPS docum ents referred to above. I
    should be grateful to see your proposed statem ent in draft and for the
    opportunity to comment.


    The DPP h as seen this letter in draft and asks th a t it be treated as a response
    on h er behalf also.




    A G /1102/2
A   ttorney g eneral



                       't T '—              ^   Vs

                                 *

                                     \s ^            V
