                   a. s. law                                                                  S

                                                                                             1212
                                                                                                         O          L

                                                                                                        Fax: 0151 707 2458
                                                                                                                            I    C       I       T          O          R          S


                                                                                                                                     E -m ail: e n q u i r ie s @ a s l a w . c o . u k
                   Myrtle Parade, Liverpool L7 7EL.     Telephone: 0151 707




                                                                                                       Please ask for
             The Attorney General,                                                                                              Mr Abrahamson
                                                                                                       Our ref.
                                                                                                                                EA KD 6526.4.1
                                                                                                       Your ref.
                                                                                                                                21st Nov.05




                                                                                            2 1 NOV 2005
             Dear Sir,                                                                                                  A
                                                                                                                                                             Partners:
                                                                                                                                                             Elkan Abrahamson
             RE KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS D E C E A S E ^
                                                                                                                                                              (Ext103)

                                                                                                                                                              Peter Simm
             We are instructed by Anne Williams, the mother o f Kevin Williams, and we are attaching to
             this letter a Memorial. We would be most grateful if you could give the Memorial Lesal Advisers:
             consideration and we look forward to hearing from you in due course.              AU,son Leary
                                                                                                                                                              (Ext103)
                                                                                                                                                              Rob Hill
             You will also find attached to this letter a personal letter from Anne Williams.                                                                 (Ext109)
                                                                                                                                                              Rachel Chapman
             Thank you in advance for your consideration.                                                                                                      (Ext109)


             Yours faithfully,

                                                         ■      V:    •   •




             D.E. ABRAHAMSON
                                                                                       ■-■ ,'V ■ :
                                                                              .   ..
                                                                                               '
             ENC                                                                                   :        \   .

                                                                                       ..
                                          ■'   '   "'     •


                                                                                                       ■"
                                                                                            v "■ ' /
                                                                                             -v

                                                                              -:. ■-, ■




                                                                                                                                                                            Immigration
                                                                                                                                                                             Law
“     "^Children
    5 / Law                                                   Regulated by the Law Society
IN T H E M ATTER OF T H E CO RO NERS ACT 1988

A N D IN T H E M ATTER OF T H E D E A T H OF:




                    KEVIN D A N IE L WILLIAMS (deceased)



T O H E R MAJESTY’S A T TO R N E Y GENERAL:


   T H E H U M BLE M EM ORIAL OF A N N E WILLIAMS (M O T H E R OF
                         KEVIN WILLIAMS)

SH E W E ITH T H A T : -


   1. Your memorialist is : -


      Anne Williams, m other o f Kevin Williams (deceased).


   2. The background to this application is the tragic incident that occurred on 15th
       April 1989 at Hillsborough football ground. Your memorialist’s son, Kevin
       Williams, was one o f the ninety-six victims who lost their lives following the
       tragedy.


   3. Your memorialist humbly requests you grant leave under section 13(l)(b)
       Coroners Act 1988 to apply to the High Court for the inquest verdict to be
       quashed and a fresh inquest held. The grounds for this request are
       insufficiency o f inquiry and discovery o f new facts or evidence.


BACKGROUND FACTS
   4. O n 15th April 1989 Kevin Williams went to Sheffield to watch Liverpool play
       Nottingham Forest in the semi-final o f the Football Association Cup at
       Sheffield Wednesbury’s football ground, Hillsborough Stadium. The kick-off
       o f the match was scheduled for 3pm. Prior to kick-off there was a huge build
       up o f supporters outside the Leppings Lane entrance to the ground which in



                                                                                     1
       turn caused pressure on those trying to get into the ground through the
       turnstiles.


   5. At 2.52 pm Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, who was the police officer in
       charge o f crowd control at the match, decided to let the gates at the Leppings
       Lane entrance be opened in order to relieve the pressure at the turnstiles. The
       opening o f one o f the gates, gate C, resulted in a sudden influx o f about two
        thousand supporters through the gate, the great majority o f whom went on
       through a tunnel and into spectator pens 3 and 4. These pens were capable o f
       holding just over a thousand persons each, bu t they were already full. The
        result was the build up o f an intolerable pressure on the supporters at the
        front o f the pens.


    6. The match started at 3:00 pm. The pressure in the pens intensified and
        supporters were crushed against the wall at the front o f the pens and suffered
        severe crush injuries. The match was stopped at 3.05 pm. A t 3:13pm the first
        St John’s Ambulance crew arrived, the first emergency services to arrive on
        site. A major incident vehicle was called at 3:29pm, arriving at 3:45pm. Dr.
        Curpen who attended certified Kevin dead at 4:06pm.


    7. In total 96 people were killed and some 400 were physically injured. The great
        majority o f those who were killed had been in pen 3, but at least five were in
        pen 4.


The Inquest and the Taylor Inquiry
    8. Following the incident, on 17th April 1989, the then Secretary o f State for the
        Home Departm ent ordered Lord Justice Taylor, as he then was, to conduct an
        inquiry “into the events at Sheffield Wednesbury football ground on the 15th
        April 1989 and to make recommendations about the needs o f crowd control
        and safety at sports events.” The West Midlands police were appointed to
        investigate the incident and gather evidence for the Taylor Inquiry and to




                                                                                      2
        assist H er Majesty’s Coroner for South W est Yorkshire, Dr. Popper, who was
        to conduct the inquest into 951 o f the deaths.


    9. O n 18th April 1989 the Coroner formally opened and adjourned the inquest.
        O n 4th August 1989 the interim report o f Lord Justice Taylor was published
        (the final report was published in January 1990). Lord Justice Taylor found
        that there was a number o f causes for the disaster. The immediate cause was
        the failure, when gate C was opened, to cut off access to the central pens
        which were already overfull.           He criticised senior officers for “failure o f
        control” . He also recommended all seater stadiums.


    10. The Director o f Public Prosecutions (“D PP”) was asked to consider bringing
        criminal charges arising out o f the incident. The Coroner was informed o f this
         and decided that the inquests could not be completed until the D PP had
        decided whether or not criminal proceedings were to take place. However,
         following receipt o f a letter from a solicitor connected with the Hillsborough
         Steering Committee, the Coroner reconsidered this decision in February 1990
        and following consultation with the D PP he decided that the inquests could
        resume on a limited basis. The Coroner decided that he would not at this
         stage deal with the question o f “how” the deceased died but just the questions
        o f “who”, “when” and “where”. The Coroner recognised however that the
        evidence would have to be carefully adduced such that there could be no
        possible prejudice to any criminal investigations, should there be any.


    11. The Coroner therefore decided that the questions o f who, when and where
        should be determined at a preliminary inquests (or “mini-inquests”) for each
        o f the 95 individuals who had died with the issue o f “how” being held over
        until a decision on criminal proceedings was reached. H e also decided that in
        order to minimise the risk o f prejudicing the criminal investigation the factual
        evidence for the first part o f the inquest should be put in the form o f
         summaries by W est Midlands police officers.


1 T he 96th victim, Tony Bland, did not die until 1992 after a prolonged period in a persistent
vegetative state.



                                                                                                  3
12. There then followed a serious o f “mini inquests”, lasting from 18th April to
   4th May 1990. At these “mini” inquests” the W est Midlands Police officers
   summarised statements relating to each deceased individual. The officers
   summarised for each o f the 95 cases the effect o f the evidence they had
   gathered and collected in the course o f their investigation.    The evidence
   given by the officers (hearsay evidence) was given on oath; the written
   summaries themselves were not evidence.


13. Evidence was also given at these mini inquests by four pathologists who had
   carried out all the autopsies within forty-eight hours o f the incident. In the
   majority o f cases the cause o f death was given as traumatic asphyxia and it
   was said that the individuals would have been unconscious within a matter o f
   seconds and would have died within a matter o f minutes thereafter.


14. In relation to Your memorilst’s son Kevin Williams, on 2 May 1990 evidence
   was summarised from a statement made by S.P.C. Martin dated 8 May 1989
   (see A N N EX A), who helped carry Kevin off the pitch into the gymnasium.
   The evidence indicated that Kevin was still alive at 4pm. In her statement
   S.P.C Martin said that Kevin had opened his eyes and muttered the word
   “m um ” after he had been taken to the gymnasium. In addition in P.C.
   Bruder’s statement dated 27th April 1989 (see A N N EX B), which was also
   only summarised, suggested that Kevin was possibly still alive after 3:15pm;
   he had reported seeing Kevin having convulsions and o f feeling a pulse (in
   summarising the evidence the officer omitted that P.C. Bruder had also seen
   Kevin vomit).


15. However, D r Slater, the pathologist, in his evidence said that Kevin’s death
   m ust have occurred before S.P.C Martin attended Kevin. While Dr. Slater
   offered an explanation for the muttering o f the word “m um ”, the convulsions
   and the detection o f a pulse after 3:15pm, Dr. Slater could give no explanation
   for the opening o f the eyes.




                                                                                 4
16. The following day, on 3 May 1990 P.C. Bruder amended his statement (see
   A N N EX C) and this amended statement was presented to the Coroner on 4th
   May 1990. In this statement P.C. Bruder said that what he thought was
   convulsions may have been “twitching”, that he may have been wrong about
   feeling a pulse and that while he originally said he saw Kevin be sick (this
   evidence was not included in the summary evidence presented earlier) he now,
   while clear he saw fluid coming out o f Kevin’s mouth, could not discount the
   possibility that this may have been just spittle or phlegm. P.C. Bruder’s
   amended statement went on to say that he was sure both now and with the
   benefit o f further training that at the point that he, and a St. John’s ambulance
   man, gave up trying to resuscitate Kevin while he was on the pitch, he was
   dead.


17. D r G um pert was called to give evidence and he agreed with Dr. Slater that by
   3.15pm Kevin had received injuries that would have meant that he was going
   to die, and that he probably died before he got out o f the area in which he
   was standing. Mr and Mrs Williams did not hear this new evidence being
   given as they were told they did not need to attend the inquest on 4th May
   1990.


18. There was then a delay while the D PP's decision as to whether to prosecute
   was arrived at. In September 1990 the Coroner was told that the D PP had
   decided not to prosecute anyone in respect o f the disaster and so the inquest
   into the question o f “how” the deceased died began on 19th November 1990.


19. Before the inquests recommenced, at a meeting held on 30th October 1990,
   the Coroner informed the legal representatives and interested parties that he
   had preliminarily decided to impose a cut-off time for the evidence he would
   hear o f 3.15 pm, this being the time o f the arrival o f the first ambulance. He
   took the view that on the overwhelming pathological evidence available to
   him that permanent irrecoverable damage had by then been suffered by all the
   deceased. In reaching this preliminary view the Coroner also took into
   account the Interim report o f the Taylor inquiry. Mr Timothy King of



                                                                                   5
   counsel, appearing for 43 o f the families including Your memorialist (who had
   been junior counsel in the Taylor inquiry), argued against that cut-off
   primarily on the ground that there was material to support the proposition
   that not all the victims were necessarily dead by 3.15 pm.


20. O n the morning o f the resumed inquest, 19th Novem ber 1990, Mr King made
   further representations, in the absence o f the jury, against the imposition o f
   the cut o ff time. O ne o f the points he made was that up to this point there
   had been no investigation or systemic analysis o f what was the organisation o f
   the rescue, what it might have been, and whether it would have made a
   difference. Mr King also made reference to material, in particular from D r
   Ashton, that the medical and rescue attempt were disorganised.


21. The Coroner was not persuaded, he reminded Mr King that the inquest was
   not a judicial inquiry and the inquest therefore proceeded on the basis o f the
   cut o ff time o f 3:15pm.


22. The evidence that was called at the resumed inquest concerned the arrival o f
   people to the outskirts o f town, evidence as to how they approached closer to
   the ground, evidence about the entrance o f the crowd to the ground, the
   opening o f the gates, the concourse and the tunnel and the way in which
   people went to the terraces. Evidence was also called about the broken
   barrier.



23. But at this resumed inquest into “how” the deceased died no evidence was
   called, and there was no inquiry into, the adequacy o f the emergency response,
   its planning, or its possible effect on the death on Kevin Williams.


24. In summing up the Coroner left to the jury the verdicts o f unlawful killing,
   accidental death and an open verdict. The Coroner indicated to the jury that
   under Rule 36(b) no rider should be attached to any verdict. Attention was
   also drawn to Rule 42.




                                                                                 6
        Superintendent Ducken field four charges o f neglect o f duty and one o f
        discreditable conduct. However in November 1991 Chief Superintendent
        Duckenfield was allowed to retire on health grounds and the disciplinary
        charges against him were not proceeded with.


    29. On 13th January 1992 the Police Complaints Authority directed that the
         charge against Superintendent Murray be discontinued on the ground that it
        would be inappropriate and unjust to pursue the charge against him when the
        charges against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield had lapsed.


Request made to Attorney General.
    30. In 1992 a request was made to the Attorney General to refer the case back to
        the Divisional court on the basis o f new evidence. This request was rejected.


Judicial 'Review

    31. O n 6th April 1993 relatives o f six o f the deceased were granted permission by
         Macpherson J to judicially review the inquest verdict o f accidental death. On
         5th Novem ber 19943the Divisional Court refused to quash the verdicts o f
         accidental death (see A N N EX I).


hard Justice Stuart-Smith Inquiry
    32. In June 1997 the H om e Secretary ordered a “Scrutiny” o f the evidence by
        Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith sat in private and there
        was no opportunity to cross-examine any witnesses and there was no access
        to details o f meetings held with the various parties. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
        published his report in February 1998 (see A N N EX J). The H om e Secretary
         accepted the findings stating that there were no grounds to order a fresh
        inquiry.


Private Prosecutions

    33. In June 1998 the Hillsborough Family Support Group (“H FSG ”) commenced
        private prosecutions against former Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
        Superintendent Murray alleging two specimen charges o f unlawful killing and



                                                                                         8
       wilful misfeasance in public office. In July 1998 both the Defendants applied
        to the D PP to take over the prosecutions and discontinue them, this was
       refused and appeals on this point all failed.


   34. The Defendants were committed to stand trial at Leeds Crown Court on 6th
       June 2000.         The trial took place between 6th June to 24th July 2000.
        Superintendent Murray was acquitted on 20 July 2000. O n the 24 July 2000,
        the jury announced that they could not reach a verdict on Chief
        Superintendent Duckenfield. O n 26 July 2000, the HFSG made an application
        for a re-trial o f Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, this was refused by Judge
        H ooper on the grounds that Chief Superintendent Duckenfield would not get
        a fair trial.


LEGAL FRAMEW ORK
The Coroners A c t 1988

    35. Section 13 (1) o f the Coroners Act 1988 states that:
                 “13. - (1) This section applies where, on application by or under the
                 authority o f the Attorney General, the High Court is satisfied as
                 respects a coroner (“the concerned”) either -
                             (a) that he refuses or neglects to hold an inquest which
                             ought to be held; or
                             (b) where an inquest has been held by him, that (whether
                                 by reason o f fraud, rejection o f evidence, irregularity o f
                                 proceedings, insufficiency o f inquiry, the discovery o f
                                 new facts or evidence or otherwise) it is necessary or
                                 desirable in the interests o f justice that another inquest
                                 should be held.”


   36. Section 13 therefore requires the Attorney General to grant leave to apply to
        the High Court for another inquest to be held where there has been
        “insufficiency o f inquiry” a n d /o r the discovery o f new facts, where it is
        necessary or desirable that a new inquest be held. (See further below as to
       meaning o f “insufficiency o f inquiry”)



                                                                                            9
The Right to U fe and Inquests
    Article 2
    37. Article 2 o f the European Convention o f Human Rights, as relevant, states:
            “ 1. Everyone’s right to life shall be protected by law. N o one shall be
            deprived o f his life intentionally save in the execution o f a sentence o f a
            court following his conviction o f a crime for which this penalty is
            provided by law. . . . ”


    38. Article 2 includes both a substantial right and a procedural right (sometimes
        referred to as an adjectival right). It is clear from the case law o f the European
        Court that the procedural requirements under Article 2 includes the right to
        an “effective investigation” where there is a possibility that Article 2 may have
        been violated. An effective investigation requires that (i) an investigation is
        carried out by an independent body, (ii) it is thorough and rigorous, (iii) it is
        capable o f imputing responsibility for the death, (iv) if agents o f the state are
        responsible it must be capable o f determining whether the killing was or was
        not justified under Article 2(2), (v) if initiated on the basis o f a criminal
        complaint, the complainant m ust be able to take part in the proceedings and it
        m ust enable effective involvement o f the next o f kin. (See Jordon v. United
        Kingdom (2003) 37 E.H.R.R. 2. para.109).


    Article 2 and inquests

    39. Article 2 has had an impact on the manner in which inquests are conducted in
        England and Wales. In R v SSHD. ex parte Amin and Middleton [2002] 3
        WLR 505, the Court o f Appeal recognised that Article 2 imposed “an
        adjectival procedural obligation to investigate deaths where arguably there has
        been a breach o f the substantive obligation.” Where Article 2 is engaged it is
        necessary that the inquest reach a determination on all matters o f fact central
        to the case. In R ("On the application o f M ID D LETO N ) v HM Coroner for
        the Western District o f Somerset & Anor [2004] 2 WLR 800 at paragraph 20
        the H ouse o f Lords stated that:




                                                                                        10
           “To meet the procedural requirements o f Article 2 an inquest ought
           ordinarily to culminate in an expression, however brief, o f the jury’s
           conclusion on the disputed factual issues at the heart o f the case”

   and at paragraph 46 that

           “By one means or another the Jury should, to meet the requirements
           o f Article 2, have been permitted to express their conclusions on the
           central facts” .


40. Additionally the family o f the deceased also have rights in respect o f an
   investigation into the death o f a family member. It was recognised in Jordan v.
   U K 37 EH RR 52 at para. 109, that the deceased’s family or next-of-kin have
   legitimate interests in the conduct o f the case, which is why they must be
   accorded the appropriate level o f participation (see R (Amin v Secretary o f
   State for the Hom e D epartm ent [2003] 3 WLR 1169). In Middleton the
   House o f Lords noted that one o f the purposes o f an Article 2 investigation
   was that “those who have lost their relative may at least have the satisfaction
   o f knowing that lessons learned from his death may save the lives o f others”
   (paragraph 18, quoting from Amin paragraph 31).


41. Article 2 is engaged in cases where agents o f the sate or the state has either
   taken life or failed to protect or safeguard life in circumstances where it has an
   obligation to do so. The European Court o f Human Rights has stated that
   Article 2 does not solely concern deaths resulting from the use o f force by
   state agents but also lays down a positive obligation on states to take
   appropriate steps to safeguard life. Article 2 provides both a negative right o f
   individuals not to have life taken away arbitrarily and imposes a positive
   obligation on the state to protect life. In Osman v UK (1998) 29 EHRR 245,
   the European Court o f Human Rights (ECtHR) held that:

           “For a positive obligation to arise, it m ust be established that the
           authorities knew or ought to have known at the time o f the existence
           o f a real and immediate risk to the life o f an identified individual from
           the criminal acts o f a third party and that they failed to take measures
           within the scope o f their powers which judged reasonably, might have
           been expected to avoid that risk.” [para. 116].




                                                                                   11
   42. This obligation m ust be construed as applying in the context o f any activity,
       whether public or not, in which the right to life might be at stake (for recent
       example see Oneryildiz v Turkey, (App. No. 48939/99), judgment o f
       Novem ber 30, 2004).


   43. There is therefore an obligation on the state to conduct an “effective
       investigation” , involving the family or next-of-kin o f the deceased into the
       death o f an individual where the state may have failed in its positive obligation
       to safeguard or protect life. A failure to conduct such an investigation will
       amount to a violation o f Article 2.


The Human Rights A c t 1998
   44. Section 3 o f the Human Rights Act 1998 (“HRA”) states that:
               3. - (1) So far as it is possible to do so, primary legislation and
               subordinate legislation m ust be read and given effect in a way which is
               compatible with the Convention rights.

                   (2) This section-

                      (a) applies to primary legislation and subordinate legislation
                      whenever enacted;

                      (b) does not affect the validity, continuing operation or
                      enforcement o f any incompatible primary legislation; and

                      (c) does not affect the validity, continuing operation or
                      enforcement o f any incompatible subordinate legislation if
                      (disregarding any possibility o f revocation) primary legislation
                      prevents removal o f the incompatibility


   45. Section 13(1) o f the Coroners Act 1988 must therefore now be interpreted
       and given effect to in a way which is compatible with Convention Rights and
       this is so even though both the death o f Kevin Williams and the inquests and
       inquiries happened before the coming into force o f the Human Rights Act
       1998 (see Commissioner o f Police for the Metropolis v Christine H urst [2005]
       EWCA 890,21st July 2005,        Times, August 11, 2005;Independent, July 28,
       2005). N othing on the face o f s.3 suggests that it should not be effective
       when events preceding commencement o f the HRA are under consideration.



                                                                                      12
         It is submitted that “insufficiency o f inquiry” m ust now therefore be read to
         include w hether the inquiry was such as to comply with Article 2 o f the
         European Convention o f Human Rights. If the inquiry is not so “sufficient”
         then the Attorney General should grant leave to apply to the High Court for
         the inquest verdicts to be quashed and a fresh inquest held. Sufficient inquiry
         under Article 2 includes one that is thorough and rigorous, independent and
         capable o f imputing responsibility for the death.


C O N C L U D IN G SUBM ISSIO NS
(* round one: Insufficiency of Inquiry

    46. It is submitted that there has been an “insufficiency o f inquiry” in the case o f
         Kevin Williams in that the requirements o f Article 2, which is clearly engaged
         in this case, have not been met. In particular because there has no
         independent public investigation into the emergency response, and no
         independent public investigation into the emergency planning for the event
         and w hether any failings had an impact on the death o f Kevin Williams.


    47. A t the Coroner’s inquest where the question o f “how” Kevin Williams died
         was considered no evidence was heard concerning matters after 3:15pm, there
        was therefore no consideration o f the adequacy o f the emergency response or
         its planning. In particular evidence from all the relevant ambulance crew was
         not heard. Although at the “mini inquest” where the question o f “when”
         Kevin died evidence was heard concerning events immediately after 3:15pm,
        this was only presented through the summary o f evidence collected by the
        W est Midlands police and no such evidence was presented at the “how”
        inquest. The question o f “when” Kevin died and “how” Kevin died are
        intimately connected, and a thorough investigation into the “how” Kevin died
        was therefore not possible without considering evidence concerning the
        events after 3:15pm, and evidence concerning the planning and organisation
        o f the emergency services.


    48. Crucial evidence about how Kevin died was no t heard at the resumed second
        inquest; the jury did n o t hear conflicting evidence about when Kevin was alive



                                                                                       13
01/11 2005 19:52 FAX 020 7404 2283            DOUGHTY STREET                                            @0 03




                   during the consideration o f “how” Kevin died. The Coronet decided that
                   Kevin could not have survived his injuries and imposed the 3:15pm cut off-


               49. The Coroner’s summing up (quoted at p. 51 para 65 o f Lord Justice Stuart-
                   Smith inquiry, see ANNEX J) is not consistent with p. 49, paragraph 56 o f
                   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report Clearly some deaths could have been due
                   to failure o f emergency treatment; evidence concerning the emergency
                   response does therefore go to the issue o f “how” the death occurred. It is
                   submitted that Kevin Williams was dearly alive for a period o f rime when it
                   could reasonably be expected that emergency services could have reached
                   him. It is therefore relevant to know whether there was any lack o f care
                   involved in the planning, organising and response o f the emergency services.


               50. In addition the jury were never able to reach a “conclusion on [all) die
                   disputed factual issues at the heart o f the case”, the disputed factual issue
                   being the response o f the emergency services and the effect it may have had
                   on Kevin’s death, as required by Arri.dc 2 (see Middleton, paragraph 20, as
                   quoted in paragraph 3 9 above).


                51. Further there was no independent investigation into the inddent; the South
                   Yorkshire Police arc not sufficiently independent o f the Midlands police to
                   satisfy the requirement to undertake an independent investigation. It was die
                   West Midlands police who summarised for the inquest the effect of the
                   evidence they had gathered and who provided the evidence for the DPP. The
                   inquest was not therefore provided with evidence suffidendy independent to
                   satisfy the requirements o f Artidc 2 and there has therefore been an
                   insuffident inquiry.


                52. For all these reasons there was therefore, it is submitted, an insuffiaent
                   inquiry into “how” Kevin died at the inquest.


                53. Further, the defects in the sufficiency o f die Coroner’s inquest have not been
                   fully remedied by the subsequent Lord justice Stuart-Smith Inquiry so as to



                                                                                                   14
        satisfy Article 2 because at that inquiry there was no opportunity to cross
        examine witnesses and the hearings were conducted in private.


    54. The Judicial Review proceedings in 1993 were pre the coming into force of
        the Human Rights Act 1998 and so did no t consider whether the inquest that
        was held into Kevin William’s death satisfied the requirements o f Article 2.


Ground two: Discovery of N ew Facts

    Mr Edward’s evidence
    55. Neither the Taylor Inquiry nor the Inquest heard oral evidence from Mr
        Edwards. In his written statements available at the time o f the Inquest and
        Inquiry he states that he was unaware o f any Hillsborough plan or the role of
        the gymnasium as a casualty clearing centre or temporary mortuary until he
        was told on the day. In later statements he describes the scene as chaotic, and
        that there was a shortage o f orofarangeal airways, and he noticed how few of
        the bodies had these airways in them. This evidence is clearly relevant to the
        effectiveness o f the emergency response and planning, a crucial issue in the
        death o f Kevin Williams, and Mr Edwards should have been called to give
        evidence.


   Mr Flack’s evidence.

   56. The Inquest did not hear oral evidence from John Flack, who was a leading
       ambulance man employed by SYMAS and was on duty on the day. All the jury
       appear to have heard concerning Mr Flack is that his role in taking two o f the
       casualties to hospital was referred to in the summaries, which the West
       Yorkshire police gave at the min-inquests. Mr Flack described the scene as
       bedlam, and said he had difficulty in finding an ambulance officer in charge or
       deciding where the casualty clearing point was.


   Mr Peter Howes
   57. Mr Peter Howes was a qualified paramedic employed by Derbyshire
       Ambulance Service, and was on duty that day. In his first statement, available
       to the Coroner, he said that he was unable to get any clear information and



                                                                                        15
       there was no obvious ambulance point.         In a second statement dated 15th
       O ctober 1997 he noted the lack o f police help in finding the location and the
       fact they did not receive a major incident call which might have prepared
       them for the horrific scene. Again this evidence is clearly relevant to the
       effectiveness o f the emergency response and planning and Mr Howes should
       have been called to give evidence


Conclusion

   58. The family o f Kevin Williams has many unanswered questions relating to the
       death of their son. There has never been a full investigation involving the
       family where the issue o f the emergency response and its planning has been
       considered in the context o f how Kevin died and what effect any failings may
       have had on his death. Mr Justice Stuart-Smith did not interview any o f the
       above witnesses when conducting his Inquiry in 1997 but did however accept
       the contents o f the witness statements. While this evidence has been accepted
       no Article 2 compliant inquiry has considered its possible impact on the death
       o f Kevin Williams.


   59. There is clearly disputed medical and factual evidence in relation to how
       Kevin died which a new inquisition could consider. Until such a new
       inquisition is held it is submitted that the requirements o f Article 2 will not be
       satisfied.


   60. Your Memorialist therefore humbly requests that you grant leave under
       Section 13(l)(b) Coroner’s Act 1988 to apply to the High Court for an Order
       that the inquisition be quashed and that a fresh inquest be held.


Dated this                            day o f                         2005


Elkan Abrahamson
A.S. Law Solicitors
Myrtle Parade
Liverpool
L7 7EL




                                                                                       16
