                                              U r tW   <y% fyZr




ATTORNEY GENERAL                          1       0>
                                                  *>[/
                                                     J) cc:     Solicitor General
                                                                Private Office



The purpose of this note is to set out the present position in relation to the
pressures for further official action on the Hillsborough disaster in the wake
of the dram a documentary televised at the end of last year and a more recent
claim by the Hillsborough Families Association to have acquired "fresh
evidence". The position remains that, in my view, no further action is required
on the part of the Law Officers at this stage - and hopefully not at all in the
future. We have had no further application under Section 13 of the Coroners
Act 1988 and the present focus of attention seems to be on the Home Office
(demands for a further independent enquiry) and the CPS (request for criminal
investigation/prosecution of police officers alleged to have committed perjury
at the inquest).

The present position

Following the broadcast of the drama documentary you received num erous
representations but no actual request under Section 13 of the Coroners Act
1988. You indicated in the course of the extensive correspondence with MPs
and members of the public that if relatives or others were to make an
application under Section 13 based on further evidence, th at would be
considered carefully in the usual way. That has not happened.

You also indicated th at officials in LSLO were in touch with the Home Office
so that you would be informed of any new evidence which might emerge as the
result of enquiries initiated by the Home Secretary and which might be
relevant to your responsibilities under Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988.
In this context, we have been provided by the Home Office with a substantial
bundle of documentary material (and accompanying video tapes) provided to
them by the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire in response to a list of
questions put to him by Home Office officials reflecting points made in the
dram a documentary. All the questions relate to the conduct of the police,
either in relation to their shortcomings in the policing of the event as a whole
or their failure to respond quickly and effectively to the disaster, and none have
any bearing on the issues which arose in your consideration of the applications
under Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988.




S W / 1 3 0 3 /4
Representations by the Hillsborough Families Association to CPS and Home
Office

Hie Hillsborough Families Association recently delivered to the DPP an opinion
obtained from Alun Jones QC (who represented them unsuccessfully on the
judicial review of the coroner) supported by an affidavit of Mr Trevor Hicks
 (Chairman of the HFA) and one Roger Houldsworth, a close circuit television
engineer. There is also reference to some "fresh evidence" from a Dr Ed
Walker. The opinion from Alun Jones QC is attached but not the supporting
material which is voluminous. It was discussed at a meeting with Home Office
 officials and the CPS on Monday. A note of that meeting is attached. The
 purport of the evidence of Mr Hicks is that he has now been supplied by
Yorkshire Television of copies of the video tapes from the cameras in the police
 control at Hillsborough which, on the fatal day, were focused on the crucial
 area of the ground. They were supplied by the South Yorkshire police to
Yorkshire Television shortly after the event. It is suggested that, because those
 tapes contain substantially more footage of the events of the afternoon than
 those played at the inquiry before Lord Taylor, there has been suppression of
 evidence and false evidence by police officers. That is not in fact the case. Hie
 South Yorkshire police have provided copies of the tapes to the Home Office in
 the same format as they were supplied to the enquiry by Lord Taylor together
 with documentary summaries of the tapes as supplied to the enquiry and
 circulated to counsel for all participants. Hie explanation for what is put
 forward as sinister is that the enquiry team caused there to be made for the
 purposes of the public hearings a compilation tape which drew to a
 considerable extent on the police footage but also very substantially on footage
 obtained from the BBC and other television companies present. If anything,
 the latter was often preferred because the equipment of the television
 companies was superior and the footage better quality. The fact remains
 however th at all the material was available to the inquiry.

The above is not, however, the only argument of the HFA. They assert th at the
police footage is of good quality and that it proves that evidence given by
certain police officers to the enquiry to the effect that the quality of pictures
available to them and its degree of detail was not such as to alert them to the
condition of fans suffering in the relevant enclosures m ust have been false.
That argument faces two difficulties. First, an assessm ent of quality is
essentially subjective. Whilst it is true that the cameras did have the facility,
as dem onstrates by the video footage, to zoom in on certain sectors of the
crown, the images received in the control box were very m uch one of "seas of
faces" such th at individuals asphyxiating would not have been apparent. The
suggestion th at facial contortions of those dying would have been obvious to
the police in the control box is not bonie out. Indeed, the contortions and
expressions on the faces of the fans in the early stages of the game are what

S W / 1 3 0 3 /4
one would generally expect of a football crowd. Nor would the main feature of
asphyxiation, blueness of the face associated with cyanosing, have been
apparent because the CCTV arrangements were for black and white only. On
these aspects, the "fresh evidence" and representations of the HFA advance the
position no further.

So far as the evidence of Dr Ed Walker is concerned, it contains general
assertions of a critical nature about the response of the emergency services,
notably the police, to the disaster and speaks of one crush victim who was still
showing signs of life (sinus rhythm and cardiac output) on arrival at the
Northern General Hospital. It is said to undermine the coroners decision to
impose the controversial 3.15pm cut off point. It does not in fact do so
because th at cut off point was in fact found to be fully justifiable by the
Divisional Court when it considered the issue. H ie crucial point was that the
extent of the damage occasioned by the crushing would, on the medical
evidence, have by 3 .15pm been such that death had either occurred or would
have been inevitable. I do not consider that this snippet of evidence comes
anywhere near justifying a spontaneous review of your decision under Section
13. Indeed, it is significant th at Alun Jones QC has not advised a further
application.

Conclusion

You are invited simply to note the position. I will m inute you further in the
event of any developments.




S J WOOLER
13 March 1997




  Vr~4*- \
S W / 1 3 0 3 /4
                       NOTE OF MEETING



Stephen Wooler attended a meeting on Monday 10 March at the Home
Office, together with representatives from CPS Central Casework and the
Home Office, to discuss the content and implications of material that had
recently been supplied by the Hillsborough Family Support Group (HFSG)
and their request for a further inquiry.

Problems arose from the fact that prior to the meeting no examination of
the material supplied by HFSG had been made. It was therefore unclear
whether the "new" material was indeed "new" and if so whether it had any
real significance. There was also uncertainty as to what the HFSG were in
fact trying to show by the material.


The new videotape evidence

The HFSG had submitted three video tapes recently acquired by them from
Yorkshire Television. The contention was that these recordings showed
that camera 5 was working at all material times and was capable of
panning, tilting and zooming contrary to the evidence given at the inquest.
On a precursory examination of the videos the footage appeared to be the
same as the South Yorkshire Police tapes and revealed nothing new.
Although a compilation tape was used at the inquest and the inquiry, there
was good reason for this (for example more detailed, coloured pictures and
sound). Furthermore, the SYP tapes appear to have been available to and
known of by the parties concerned. It was therefore not a matter of
deliberate suppression.


The Evidence of Roger Houldsworth

Houldsworth had sworn an affidavit commenting on the evidence given at
the inquest. From a brief examination of the affidavit much of its contents
would appear to be opinion evidence and fell into the trap of taking
passages of the evidence given at the inquest out of context.

From this preliminary examination of the material supplied it was
considered unlikely that it contained any new evidence to justify the setting
up if an inquiry or the institution of criminal proceedings for perjury.
However, before a final conclusion could be reached the material would
have to be gone through in greater detail and compared with the existing
evidence. Even were such an examination to support the provisional
findings, it was recognised that the Home Secretary may still wish to refer
the matter to an independent body. This was ultimately a political decision.
However, careful thought would need to be given to the constitution of any
such body otherwise there was the risk that the exercise would develop into
a full scale inquiry considering representations on any new evidence.

Concern was expressed that many of the points being raised by the HFSG
and the recent BBC documentary were matters which were dealt with by
the Taylor inquiry. It was noted that in his opinion Alun Jones QC had
requested a meeting with the DPP. It was agreed that since the Home
Secretary was carrying the matter forward it would be both unnecessary
and inadvisable for the DPP to accede to this request. In particular, it
would give rise to the risk of possible, albeit unintended, inconsistency.

The CPS and the Home Office would go through the material supplied by
the HFSG in detail and on the basis of the conclusions drawn a submission
would be made to the Home Secretary. A copy of the draft submission
would be sent to the LSLO for comments.
   ► k
O 7   7   Ma r-97       10:11P           CPS     CENTRAL      CASEWORKCCP               0171   273    8050           P . 0 7
a R .0 'j-97     |7:«2        FROM   i   BRUCE   CAMPBELL    CO              ID*




                                               The Hillsborough Disaster. April 1383.


                                                              Opinion


             In trod u ctio n

             1         I am asked to giv« an opinion to the Hillsborough Family Support Group on the
                       appropriate legal course to follow in the light of three areas of fresh evidence that
                       have come to light recently. Ninety-five people, mainly supporters of Liverpool
                       Football Club, died in the Hillsborough Stadium in Sheffield as a semi-final o f the FA
                       cup was heyianing in April 19K9. After a long inquest, hold in April and May 1990.
                       und later between November 1990 and 28* March 1991, verdicts o f accidental death
                       were recorded on the victims .

             2         A full application for Judicial Review was made in November 1993 by six of the
                       bereaved fumities, seeking to quaah the verdicts and obtain a ftcsh inquest The mam
                       complaints of these and the other families were set out in the skeleton argument
                       presented in the 1)i visional Court hearings on their behalf, attached as Annex A. In
                       summary form, those main complaints were.

                       2.1      The Coroner imposed an arbitrary cut-off point in time o f 3.15, which had the
                                ctYcct o f excluding relevant evidonce as to tho failure to implement the “Major
                                Di*uster Plan” promptly (paragraphs 6 and 7); and failures to summon the
                                emergency services promptly.

                       2.2       The Coroner failed to enquire into the individual circumstances of the deaths
                                 of the 95; he failod therefore to disclose and call evidence indicating that many
                                 ol'the victims were alive after 3.15, and might have been saved by prompt
                                 medical attention (paragraphs 5.5 tn 5.12. and 7)

                       2.3       The Coroner devoted an excessive time, reflected in seventeen pages of his
                                 summing-up on the subjcct, to the unsubstantiated allegation that many of the
                                 Liverpool supporters were under the influence of drink. The report by Lord
                                 Taylor, which was severely critical o f the police, had ruled out the
                                 consumption of alcohol us a cause of tho disaster (paragraph 10 10)

                        2 A      The Coroner exhibited bias towards the South Yorkshire authorities in his
                                 scicction of evidence and treatment of witnesses (paragraphs 10 and 11).

                        2.5      The Coroner failed to leave the jury with any substantial Uuk to perform, in
                                 directing them that there was no verdict intermediate between accidental death
                                 und unlawful killing.




                                                                   1
07   Mar-97          1 0 : IIP    CPS     CENTRAL      CASEWORKCCP               0171      273    8050                    p   q q
(V R-ai- 9 7   1 7 . ©2   FROM:   BRUCE   CAMPBELL     CO                ID<                                   PACE   □




          3        The inquest verdicts were not quashed. The judgment of the Court is at Ann™ r
                   'fhe Court was strongly influenced by the ftct that the lawyers originally instructed
                   for the tnmiiics had acquiesced in many of the Coroner's decisions (eg page 7), that
                   the evidence presented then, in 1993, would not really have made u difference, or had
                   necn properly excluded (pages 14- 36), that the directions of the Coroner to the jury
                   were orthodox; and that a new inquest would serve no useful purpose (page 9 and
                   40).


          4        Since 1993, as I am keenly aware, various bereaved relatives, and the Hillsborough
                    i amily Support Group as a whole, have continued to bcliovc with deep conviction
                   that the legal system failed them badly, and that they have been deceived as to the
                   eircum.stances of death. After the 1993 judicial review it seemed to me thut the
                   disaster would probably rceede, from the legal point o f view, quietly into history. It
                   has not. In the past six months, there have been three developments which, in my
                   professional opinion, provide strong evidence of perjury by individuals police officers
                   at the inquest, and suppression of evidence, organised successfully to pervert the
                   coursc ol justice at the inquest. None of the following matters were made known at
                   the inquest.

          5       Ih c tfvidunuc Of Roger Houldaworth. Attached is an affidavit of Roger Houldsworih,
                   dated 25"’ November 1996, attaching a statement of May 1989 and supporting
                   docum ent, and commenting on evidence given at the Inquest (AUDC2LC). Contrary to
                   the evidence presented, no camcras were faulty; the cameras gave clear pictures of the
                   l.eppings Lane Terraces where the deaths occurred. If this evidence is correct, video
                   tflpcs and Mr I louldsworth s evidence were deliberately suppressed, and a number of
                  officers committed perjury. ITiis evidence was made known to the world at large in
                   December 1996 when Granada I elcviaion televised a drama-documentivy on the
                  di.sustcr. ( flic evidence of the witnesses referred to by Houldsworth is at Anne* m

          3       B e new vidcplacsi evidence- Very recently, a member of the Family Support group
                   has acquired from Yorkshire Television tapes which appear to be those, or copies of
                   those, taken away or stolen immediately after the disaster. Copies arc enclosed. I am
                   told that apes, or copy tapes, w*re made available to Yorkshire Television by the
                   South Yorkshire Police shortly after the disaster, but at a significant time before the
                   inquest. I have btscn shown a videotape by Mr Trevor Hicks o f the Family Support
                   Omup in tho presence of M r ! louldsworth. Mr Philip Hammond of the Family
                   Support Group, and Ann Adlington of my instructing solicitors. The tape indicates
                  thut policc officers were lying, and that the picture* of all relevant areas of the ground
                  were clear, derailed ar.d uninterrupted, contrary to the police evidence referred to by
                  Mr Houldsworth in his evidence of November 1996. Hvents in the relevant area may
                  not, fur various reasons, lmve been recorded on tape between 2.30 pm and 3 pm. but
                  they were clearly visible on the monitors to those on duty at the time.

                  I have iiIno Seen shown a copy of what w « , [ am told, presented to the jury. It is a
                  very hadly duplicated and blurred picture o f individuals escaping from the stricken
                  pens shortly after 3 pm. in which it is indeed not possible to identify individuals. The


                                                            2
0 7 - M a r - 9 7    1O :1OP       CPS     CENTRAL      CASEWORKCCP                0171     273    8050                     P .02
A ft-01-9? 17       03 T R O M .   BRUCE   CAMPBBLL    CO                                                        POGK   a




                     tape has bad interference in tho picture. It appears that this tupc is a copy at several
                     gcneruiions removed from cither tho copy'now made available to Mr Hicks, or from
                     the videotape of which the now evidence is a much better copy, but it presents only
                     events after 3 pm.

            8        Ills unpummcc of thfi new cyidencc The question whether the police could and did
                     nonce the pressure on tho pens before 3 pm was central at the inquest. On Day 77.
                     punc 125. the Coroner dircctcd the jury (Annex El:

                     “The assessment of the terraces’*is a “very important factor” and “maybe the single
                     most important factor in the whole inquest1’. “The total sum of ovidcncc from the
                     Control Room, that is Mr Duckenfeld, Mr Murray. Mr Goddard and Mr Bichard was
                     that mine of them noticed any problems with the pens until     3 o-clock”

            9        None of this evidence was available in 1993, and yet it touched the core issue in the
                     ca*e in the pre-3.15pm period, regarded as by the Coroner as the critical time. I
                     believe thut the existence of this evidence would have been of crucial significance to
                     the Nigh Court in 1993, let ulone the jury in 1991.

            10       lfrfi tividcncc tifP f Ed Walker In February ! 997 the evidence of Dr Walker came lo
                    light; sec Aflficx F. • The evidenco at the inquest to which it must he contrasted
                    appcurs at AflnoUC. The new evidence discloses that Philip Hammond junior had
                    “sinus rhythm and cardiac output" after arrival at the Northern General Hospital,
                    Shcllield. I he statement Dr Walker made very shortly after, in 1989, shows serious
                    criticisms of the reaction to the disaster, and that other victims w ere alive. Dr Walker
                    points out in his letter o f T h February 1997 that his evidence conflicts with that of Dr
                    Slater. Dr W alker ww congratulated on 3* May 1989 by Dr Wardrope, who was
                    closely involved in the inquest, and who requested Dr Walker on 15th June 1989 to
                    stand by io make a statement to the West Midlands Police. Dr Walker was not called
                    at the inquest.

                    It is difficult to exaggerate the significance of the concealment of Dr Walker’s
                    evidence. At page 10 of the Divisional Court’s judgment of November 1993 the
                    Court pointed to the Coroner’s reasons for the 3.15 cut-off. In all cases, it was sad.
                    tho evidence di closed the samo pattern, o f rapid unconsciousness lending io rapid
                    death. Dr Walker expressly disagrees, especially with Dr Slater. Perhaps the most
                    revealing remark comes from Dr Wardrope in his letter of 3rd May 1989 “Almost
                    immediately the department was flooded with large numbers of ucutoly ill patients
                    requiring urgent resuscitation”. The whole inquest, spanning over ninety days, was
                    structured by the Coroner on an utterly different factual assumption.

                    i iltf PfSVlQUS investigation- One of tho most striking aspects of this history is the way
                    :n which the evidence presented to the inquest was ev id en ce which tended to
                    exculpate the South Yorkshire authorities and the police from blame. Very serious
                    questions arise us to the process by which evidence was selected by the W*9 t
                    Midlands Policc who assisted the Coroner.


                                                             3
D/-;Mar'-37              10 :1OP            CPS         CENTRAL            CASEWORKCCP         0171   273   8050                 p
A R -a 3 -e ?        i7.<a^   f r o m   ,   b r u c c   Ca   m p b e l l   c o       i d   .                       p a c e   s




                12       Conclusion In my viow these new pieces of evidence caU for a fail policc enquiry or
                          public inquiry, lixhibiis such as the tapes must be «ecured and subjected to forensic
                         analysis by some independent body with powers to investigate and compel the
                         production of evidence. Witnesses must be identified. [ therefore recommend that
                         this opinion, together with the documents referred to in it be sent to the Director of
                         Public Prosecutions for her consideration, with afulf copy to the Home Secretary
                         who has expressed interest irt this matter in the last few months

                13       [ hope thut the Director might feel able to allow a senior lawyer in her otTicc to meet
                          :w« nr three of the 1-amily Support Oryup, Ann Adlington and me to expand upon this




            3 Raymond buildings
            Gray's Inn
            London V/Cl


            3rd March 1997.                                                                         .     __
                                                                                               Alun Jones QC




                                                                                 4
ATTORNEY GENERAL                                           cc:   Solicitor General
                                                                 Private Office



The purpose of this note is to set out the present position in relation to the
pressures for further official action on the Hillsborough disaster in the wake
of the dram a documentary televised at the end of last year and a more recent
claim by the Hillsborough Families Association to have acquired "fresh
evidence". The position remains that, in mv view, no farther action is required
on the part of the Law Offi^ r g ^ this,        - and hopefully not at all in the
future. We have had no further application under Section 13 of the Coroners
Act 1988 and the present focus of attention seems to be on the Home Office
(demands for a further independent enquiry) and the CPS (request for criminal
investigation/prosecution of police officers alleged to have committed perjury
at the inquest).

The present position

Following the broadcast of the dram a documentary you received num erous
representations but n o actual request under Sertinn 13 of the Coroners Apt
1988. T ou indicated in the course of the extensive correspondence with MPs
and members of the public th at if relatives or others were to make an
application under Section 13 based on further evidence, th at would be
considered carefully in the usual way. That l^isj^o^jgygjjgjjgjJ.

You also indicated th at officials in LSLO were in touch with the Home Office
so th at you would be informed of any new evidence which might emerge as the
result of enquiries initiated by the Home Secretary and which might be
relevant to your responsibilities under Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988.
In this context, we have been provided by the Home Office with a substantial
bundle of documentary material (and accompanying video tapes) provided to
them by the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire in response to a list of
questions put to him by Home Office officials reflecting points m ade in the
dram a documentary. All the questions relate to the conduct of the police,
either in relation to their shortcomings in the policing of the event as a whole
or their failure to respond quickly and effectively to the disaster, and none have
any bearing on the issues which arose in your consideration of the applications
under Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988.




S W / 1 3 0 3 /4
Representations bv the Hillsborough Families Association to CPS and Home
Office

The Hillsborough Families Association recently delivered to the DPP an opinion
obtained from Alun Jones QC (who represented them unsuccessfully on the
judicial review of the coroner) supported by an affidavit of Mr Trevor Hicks
 (Chairman of the HFA) and one Roger Houldsworth, a close circuit television
engineer. There is also reference to some "fresh evidence" from a Dr Ed
Walker. The opinion from Alun Jones QC is attached but not the supporting
material which is voluminous. It was discussed at a meeting with Home Office
 officials and the CPS on Monday. A note of th at meeting is attached. The
 purport of the evidence of Mr Hicks is th at he has now been supplied by
Yorkshire Television of copies of the video tapes from the cam eras in the police
 control at Hillsborough which, on the fatal day, were focused on the crucial
 area of the ground. They were supplied by the South Yorkshire police to
Yorkshire Television shortly after the event. It is suggested that, because those
 tapes contain substantially more footage of the events of the afternoon than
 those played at the inquiry before Lord Taylor, there has been suppression of
 evidence and false evidence by police officers. That is not in fact the case. The
 South Yorkshire police have provided copies of the tapes to the Home Office in
 the same format as they were supplied to the enquiry by Lord Taylor together
with documentary sum m aries of the tapes as supplied to the enquiry and
 circulated to counsel for all participants. The explanation for w hat is put
 forward as sinister is th a t the enquiry team caused there to be m ade for the
 purposes of the public h earings a compile ftnri ta? p which drew to a
 considerable extent on the police footage but also very substantially on footage
 obtained from the BBC and other television companies present. If anything,
 the latter was often preferred because the equipment of the television
 companies was superior and the footape .better quality. The fact remains
 how ever thnt all the                                inquiry.

The above is not, however, the only argument of the HFA. They assert th at the
police footage is of good quality and th at it proves th at evidence jjrtven-hv
certain police officers to the enquiry to the effect th at the quality of pictures
available to them arid its degree of detail was not such as to alert them to the
condition of fans suffering in the relevant enclosures m u st have been false.
That argum ent faces two difficulties. First, an assessm ent of quality is
essentially subjective. Whilst it is true th at the cameras did have the facility,
as dem onstrates by the video footage, to zoom in on certain sectors of the
crown, the images received in the control box were very m uch one of "seas of
faces" such th at individuals asphyxiating would not have been apparent. The
suggestion th at facial contortions of those dying would have been obvious to
the police in the control box is not Pome out,. Indeed, the contortions and
expressions on the faces of the fans in the early stages of the game are what

S W / 13 0 3/4
one would generally expect of a football crowd. Nor would the m ain feature of
asphyxiation, blueness of the face associated with cyanosing, have been
apparent because the CCTV arrangem ents were for black and white only. On
these aspects, the "fresh evidence" and representations of the HFA advance the
position no further.

So far as the evidence of Dr Ed Walker is concerned, it contains general
assertions of a critical nature about the response oi the emergency services,
notably the police, to the disaster and speaks of one crush victim who was still
showing signs of life (sinus rhythm and cardiac output) on arrival at the
Northern General Hospital. It is said to undermine the coroners decision to
impose the controversial 3.15pm cut off point. It does not in fact do so
hpransp th at ru t off pnlnt wac In fart fminH to hp fiilly                  hv the
Divisional Court when it considered the issue. The crucial point was th at the
extent of the damage occasioned by the crushing would, on the medical
evidence, have by 3 .15pm been such th at death had either occurrecftgft would
have heen inevltatye. I do not consider th at this S J^ g D g ^ j^ ^ jg n ce comes
anywhere near justifying a spontaneous review of your decision under Section
13. Indeed, it is significant th at Alun Jones QC has not advised a further
application.

Conclusion

You are invited simply to note the position. I will m inute you further in the
event of any developments.




S J WOOLER
13 March 1997




S w / l o u o / 4*



                                                                      lll-i
                       NOTE OF MEETING



Stephen Wooler attended a meeting on Monday 10 March at the Home
Office, together with representatives from CPS Central Casework and the
Home Office, to discuss the content and implications of material that had
recently been supplied by the Hillsborough Family Support Group (HFSG)
and their request for a fiirther inquiry.

Problems arose from the fact that prior to the meeting no examination of
the material supplied by HFSG had been made. It was therefore unclear
whether the "new” material was indeed "new" and if so whether it had any
real significance. There was also uncertainty as to what the HFSG were in
fact trying to show by the material.


The new videotape evidence

The HFSG had submitted three video tapes recently acquired by them from
Yorkshire Television. The contention was that these recordings showed
that camera 5 was working at all material times and was capable of
panning, tilting and zooming contrary to the evidence given at the inquest.
On a precursory examination of the videos the footage appeared to be the
same as the South Yorkshire Police tapes and revealed nothing new.
Although a compilation tape was used at the inquest and the inquiry, there
was good reason for this (for example more detailed, coloured pictures and
sound). Furthermore, the SYP tapes appear to have been available to and
known of by the parties concerned. It was therefore not a matter of
deliberate suppression.


The Evidence of Roger Houldsworth

Houldsworth had sworn an affidavit commenting on the evidence given at
the inquest. From a brief examination of the affidavit much of its contents
would appear to be opinion evidence and fell into the trap of taking
passages of the evidence given at the inquest out of context.

From this preliminary examination of the material supplied it was
considered unlikely that it contained any new evidence to justify the setting
up if an inquiry or the institution of criminal proceedings for perjury.
However, before a final conclusion could be reached the material would
have to be gone through in greater detail and compared with the existing
evidence. Even were such an examination to support the provisional
findings, it was recognised that the Home Secretary may still wish to refer
the matter to an independent body. This was ultimately a political decision.
However, careful thought would need to be given to the constitution of any
such body otherwise there was the risk that the exercise would develop into
a full scale inquiry considering representations on any new evidence.

Concern was expressed that many of the points being raised by the HFSG
and the recent BBC documentary were matters which were dealt with by
the Taylor inquiry. It was noted that in his opinion Alun Jones QC had
requested a meeting with the DPP. It was agreed that since the Home
Secretary was carrying the matter forward it would be both unnecessary
and inadvisable for the DPP to accede to this request. In particular, it
would give rise to the risk of possible, albeit unintended, inconsistency.

The CPS and the Home Office would go through the material supplied by
the HFSG in detail and on the basis of the conclusions drawn a submission
would be made to the Home Secretary. A copy of the draft submission
would be sent to the LSLO for comments.
    I


0 7 - Ma r-- 9 7   1 0 :IIP        CPS     CENTRAL      CASEWORKCCP               0171     273    8050
              17:02       FROM I   BRUCE   CAHPBSLL    CO               ID '




                                         The Hillsborough Disaster: AariL13fl3.


                                                        Opjpion


         Introduction

          1        I am asked to give an opinion to the Hillsborough Family Support Group on the
                   appropriate legal course to follow in the light of three areas of fresh evidence that
                   have come to light recently. Ninety*fivc people, mainly supporters nf Liverpool
                   Football Club, died in the Hillsborough Stadium in Sheffield as a semi-final o f the FA
                   cup was beyiuning in April 1989. After a long inquest, hold in April and May 1990.
                   und later between November 1990 and 28* March 1991, vcidicts of accidcntal death
                   were recorded on the victim s.

          2        A full application for Judicial Review was made in November 1993 by six o f the
                   bereaved families, seeking to quash the verdicts and obtain a fresh inquest The main
                   complaints of these and the other families were set out in the skeleton argument
                   presented in the I )i visional Court hearings on their behalf, attached as AnncxA- In
                   summary form, those main complaints were.

                   2 .1      The Coroner imposed an arbitrary cut-off point in time of 3.15, which had the
                             cffcct o f excluding relevant evidence as to tho failure to implement the “Major
                             Disu-ster Plan” promptly (paragraphs 6 and 7); and failures to summon the
                             emergency services promptly.

                   2.2       The Coroner failed to enquire into the individual circumstances o f the deaths
                             of the 95; he failod therefore to disclosc and call evidence indicating that many
                             of the victims were alive after 3.15, and might have been saved by prompt
                             medical attention (paragraphs 5.5 to 5.12, and 7)

                   2 .3      The Coroner devoted an excessive time, reflected in seventeen pages of his
                             summing-up on the subjcct, to the unsubstantiated allegation that many of the
                             Liverpool supporters were under the influence of drink. The report by Lord
                              la y lor, which was severely critical o f the police, had ruled out the
                             consumption of alcohol as a cause of tho disaster (paragraph 10.10)

                   2.4        The Coroner exhibited bias towards the South Yorkshire authorities in his
                              sc led ion of evidence and treatment of witnesses (paragraphs 10 and 11).

                   2.5        The Coroner failed to leave the jury with any substantial Uwk to perform, in
                              directing them that there was no verdiot intermediate between accidental death
                              und unlawful killing.




                                                              1
 0 ’
   7-Mar-97               10:1 IP         CPS     CENTRAL     CASEWORKCCP              0171      273    8050                    I
“I A R - 8 1 - B 7   17 . B2    FROM- .   BRUCE   C AHP8BLL   CO              ID '                                   PACE   3




         •
               3        The inquest verdicts were not quashod. The judgment of the Court is at Annw n
                         The Court was strongly influenced by the flust that tho lawyers originally instructed
                         for the families had acquiesced in many of the Coroner's decisions (eg page 7). that
                         the evidence presented then, in 1993, would not really have made u difference, or had
                         hecn properly excluded (pages 14- 36), that the directions of the Coroner to the jury
                         were orthodox; and that a new inquest would serve no useful purpose (page 9 and
                         40),


               4        Since 1993, as I am keenly aware, various bereaved relatives, and the Hillsborough
                         i amily Support Group as a whole, have continued to bdiove with deep conviction
                        that the legul system failed them badly, and that they have been deceived as to the
                        circumstances o f death. After tho 1993 judicial review it seemed to me that the
                        disaster would probably rccade, from the legal point o f view, quietly into history. It
                        has not. Fn the past six months, there have been three developments which, in my
                        professional opinion, provide strong evidence of perjury by individuals police officers
                        ui the inquest, and suppression of evidence, organised successfully to pervert the
                        coursc ol justice at the inquest. None of the Following matters were made known at
                        the inquest.

               5       Ih c tfvidunuc Of Roger Htiuldswonh. Attached is an affidavit of Roger Houldsworth,
                        dated 25,h November 1996, attaching a statement of May 1989 and supporting
                        document*. and commenting on evidence given at the inquest (Annex r v Contrary to
                        the evidence presented, no camcras were faulty; the cameras gave clear pictures of the
                        I.eppings Lane Terraces where the deaths occurred. If this evidence is correct, video
                        tapes and Mr I louldsworth's evidence were deliberately suppressed, and a number of
                        officers committed perjury. Ihis evidence was made known to the world at largo in
                        December 1996 when Granada I etevision televised a drama-documentary on the
                        disaster. (The evidence of tho witnesses referred to by Houldsworth is at Annex H)

               6       Ih c nvw    videotape evidence- Very recently, 1 member of the Family Support group
                         has acquired from Yorkshire Television tapes which appear to be those, or topics of
                         those, taken away or stolen immediately after the disaster. Copies arc enclosed. I am
                         told that tapes, or copy tapes, were made available to Yorkshiro Television by the
                         South Yorkshire Police shortly after the disaster, but at a significant time before the
                         inquest. I have been shown a videotape by Mr Trevor Hicks o f the Family Support
                         Group m tho presence of Mr 1louldsworth, Mr Philip Hammond of the Family
                         Support Group, and Ann Adlington of my instructing solicitors. The tape indicates
                        thut policc officers were lying, and that the pictures of all relevant areas of the ground
                        were clear, detailed and uninterrupted, contrary to the police evidence referred to by
                        Mr Houldsworth in his evidence of November 1996. Hvents in the relevant area may
                        not, for various reasons, liave been recorded on tape between 2.30 pm and 3 pm, but
                        they were dearly visible on the monitors to those on duty at the time.

              7         1 have a l s o been
                                         shown a copy of what was, I am told, presented to the jury. It is a
                        very hadly duplicated and blurred picture of individuals escaping from the stricken
                        pens shortly after 3 pm. In which it is indeed not possible to identify individuals. The


                                                                   2
 0 7-Mar-97              10:10P CPS         CENTRAL       CASEWORKCCP                0171273       8050
MAR-B3 - 9 ?1 7 . 0 3     THOM•     BRUCE    CAMPBELL     CO                 ID.



        •
                         Uipc has bad interference in tho picture. It appears that this tape is a copy at several
                         gcneruiions removed from cither the copy'now made available to Mr Hicks, or from
                         ihe videotape o f which the now evidence la a much better copy, but it presents only
                         e v e n t s ufler 3 pm.


              8         Tti& unppnancc of the new evidence The question whether the police could and did
                         notice the pressure on tho pens before 3 pm was central at theinquest.On Day 77,
                         puye 125, the Coroner directed the jury (Annex El:

                        “The assesxment of the terraces” is a “very important factor” and “maybe the single
                        most important fiictor in the whole inquest". “The total sum of ovidcncc from the
                        Control Room, that is Mr Duckenfeld, Mr Murray, Mr Goddard and Mr Bichard was
                        that none of them noticed any problems with the pens until     3 o-dock'\

             9          None of this evidence was available in 1993, and yet it touchcd the core issue in the
                        ciwe in the pre~3.15pm period, regarded as by the Coroner as the critical time. I
                         believe that the existence of this evidence would have been of crucial significance to
                        the High Court in 1993, let alone the jury in 1991.

             10         The ttYidcncc of D t£ d Wfllkcr In February 1997 the evidence of Dr Walker came to
                         light; see Annex F- • The evidcnco at the inquest to which it must he contrasted
                        appear* at AnnCA-G- The new evidence discloses that Philip Hammond junior had
                        “sinus rhythm and cardiac output" after arrival at the Northern General Hospital,
                        Shel field. The statement Dr Walker made very shortly after, in 1989, shows serious
                        criticisms of the reaction to the disaster, and that other victims were alive. Dr Walker
                        points out in his letter o f T h Fobruary 1997 that his evidence conflicts with that of Dr
                        Slater. Dr Walker was congratulated on 3"* May 1989 by Dr Wardrope, who was
                        oloscly involved in the inquest, and who requested Dr Walker on 15th June 1989 to
                        stand by to make a {statement to the West Midlands Police. Dr Walker was not called
                        at the inquest.
                         \

             11     It is difficult to exaggerate the significance of the concealment of Dr Walker's
                     evidence. Ai page 10 o f the Divisional Court’s judgment of November 1993 the
                     Court pointed to the Coroner’s reasons for the 3.15 cut-off. In all cases, it was said,
                     tho evidcnco disclosed the same pattern, o f rapid unconsciousness lending to rapid
                     death. Dr Walker expressly disagrees, especially with Dr Slater. Perhaps the most
                     revealing remark comes from Dr Wardrope in his letter of 3* May 1989 “Almost
                     immediately the department was flooded with large numbers ofucutoly ill patients
                     requiring urgent resuscitation". The whole inquest, spuming over ninety days, was
                     structured by the Cowncr on an utterly different factual assumption.

             ^      i iltf PfgviflUS investigation- One of the most striking aspects of this history is the way
                     in which ihe evidence presented to the inquest was evidence which tended to
                     exculpate the South Yorkshire authorities and the police from blame. Very serious
                     questions arise us to the process by which evidence was selected by the West
                     Midlands Police who assisted the Coroner.


                                                                3
   c>
0 7-Ma r-97              lOtlOP       CPS     CENTRAL      CASEWORKCCP              0171     273    8050                      P. 0 3
MA R —0 3 - B 7    1 7 .0 4   FROM.   BRUCE   CAMPBELL    CO                IDi                                    PAGE   5




                  12     O m d u s r n In my view these new pieces of evidence call fur a full policc enquiry or
                         public inquiry. Inhibits such as the tapes must be secured and subjected to forensic
                         analysis by some independent body with powers to investigate and compel the
                         production of evidence. Witnesses must be identified. I therefore recommend that
                         this opinion, together with the documents referred to in it be sent to the Director o f
                         Tubllc Prosecutions for her consideration, with ft foil copy to the Home Secretary,
                         who has expressed interest in this matter in the last few months.

                  13     [ hope that the Director might feel able to allow a senior lawyer in her office to meet
                          two nr three of the 1-amily Support Group, Ann Adlington and me to expand upon this




              3 Raymond buildings
              Gray s Inn
              London WCI


              3rd March 1997.
                                                                                     Alun Jones QC




                                                               4
603                                                   5 MARCH 1997                       Written Answers                         604


                Written Answers to                              conversations involving alleged criminals to be usable as
                                                                evidence in criminal trials; and if he will make a
                                                                statement.                                        [18448]
   £>•                      Questions
                                                                   M r. H ow ard: The right hon. Lord Lloyd of Berwick
                                                                has raised the issue on a number of occasions, including
                                                                at chapter 7 of the report of his inquiry into legislation
                         Wednesday 5 March 1997
                                                                against terrorism, where he recommended that section 9
                                                                of the Interception of Communications Act 1985 be
                                                                amended so as to allow the prosecution to adduce
                         HOM E DEPARTM ENT                      intercepted material in cases affecting national security.
                                                                That recommendation is under consideration. The views
                            H unger Strikers                    of the law enforcement, security and intelligence agencies
   M r. Cohen: To ask the Secretary of State for the Home       have been sought by my Department. Otherwise, I am
Department (1) what independent medical assessment              aware of no recent representations on the subject.
(a) is allowed and (b) has been made of the condition of
the hunger strikers at Rochester prison or moved from                                         Knives
Rochester prison;                                   [18473]
                                                                   M r. Bayley: To ask the Secretary of State for the
   (2) if he will make a statement on the medical condition
                                                                Home Department (1) how many people (a) aged under
of (a) Mr. Naser Lechibi and (b) the other hunger strikers at
                                                                18 years and (b) in total were (i) arrested for,
Rochester prison or moved from Rochester Prison. [ 18472]
                                                                (ii) cautioned for, (iii) charged with and convicted of
   M iss W iddecombe [holding answer 4 March 1997]:             offences relating to knives in north Yorkshire in each
No immigration detainees at Rochester are currently             of the last five years;                          [18261]
refusing food. Those who do so are taken to an outside
hospital if their condition gives cause for concern.               (2) how many people (a) from York, (b) from north
Detainees who persist in food refusal clearly take risks        Yorkshire and (c) nationally were convicted of offences
with their health: medical records are confidential, but        relating to knives carried out by (i) persons of all ages
none of those who took part in the recent protest is            and (ii) persons aged under 18 years at the time of the
currently assessed as giving cause for medical concern.         offence in each of the last three years.           [18262]

                             T aylor Inquiry                       M r. M aclean: Detailed data of the number of people
                                                                arrested and charged are not collected centrally.
   M r. Loyden: To ask the Secretary of State for the i
Home Department if evidence from Dr. Ed Walker was                 Information available on the number of people
offered to the Taylor inquiry into the Hillsborough             cautioned, prosecuted and convicted from 1991 to 1995 is
disaster; for what reasons he was not called to give oral       given in the tables. 1996 data will not be available until
evidence; and if he will make a statement.        [18500]       the autumn.
   M r. M aclean [holding answer 4 March 1997]:
                                                                   Table A. N um ber o f persons aged under 18 years cautioned,
Dr. Walker did not give evidence to the Taylor inquiry
                                                                 prosecuted at m agistrates’ courts and convicted at all courts fo r
into the Hillsborough disaster. The inquiry was concerned
                                                                 offences relating to knives by type o f offence and area 1991-95
with the events at the Hillsborough stadium. The precise
circumstances in which the victims died were matters for        A rea     D isposal          1991     1992    1993     1994      1995
the coroner’s inquest. A statement given by Dr. Walker
                                                                      Carrying article with blade or point in a public place
to police on 20 July 1989 was made available to the
                                                                               [Crim inal Justice Acf 1988, Sec 139J
coroner’s inquest.                                              York petty sessional division'
                                                                          Cautions             n/a     n/a     n/a      n/a       n/a
                            Child Prostitution                             Prosecutions          1                                     2
                                                                          Convictions            1                                     ■>
  M r. Sheerm an: To ask the Secretary o f State for the
Home Department if he will review the penalties for those       North Yorkshire police fo rc e area
who entice children into prostitution.            [18492]                Cautions                1
                                                                         Prosecutions            3
  M r. M aclean: The Government announced on
                                                                         Convictions             3
16 January that it had decided to carry out a review of
existing maximum penalties for sex offences. This will          England and Wales
include the offence of causing or encouraging the                        Cautions             328      423      418      497     544
prostitution of a girl under 16. The purpose of the review               Prosecutions         274      277      222      392     435
will be to identify any anomalies in existing penalties, and             Convictions          185      207      168      296     305
to ensure that penalties properly reflect the comparative
gravity of existing offences.                                        Carrying o f offensive weapons: without law ful authority
                                                                              o r reasonable excuse in a public place
                         Telephone Interceptions                              I Prevention o f Crime A ct 1953, Sec 1]
                                                                York petty sessional division'
  M r. David Nicholson: To ask the Secretary of State                     Cautions              n/a     n/a     n/a     n/a       n/a
for the Home Department what representations he                           Prosecutions             1       1     —        1            2
has received calling for interceptions of telephone                       Convictions            1   1           —        I            1

      307 CW 76-PAG1/1
DRAFT LETTER FROM THE ATTORNEY GENERAL TO:

Dennis Skinner Esq MP
House of Commons
LONDON SW1A0AA

       Jan u ary 1997




Thank you for your letter of 16 Jan u ary 1997 enclosing a letter you have
received from Mr P Hammond, Secretary of the Hillsborough Family Support
Group, of 21 Rosemount Road, Liverpool L I7 6BX. You invited my comments
with particular reference to (ii).


I have the deepest sympathy for the families involved in the tragic events which
took place at Hillsborough and fully understand the concerns raised by the
recent programme. The Home Secretary, when he spoke in the adjournm ent
debate on this topic on 17 December made the point that any decisions which
have to be taken m ust be on the basis of consideration of all the relevant facts
and underlying evidence, rather than simply on the basis of the television
programme itself. He said that in particular the Home Office would consider
whether there is any new evidence, and if so, whether that evidence is of such
significance that had it been put before Lord Taylor or before the coroner,
either the outcome of the Taylor enquiry or the verdict of the jury would have
been different.


My main role in the events which have followed the Hillsborough disaster has
arisen from my responsibilities under Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988. I
have previously considered several applications made by relatives of the

S W / 2 4 0 1/ 10
deceased for consent to the making of an application to the High Court for an
order directing the holding of a fresh inquest. In each case I concluded that
the m atters put forward did not establish that there was a realistic prospect
of the High Court granting such an order. Indeed, very similar issues have
been canvassed by the relatives in unsuccessful judicial review proceedings.


There does not appear to be anything in the programme which touches on the
issues raised in the applications which I have already considered. My officials
are, however, in touch with the Home Office so that I may be informed of any
new evidence which may emerge and is relevant to my responsibilities under
Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988. I shall have close regard to any material
which may put to me as to the desirability of any further inquest. In addition,
if relatives or others were to make an application based on further evidence -
they have not yet done so - this would be considered carefully in the usual
way.


I have a further interest in this m atter because of my statutory duty to
superintend the work of the Director of Public Prosecutions. I understand that
the Director has also asked to be kept informed of the enquiries being made
by the Home Office so th at she may consider, in the light thereof, whether any
further action may be required on her part. You will recall that the issue of
criminal liability was very fully considered at an early stage on the basis of the
evidence disclosed by the Taylor Report and the investigation undertaken by
the West Midlands police.




S W / 2 4 0 1/ 10
                                                                                                          M U
    id Kyle                                                                   153703                      CPS
m     Crown Prosi

                                                                                                          CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                          United House
                                                                                                          Piccadilly
                                                                                                          York YOl 1PQ
                                                                                           Switchboard:   01904-450070
                                                      1                                         DXNo:     65204 York 6
 S. J. Wooler Esq.,
                                                                           Facsimile: 01904-    455577
 Legal Secretariat
 to the Law Officers,
 Attorney General’s Chambers                                             Direct Line: 01904-    456670
 9 Buckingham Gate
                                                                       Our Reference:
 LONDON SW1E 6JP                                                                                PR3/PRPP
L                                                     J               Your Reference:




                                                                                               24th January 1997




    RE:       HILLSBOROUGH


    Thank you for your letter of the 23rd January 1997 and enclosures which we received by fax
    yesterday and through the post this morning. Your observations and the specimen letter will
    be most useful to us.

    We are preparing a briefing for the Director and once she has replied to David Alton MP,
    I will let you have a copy of her letter for your information. We shall then also write to the
    various private correspondents in similar terms.

    Subject of course to any instructions I receive from the Director, I agree, as we discussed
    earlier that it would be better for us at the moment to await the results of the enquiries
    instigated by the Home Office. I can confirm that it would be of great assistance to us if we
    could meet with the Home Office and yourselves once this information is available.

    I look forward to receiving your revised model letter in due course.




    PETER R. P. PEARSON
    MMs/53.97




                         Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests of justice
                                                  THE LEGAL SECRETARIAT TO THE LAW OFFICERS

                                                                ATTORNEY GENERAL’S CHAMBERS

                                                                           9 BUCKINGHAM GATE

                                                                             LONDON S W 1 E 6 J P
General enquiries 0 1 7 1 - 8 2 8 7 1 5 5
Direct line          01 71-8 28



           Miss Amanda Illing
           Private Secretary to the DPP
           Crown Prosecution Service
           Headquarters
           50 Ludgate Hill
           LONDON EC4M7EX

           24 Jan u ary 1997




          Further to my letter earlier today, I enclose a copy of a letter received from Mr
          Dennis Skinner MP, together with a draft reply. I should welcome any
          comments the CPS may have. Once we have an agreed text, I would envisage
          the Attorney General using it for similar letters we have from David Alton MP
          and Ms Diana Maddock MP. You may wish to consider using it as the basis
          of a reply from the Director to those MPs who write to her. Any such letters
          will of course be confined to CPS issues but the line needs to be consistent
          with what the Attorney General is saying.

                    O
                        Vo




           S J WOOLER




           S W / 2 4 0 1/11
                                                  THE LEGAL SECRETARIAT TO THE LAW OFFICERS

                                                               ATTORNEY GENERAL’S CHAMBERS

                                                                          9 BUCKINGHAM GATE

                                                                            LONDON S W 1E 6 J P
General enquiries 0 1 7 1 - 8 2 8 7 1 5 5
Direct line          01 71-8 28



          Paul Pugh Esq
          Operational Policing Policy Unit
          Home Office
          50 Queen Anne’s Gate
          LONDON SW1H9AT

          24 Jan u ary 1997




          HILLSBOROUGH

          We spoke on Wednesday and I enclose a copy of a letter which I have since
          written to Peter Pearson at CPS Headquarters (York). I hope that its content
          accurately reflects the substance of our discussion.

          I have also been in touch with Amanda Illing (Private Secretary to the DPP)
          about the handling of Parliamentary correspondence. The DPP has received
          some correspondence as has the Attorney General. I enclose a copy of a draft
          "standard letter" which I would envisage the Attorney General using in relation
          to those MPs who write to him. Enclosing the leaflet which has been circulated
          to all MPs by the Hillsborough Families Support Group.

          I should be grateful for any comments you may have by close on Tuesday, 28
          January.




          S J WOOLER



          S W / 2 4 0 1/12
                                                  THE LEGAL SECRETARIAT TO THE LAW OFFICERS

                                                               ATTORNEY GENERAL’S CHAMBERS

                                                                          9 BUCKINGHAM GATE

                                                                            LONDON S W 1 E 6 J P
General enquiries 0 1 7 1 - 8 2 8   7155
Direct line          01 71 -8 2 8



          Miss Amanda Illing
          Private Secretary to the DPP
          Crown Prosecution Service
          Headquarters
          50 Ludgate Hill
          LONDON EC4M7EX

          24 January 1997




          HILLSBOROUGH

          I spoke briefly yesterday about the Parliamentary correspondence being dealt
          with by Peter Pearson relating to Hillsborough. I enclose a copy of a letter
          which I have subsequently written to him.

          The correspondence (both Parliamentary and from the public) which we have
          dealt with so far in LSLO, has been concerned mainly with questions relating
          to further public inquiry or inquest. We too have received a num ber of letters
          from MPs enclosing a copy of the circular, promulgated by the HFSG which
          raises, for the first time, the issue of a further criminal investigation and
          reconsideration of the prosecution decision. This adds a new dimension to the
          need for co-ordination.

          I shall be trying my hand at a revised "standard" letter for use in responding
          to those who raise the HFSG letter with us. I will send it to you as soon as
          possible.

          In the meantime, I would stress what I said yesterday that Parliamentary
          correspondence relating to this issue should be answered in consultation with
          LSLO. I think too that you ought to make the Director aware of these issues
          if th at has not already been done.




          S J WOOLER

          S W / 2 4 0 1/1
                                                  THE LEGAL SECRETARIAT TO THE LAW OFFICERS

                                                                ATTORNEY GENERAL'S CHAMBERS

                                                                             9 BUCKINGHAM GATE

                                                                              LONDON S W 1 E 6 J P
General enquiries 0 1 7 1 - 8 2 8 7 1 5 5
Direct line          01 71-8 28




          Peter Pearson Esq
          Central Casework Division
          CPS Headquarters
          United House
          Piccadilly
          YORK YOl 1PQ

          23 January 1997




          HILLSBOROUGH

          We spoke yesterday afternoon about the Parliamentary correspondence the
          CPS has received, based on the letter circulated by the Hillsborough Family
          Support Group to all Members of Parliament. We agreed that this would need
          careful and co-ordinated handling.

          The Home Office and LSLO have each received extensive correspondence from
          families affected by the Hillsborough disaster which have hitherto focused
          either on demands for a fresh public inquiry or the reopening of the inquest,
          of both. Our line has been to draw on what the Home Secretary said in the
          House of Commons on 17 December 1996 when responding to an adjournment
          debate. He made the point that any decisions which have to be taken m ust be
          on the basis of consideration of all the relevant facts and underlying evidence,
          rather than simply on the basis of the television programme itself. He also
          said that in particular the Home Office would consider w hether there is any
          new evidence, and if so. whether that evidence is of such significance that had
          it been put before Lord Taylor or before the coroner, either the outcome of the
          Taylor Inquiry or the verdict of the jury would have been different.

          I enclose a specimen of a typical letter which we have written. We do not. at
          present, consider that anything in the programme materially affects the
          applications which the Attorney General has already considered under Section
          13 of the Crimes Act 1988, but have in place arrangem ents so that we are
          informed of any new evidence which can then be considered.




          S W / 2 2 0 1/4
                                                                         O
The correspondence from HFSG opens a new angle on this by calling on the
DPP to request a further criminal investigation. Since we spoke, I have been
in touch with Paul Pugh in the Police Policy Directorate, who informs me that
the South Yorkshire Police have undertaken to report to the Home Secretary
by the end of January on the issues raised by the programme. That will, in
particular, include clarification about the point whether the film from the video
camera trained on the central enclosure was available to the Taylor Inquiry.
I enclose, for each of reference, a copy of Paul Pugh’s letter of 20 December
 1996 to the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire.

You may feel that it would also be appropriate for the CPS to adopt a similar
stance indicating that it will consider whether any further action may be
appropriate on its part once the results of the enquiries by the Home Office are
to hand. That would not, of course, preclude the CPS from asking for further
or wider enquiries at that stage. As to co-ordination, Paul Pugh thought there
would be no difficulty in making the results of the South Yorkshire enquiries
available to the CPS and LSLO. We felt that, assuming the report is received
in early February, we should look to a meeting between ourselves, the Home
Office and CPS in mid-February. Whilst each Department m ust form its own
judgm ent in relation to the discharge of its own duties, it is equally im portant
 that there is a coherent and co-ordinated response.

I shall be revising our model letter to take account of the additional points
made in the HFSG circular and will fax that to you as soon as possible.




S J WOOLER




S W /2 2 0 I/4
