       The
       ATTORNEY GENERAL
         It-




tfM—            *-9    **




               < _ s ^ -



                  vCV«
                                               THE LEGAL SECRETARIAT TO THE LAW OFFICERS
                                                          ATTORNEY GENERAL'S CHAMBERS
                                                                      9 BUCKINGHAM GATE
                                                                         LONDON SW1E 6JP
General enquiries 071-828 7155
Direct line       071-828 17 2 1


      Our Ref:         400/89/105

      12 December 1990

      Ms Maggie Sharp
      Fire and Emergency Planning Department
      Home Office
      Queen Anne’s Gate
      London SW1H 9AT




      Dear Ms Sharp

      Thank you for your letter of 27th November 1990 about the
      correspondence from Mrs P Joynes.

      I understand your            difficulty but am anxious not to start up
      further rounds of            correspondence on behalf of the Attorney
      General at a time            when we appear finally to be seeing the back
      of this matter so            far as the prosecution decision was
      concerned.

      Mrs Joynes is one of the few people to whom the Attorney
      General and LSLO have not yet written; but she has had a
      letter from the Prime Minister.  I wonder if a suitable
      compromise might be for a letter to issue from the Home Office
      at this stage containing an apology for the delay and saying
      that you have seen the letter (copy enclosed) sent to her by
      the Prime Minister. The comments made by the Prime Minister
      about the position of the Government extend to the Home
      Secretary.

      I hope you will find this a satisfactory way forward.  If you
      have any doubts, please do not hesitate to telephone me.

      Yours sincerely




      S.J. Wooler




      Encl.
                                1
                                                C k            \


                    TREAT
%     i       O FF |r , A M Y
      f        2 6 SEPI990



                                                                    September 1990

TO: THE HOME SECRETARY




Dear Mr woolgrave,
Why don't ordinary people, like us, the Hillsborough Families
get Justice ? Can you honestly answer this question ? Or is
Justice only for the rich and famous who have money to pay for
their Justice.
As one mother whose son went to a football match and didn't
come back I cannot believe the D.P.P.'s decision after Lord
Justice Taylor's Report on the tragedy.

If you are a father you will know how much your children mean
to parents 1 They are lives and our future.    My son now has
no future and his wife has not future, my husband and I have
no future to look forward to (no grandchildren from his
marr iage).
          ;    j.                  — -----      — ------------ -
                                i-r-innpiirjn-UKn r- r s i —




Please will you meet some of the Hillsborough mums to explain
the meaning of the word "Justice".

Yours sincerely,



                                                                     pfsTW^
MRS P JOYNES



    lO
                                             Uuk>                   £>c€N

                      cSecoAft)                                    Ui«ir^s'tiLy
                              lO DO W NING STREET
                                 LONDON SW1A 2AA   .
 From the Private Secretary



                                                       31 October 1990




     The Prime Minister has asked me to reply to your letter of
5th September 1990 about the decision not to institute criminal
proceedings against any person following the Hillsborough
disaster.  I am sorry you have had to wait so long for a reply.

     The Prime Minister shares the continuing grief of those
whose friends and relatives died or were injured in the tragic
events at Hillsborough.  She understands why such a depth of
feeling persists well after the event, and she and other
Ministers are determined that all the lessons which can be
learned from the disaster and from the subsequent very thorough
report by Lord Justice Taylor are heeded so that such a tragedy
may never again occur.

     The Prime Minister recognises equally that the decision not
to institute against anyone criminal proceedings arising from the
Hillsborough tragedy has been a severe disappointment to you and
to others who have been bereaved. Nevertheless she has to point
out that questions regarding prosecution in matters of this kind
are the ultimate responsibility of the Director of Public
Prosecutions.  He holds a statutory office which is independent
of the Government of the day, and is subject by statute only to
the superintendence of the Attorney General.  Our constitution
guards in this way against any risk of the criminal justice
system being manipulated for political purposes. Accordingly
the decision in this instance, which the Prime Minister
understands to have been taken personally by the Director, is not
one which it would have been open to the Government to have
sought to influence at any stage.

       I    am sorry this reply cannot be more helpful.




                                 CAROLINE SLOCOCK


Mrs. P. Joynes
      HOME OFFICE
      Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                   Direct line£>M 3      1     lf\Z'
                                  Switchboard 01-213 3000


Parliamentary Section                               Please reply tv Thvlfmhsr Secrmuy uf State
Attorney General's Chambers                         Your reference
Royal Courts of Justice
Strand                                              Our reference
London WC2A 2LL
                                                                 27 November 1990



Dear Sir

I enclose a letter dated 24 September from Mrs P Joynes to the
Home Secretary, about the Director of Public Prosecutions'
decision not to prosecute following the Hillsborough tragedy.

I am afraid that this letter has just been located amongst the
papers of a colleague who is on long-term sick leave, and as far
as I can tell has not been actioned. I should be very grateful
if you would pass the letter to the appropriate area of your
office, for reply if your records show no trace of previous
correspondence.

I have not acknowledged the letter (in case you have, in fact,
already received a copy and replied) and I should be grateful if
your reply reflects our sincere apologies for the delay.




Yours sincerely




Maggie Sharp
(Fire and Emergency Planning Department)
