PAUL WILLIAM CARLILE



1.   Paul   Carlile the son and brother respectively                of the
     Applicants Sandra Stringer and             Donna Carlile was born
                     t
     on 8 th August, 1969, and was 19 years old when he died
     at Hillsborough football ground on 15th April, 1989.


2.   He went to the stadium - in the company of friends, but
     it is not     known whether he was in            their company when
     he took up a        position inside the stadium in enclosure

     3.

            %
3.   During the course          of the mini inquest       the jury heard
     fromProfessor        Usher    that     in his    view the    cause of
     death was     traumatic asphyxia.          The death       would b w e
     been   painless as         he would     have fallen     unconscious
     within 10     or 20 seconds          of his chest    being crushed.
     This was     followed by          the evidence of    Police Officer
     Geraldine Evans and Detective Inspector Michael Layton
     which when combined produced             the following chronology
     of events: At 2.45 p.m.              Paul Carlile was outside the
     ground near to        the perimeter gate.           Some time before
     3.03 p.m.     he climbed          over the fence from enclosure 3
     into enclosure        4.   Between      3.03 p.m.    and    3.15 p.m.
     Michael     Hollinghurst, an          off duty    nurse, found     Mr.
     Carlile lying on the          floor unconscious in enclosure 4
     whereupon    he tried        to    resuscitate him     but was     not




ANNAAF                             o
     successful.        He     then       moved    on       to    treat ^another
     casualty       after    being     told    by       a    uniformed      police
     officer to leave the terrace.                 Shortly after 3.15 p.m.
     DC Goulding and DC Pont saw Paul Carlile being carried
     from    the general       direction          of    the tunnel,        in    the
     concourse at       the Leppings         Lane end            of the   stadium.
     The    two     officers and       an    unidentified             ambulanceman
     attempted to revive          him but were not               successful.     At
     4.35    p.m.     behind      the Leppings          Lane stands         Doctor
     Monaghan certified Paul Carlile dead.


4.   The    jury also       heard directly         from Mr.           Hollinghurst
     that it      was only when       the pressure began to                ease in
     enclosure 4 that he realised Paul Carlile was lying at
     his feet.       He began     helping him and another                 man who
     was unconscious        a few feet        away..        Eventually      he was .
     told that it was time            for him to leave the enclosure,
     and he did this through a hole in the perimeter fence.
     He recollected         two ambulancemen           had arrived         to take
     over   from      him    in      the    attempts             to   resuscitate
     casualties.


5.   The Applicants submit that much important evidence was
     not put      before the      jury thus        depriving them           of the
     opportunity properly to consider                  what happened.           Much
     of this      evidence was       also relevant            to the      issue of




                                      ©
ANNAAF
     whether death was aggravated by lack of care," an issue

     which was not left to the jury.


6.   The evidence        that Mr. Hollinghurst gave             was markedly
     different        to that       contained       in a    statement he     had
     previously        made.        In this    he stated       that he     first
     became aware of Paul when                he felt him climbing up his
      legs.    He     was pulling himself up by              holding onto Mr.
      Hollinghurst's          trousers.       Mr.     Hollinghurst       reached
     down and        took Paul's hand          and began pulling         him up.
     This task        was made       difficult by       people standing       on
     Paul.      He lost        Paul's hand and         so took hold       of his
     hair’
         . All         this time Paul was trying             to pull himself
     up.      He was in        pain and aware         of what was    going on
     around him.        This contrasts strongly with the evidence
     of Dr. Usher        that Paul would have              fallen unconscious
     within 20 seconds of            being crushed and would not have
     been in pain.            In the statement Mr. Hollinghurst also
     said that        he was    told to       leave the      enclosure by      a
     policeman or ambulanceman on the grounds that he could
     do no more.        However the       person who told him to leave
     did not        himself check      Mr.     Carlile      to see   if there
     were     any     signs    of     life,    before      instructing      some
     supporters to        carry him to         the back of       the terrace.
     The Applicants submit that this evidence was extremely
     important and possibly indicated that Mr. Hollinghurst




•ANNAAF                                (D
     was given insufficient time          to attempt to resuscitate

     Mr. Carlile.


7.   There was     a ^discrepancy    between PC Evans        account of
                    f

     the    activities of     DC    Goulding and   DC     Pont and    DC
     Gouldiirg's own account.           This account, contained in a
     statement he had       made, was to the effect         that he was
     initially on his own wi-th         Paul Carlile.     He then left
     him in    order to      see what    his colleagues .were doing
     after which he returned to him          with DC Pont.      DC Pont
     then left and returned to him with an ambulanceman.

           %
8.   The Applicants       were inf ormed by West    Midlands Police
     Officers that Paul       Carlile was the first         casualty to
     have been taken       off the terraces.       This matter never
     came out at the inquest.           They are deeply concerned by
     the    fact   that he    was    left   in   the area     and    only
     certified dead at 4.35 p.m.            They feel that he should
     have been one of the first persons to have been placed
     in an ambulance and taken to hospital.             They were also
     informed that Dr. Monaghan          had requested the use of a
     machine when       he was attending     to Mr. Carlile.         This
     possibly indicates that he believed that he could only
     be    certain that    Paul Carlile      was dead     or alive     by
     using such a machine       or that alternatively efforts to
     save Paul may have       been successful had a machine been
     available.




ANNAAF
                                   ©
The Applicants submit        that had all this 'evidence and
the evidence       of Dr.   Glynn Phillips, Dr.      John Ashton
and Mr.   F. Eccleston       been put   before the     tribunal,
there would have been        sufficient material for them to
               K
consider whet'her to return a verdict that the death of

Paul Carlile was aggravated by lack of care.
   HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                (WEST DISTRICT)


        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE
     VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL
               STADIUM DISASTER
            ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989


           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

             PAUL WILLIAM CARLILE




                    Before
DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci, BM, BS, MRCGP
            (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                      At
           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.
                      On
                3rd May, 1990.



          TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




    From the Notes of J.L. Harphara, Ltd.,
         Official Shorthand Writers,
     55, Queen Street, Sheffield Si 2DX
                       APPEARANCES:




MR. D. FRASER              Hillsborough Solicitors' Group
                           Steering Committee

MR. S. SMITH               Medical and Dental Union of
                           Scotland (Representing Dr. A.
                           Forrest)

MR.    CALLAGHAN           Trent Regional Health Authority and
                           South Yorkshire Metropolitan
                           Ambulance Service

MR.    GREGORY             Sheffield City Council

MISS    THORPE             Eastwood & Partners

MISS A. ADDLEMAN           Police Federation of England and
                           Wales

MR. P. ISAACS              Cnief Superintendent D. Duckenfield

MS. B. NORCLIFFE and       Chief Constable, South Yorkshire
MR. P. METCALF             Constabulary

MR. S. CATCHPOLE and       Sheffield Wednesday Football Club
MR. JACKSON
                  pnOF. AT./1~T U~r?R Cr.IJLod

                        'Tyr   t-ti:   r.o n c ? -^                           .................                              2

              B          ny m .                                                                                              3

                  O F F IC E Cr.iSRALDI'-rS SI.TZATreTIT 3VAKS C a l l e d

                         TV«r TTTT^
                         ;\4           CORO
                                        ■—— N E R ........................................................................   **

                  POLTC:-: INSP^OTOT? IP:CTTAT?L LAYTON C a l l e d

                         ;-M.r TF'S                        ............................                                      6




              D




              E




          H
I

    phamLtd
?rd Vv."T, 1990




              :Cin3'1:    Good morning.   Please sit down.
             Soli:   Sir, the evidence you are Going to
hoar now relates to Paul Uilliam Carlilq. Sir, Paul's
mum is within the precincts of the building but would
rather not hear the pathological evidence so will come
in, as it were, halfway through the hearing. raul*s
stepfather and two sisters and aunt arc present in
Court, sir. Sir, the practice that represents them
is a naonber of ray Group and I, therefore, appear in the
usual guise this nomir/j as their agent through the
Steering Committee•
     TIED CORCHER:        You, sir, are the stepfather, is
that right?
     IjTjJI’FATI-72R:    Yes.
       TIT1D C0RCI7ER: Just so 1 know who I am loo!cine at.
TThich. are the tvo sisters? Right.
      Can I just e>:plain to you, before we begin, so to
•speak, the procedure so that you know what is coning.
 You have probably already been told, in the circumstances,
 but very very briefly I am goj.ng to read the evidence
 which I took right at the beginning last year in April,
 in fact, the 1 9 th, and then, .wlien X have done that, I
 an going to toll you what the blood alcohol levels
 were and then we will listen to Prof. Usher who will
 toll us about the pathology. X think I will pause then,
 Mr. Fraser, so that we can allow Paul*s mum to come bade
 if she wishes, ’..lion wo are all settled again, so to spenlc,
 the presenting Officers of the Tiest Midlands 3olice will
 present the evidence which they have sumr.iaid.sed for me
 ana Inspector Layton will doe.l with the visual side of
 the evidence. Ho will describe it, first of all. There
 is not, I think, in fact, very much visual evidence,
 is there, in this particular instance?
     IITSriSCTOR LAYTON:        There is, sir.   Some of it is
not confirmed.
      TIIE CORONER:  Anyway, he will describe it. You may
find that bit a little bit confusing. Do not bo too
worried about that because, in a moment, after he has
described it, ho comes round hero and, as far as he is
able, ho shows us on these big plans what he has boon
talking about and then it falls into place somewhat
bettor.




                                 1
       This tlton is a rosuued Inquest which vas oponea on
the 1?tli April, 19"9 ai:*’, on tljr.t occasion, Ioil Anthony
Parki:-', Acting Coroner* s Officer, sr„5.r’:
        !!Thc body which is the suoject of tiiis
        Inquest has been identified to 1)0 3155
        '..'allace of the South Yorkshire Police
        as that of raul Villiara Carlile by Georgs
        Peake, his u n d o . Ho was 1£ years of ago
        having been b o m on the Ctli August, 19^9
        at Liverpool. lie was a single nan and he
        lived at 5 Sasdalo "./all:, Tower Hill, Kirkby,
        Liverpool, Ho was a plasterer by occupation.
        ITo died at Hillsborough Football Ground
        following an incident there on Saturday,
        15 th April, 1 9 8 9 , 1C 1212 Goulding caused
        th2 body to bo ronovoci to tho Medico Local
        Centro and there ho identified it to
        Detective Constable Simon tfeigold who
        subsequently identified the sane body to
        Prof. Usher. It is the family wish that
        the body should be cremated.”
      I then adjourned the Inquest and what I did was, I
wrote to you and, in fact, I think you, I-Ir. Stringer
signed the form, James Stringer, which I sent to you on
the 2 7 th April, I9 G9 and asked you to check names and
addresses a n d , although tho pronunciation of     thesurname
was corroct, in fact wo had mi spelt it and it      shouldbe
snolt *Carlile*. And wo had also mispelt Kirkby because
ve had loft tho *k* out. It is spolt *Kirkby * but I
havo boon told that it is pronounced *Kirkby*. Zn 7.
am learning. Apart from that, I thinlc, all tho othor
iuforr.ir.tion was, in fact, correct?
     lr*. J. ST^I?TG2 TI:   Yos.
     TT") C0ItCK?31i: '..lien I opened this Inquest Dr.
Forrest cane along and told vis all about the blood
alcohol levels for everybody and, in the case of Paul,
tho level wliicli ho measured was 61 rag/ 100 ml.
     iTov wo are going to turn to Prof. Usher.
                  PROF, ALAI! USHSft Called;
                      TSv TITS COIiOMER:
q. Prof. Usher, you arc a Home Office Pathologist and
   prof. of Forensic iredicino here in Sheffield, is
   that right? - A. Yes.
r,. prof. Usher, you sure going to tell r.10 about a man by
    tho name of Paul Vi H i am Carlile and what number did
    wo ..•• - A. 73» sir.
0. That is right, yos.      Can you tell me tlion, please? -
A. Tho bo«1y I examined was that of a heavily-built,
dark-haired young, white nalc, 171 cr.is in 3ici~ht and
weighing GO kgs. The typical signs of traur:atic
asphy::ia \:cre present hot!: externally and internally.
There was some swelling of the brain which is, again,
not uncommon in traumatic asphyxia, and occasional
petechial haemorrhages 011 the lungs. The heart weighed
about ^OO grans and that is slightly enlarged but I
am quite certain that heart disease played no part
in bringing about this man's death.
                                                        %
Ue will cone back to the heart in a moment. - A. In
fact, I give his cause of death as traumatic asphyxia.
I really believe that he had an average expectation of
life for his age.
Yov. do, because I think you said thoro was slight
particular h y p e r t r o p h y , which is thickening, and you
also mention, I notice, that the valve seemed a little
bit dilated? - A. Yes, it did. I do not know this
man's occupation so ....
A plasterer. - A. Veil, that is fairly heavy muscular
work and it may well be that this slight enlargement
of his heart was, in fact, due to work hypertrophy of
his heart.
So what you are saying is nothing to worry about,
ccrtniuly nothing for tho family to worry about - this
is not a genetic matter which they need to bo concerned
about for themselves? - A. No, not at all.
That is really what I vantod to bo quite certain about
in riy mind. - A. Yos.

     J!r. Fraser?
                    ny NR. PHASER:
Trof. Usher, can you offer some roassurance to the
family about the timescale for this type of injury
in terms of the time that you think it may have taken
for 1'aul to lose consciousness once the crushing that
wo have hoard about actually started to take place? -
A. Yos, the reason for Paul's death was that his
chest was held so tightly that he could not breathe
in or oxit and,, once that had happened, then he would
have been unconscious in a matter of seconds, between
10-20 seconds. He would have died within a few
minutes but at the time, of course, subsequent to
his unconsciousness, he would not have been aware of
any pain.
     TIIE C0110IJ1CR: Can you check that the family got
that because it is so important that people shoiiLd
appreciate it.
     HR. PHASER:     Yes, thank you.
      TI’13 CC?vC<n;R:     Any questions?      (Mo questions from
 the Jury)
Prof•. Usher, I am rcost obliged to you and tho some
arrangement as before, thank you. - A. Yos, indeed,

     .TU15 COROITUR; Prof, Usher is in the building so
ho goes back to his offico. 'Tow, shall we vait for
nun to come back? (?qs. CA3LIL5 CAT-"' INTO CCUTrr)
Paul's mum is now with us,
     Iiello, Mrs, Stringer, !.re will call the T/est
Midlands l-ol5.ee Officer, I think.
        CFF1C-7R GSTtALftlNS ELIZABETH 3VAXS Called;

                         13y TIT«S C0R0NJ2R:

’Then you are ready will you introduce yourself and
take me through the summary, please? - A. I am
Geraldine Elizabeth Evans, an Officer of tho T/est
Midlands Police.
Yes, tell me what you have summarised in this case,
please? - A. At about 0930 hours on Saturday, 15 th
April ••••
I am sorry, not what you have summarised, what has
been summarised wotild bo more accurate, I tliirk ? -
A, At 0930 hours on Saturday, 15 th April, 1 9 8 9 , Mr,
Paul William Carlile, together with a Mr, Paul Darren
Murray and Mr, Ian Joseph Foard, left Liverpool and
travelled by train to Sheffield in order to vatch
the FA Cup Semi Final football match which was due
to be held at the Ilillsboroti^L Stadium that day.
Upon tlieir arrival in Sheffield they boarded a bus
which toolc them to the Leppings Lane end of the
Stadium, arriving at about 1230 hours, Hiey met up
with other friends and sat on a wall outside the
ground whilst they had refreshments.

Shortly afterwards Paul went off on his own stating
that he was going to a nearby public house in order
to try to swop his terrace ticket for a seat ticket.
At about 13^0 .hpurs a Mr, Paul Patrick William Nagle
was outside the Stadium in Leppings Lane when he
saw Paul who was in the company of Mr, Carl David
Lewis, Mr, Nagle arranged to see the other two men
later inside the ground. In fact, this is the last
time Hr, Nagle saw either man again.
That was at 13^0, was it not, I think you said? -
A, Yes, Shortly after 15^5 hours and following the
sovoro crushing in the V'est Stand terracing, DC
Coulding and DC Pont entered the Stadium via Gate
0 and saw a p’un who they now lcno.* to be Paul
Cf'rlile being carried from the general direction of
tho turinel on the !7ost Stand concourse. Together
with an o.nbulanceman, '•.•/ho has not boon identified,
the officers attempted to revive Tai.il but without
succcss, Tho persons carrying Paul Iiavo not been
identified.
A Michael Thomas Uollinglmrst, an off duty nurse,
wr.s a spectator at tho match and was in Pen 4 at the
Leppinjs Lane- end of the jround when lie became avaro
of tZic increasing pressure being exerted on hiri by
tho crowd. After being subjected to this pressure
for j‘.ppi’o:;imatoly 15 ninutcs, Mr. Ilollinghurst bo came
awrro of. a space being created around him, and on
looking dovm to the floor of the terracing, he sax/ a
man ho now Itnows to bo Paul 'Jilliam Carlile. Mr.
Uollinghurst saw that Patti was blue in- the face and,
o k not detecting a pulse, he tried to resuscitate him
by heart h u g sage and mouth to mouth resuscitation.
Prul failed to respond to the emergency treatment and
Mr. Ilollinghurst then moved on to treat another
casualty.
Can I just stop you? This is very late information,
is it not? - A. That is correct.
And I think, strictly chronologically, this should
have come before tho paragraph about Detective
Constables Goulding and Pont because that is still
wit lii]). the torraccs? - A. Yes.
Thr>.t is right, is it not? - A. Yes.
Just so t’-»at we got the order right. - A. At 1635
hours Dr. David Monaghan examined Faul at the rear
of t’-o ’.foot Stand and pronounced life extinct.
Shortly thereafter DC Goulding accompanied the body
of Paul to tho gymnasium where a temporary mortuary
had. been sot tip.
This Officer later escorted the body of Paul to the
Medico Legal Centre whore he confirmed the
identification jfco DC Ueigold.
At approximately 0300 hours on Sunday, 16th April,
I9 O9 f Mr. George leako identified tho body of his
nephew to Dotectivc Constable Wallace at the Medico
Lognl OojitT-o.
On Monday, 17 th April, 1p0p-, following an identification
by Detective Constable Iveigold, Prof. Alan Usher
carried out an autopsy and submitted a report giving
cause of death.
  Dvidonce is included regarding- tho analysis of tho
  blood sar-.;:lc from 2 iiul whore the presence of ethanol
  was dotoctou. Tho witnesses proving tho continuity
  of tho blood sample arc ilr. Philip Harvey liich,
  ’
  Jetactive Serjeants Flotchcr and Turner and Dr.
  Alexander Robert Forrost carried out the analysis.
  Found in the personal effects of Paul was a full
  match ticket. lie is shown on visual cvidcnce, sir,
  near to the outer perimeter sate at 1    hours.
        That concluded tlie summary, s i r .

        TiU CGilcniifl:           Hr. F raser, anything you want to
 ask?



        1-7?.LUJH:          j;o, thank j'ou, sir.

        i n . C.-'-'lOCHPCLP/:       !'o, thank you, s i r .

            rcLica T.nsy::cTCR          i h c -iaet, jaytoi :   called-

                                 3y t:~-: cc^azsn:

, Yes, Inspector? - A. Sir, Michael Layton, Detective
  Inspector, .Jest Midi"jirts I'olico. Sir, if I can say
  thorn r.ro a number of uniall additions to tho evidence
  that you v.ro to hear so if you could bearwith me.
  Sir, ran examination has been made ofvideo film and
  photographic evidence and Trail 1ms boon identified
  alive outside the stadium.

 Donna Carlile, Paul* 3 sister, and in fact the same
 applies to Michelle, his other sister, who is also in
 Court, have identified Faul on a photograph which has
 boon given the reference number iriLlO/33A. This
 photograph, sir, is timed at 1h*>h and shows Faul ,
 ^-1 —ve outsiae the ground near to the outer perimeter
 G^to. I*i aact yesterday, sir, on a second piiotogra|5h,
              ^licli is timed at 14551 Paul again has been
 iucntix ied by Donna and Ilicholic as being near to tho
 outer perimeter gates.

Carl Lewis, as you have heard, also one of those who
died at Hillsborough, is not on the photograph and
there is no evidence as such that they we re together
after being seen at 13^0 by Hr. Nagle.

Sir, on the 2 9 th March, 1990, Donna and Ilichelle were
again 00011 and perhaps I should point out that, in
total, ^the two girls have viewed visual evidence for
something like 15 hours together with their social
worker ana, in fact, they made further identifications
of ’aul both o;i photographs and video.


                                            ©
                                                                 l.
                                                                  v t t t ::




                    r;i_-f ozi    photograph      there* ure c. number of
                    photographs, in fact, but on a photograph referenced
                            / 1 9 a person who they believe is Paul is shovn
             D      climbing from Onclosurc no. j into         closure no. 4.
                    That photograph, sir, is not timed.
                    There are, in fact, then, sir, a number of other
                    photograj->hs and X clo not knov whether you vish me
                    to z'o:-.d all tho reforonce numbcx'S out ’.mt I have
                    l-oforrod to ono of thor.i on tho plan which X vill
                    5.nclicnto later,
                 Q. Pic’: that one because they sai'O all, X tal;o it, fairly
                    closo together? - A, Vos, thoy are, sir, and in fact
                    they txre in Enclosure no, h opart front tho first ono
                    T have just mentioned..

                    Sir, tho photograph I have referred to on the plan is
                    FT!2 / 2 and if you could just boar with me a second, sir,
             D      I vill confirm the time. Sir, that photograph is
                    timed at 15°5« Again, on a I3’’C video, roforoncod
                    KAT 0 and timod at 1503:50:18 and also 1503:52:03,
                    again tho person that the girls believe is Paul is
                    shown on that video. All those identifications
                    actually arc in JSnclosuro no, 4 apart from tho first
                    ono .
                 ' I . Tf I can just stop you there because at this point I
                    s o c k : to l'orncmbcr because every effort had been made
                    but this was still just tho start and this was one
                    of the eases whore wo thought it was Enclosure k but
                    wo could not really bo cortain? - A. That is right,
                    sir. In fact, ono of the points I was going to make
                    was that the subsequent evidence you vill hear will,
                    in fo.ct, slightly alter tho figures which I gave to
                    you on the first day and perhaps X will mention it
                    in a moment.

                    Sir, in respect of the last identifications I have
                    prepared a plan which has boon given the reference
                    no, jr.JJTr 128, There is another addendum, sir. In
                    respect of Mr, Ilollinghurst, whose evidence you have
                    already hoard alSdvit, he has viewed photographs and
                    confirms that Faul is one of tho persons that he
                    tried to revive and he has signed a plan of tho
                    terracing indicating tho position at            treated
                    Paul, ^lat plan^ sir, is referenced MTTl/1, I think,
                    sir", that probably covers the additional visual
                    evidence.

         H


h|>i
   ham Ltd                                  -7-
sir, I t M n k 7. said to yo*ar.t that stc.-c that we
bnliev.ou that scvon of tho people that died were in
.
’Snclor.uro no,    and that possibly twot r.t t'icit stage
nu*y *ir.vo boon in 'Enclosure no, 4, As a result of
tho ovidonco of* Mr, Hollinghurst, in' fact, it is now
oight people that we believe were in no, 4 and one
that nay have been,

Cir, can I refer you then to a plan which has been
Given the reference no, 2~.:jL 1 7 0 and that relates to
tI.'.o identifications outside the ground, sir.
That will be C221, - A, I have already referred to it,
sir, but m.rJL 128, which is a plan of the terraces ,,,,
That is C222, This is tho one where the two young
ladies, if I can refer to them, spent so much effort? -
A. That is right. Finally, sir, MTH/l, which is Mr.
Ilollinghurst *s plan.

That will be C223, - A, Sir, if I can deal, first of
all, with the identification outside and that is
M'JJJ, 170, The point at which we believe Paul — —
well, wo know Paul is shown is at this point here,
the outer perimeter gates near to here. These are
the outer perimeter gates and it is in this position
here,

     HID COJIOMER:       Ladies and gentlemen of tho Jury,
can you see that?       Mot Gate C ,,,,

     TITS IJITjffiSS:   It is the actual outer gate, sir,
      TIPv COUGMSR:  Yos, - A, Sir, in respect of the
terrace plan, this is Enclosure no, 3 and this is
ICnclosure no, 4 and, in respect of the identification
where it appears that Paul is, as it were, going from
3 to 4 at the dividing fence, the position that I
believe that is shown is at this point here. In
rcspect of tho photographic and video identifications
actually in Enclosure no, 4, as I say, on the plan
I have referred to just one, PRT/2, but tho position
shown is here. I think it is fair to say, sir, on
those photographs and the video, I am satisfied that
Paul is probably still alive at that stage but I
cannot say at. what stage of the medical process that
you have already-heard about Paul has actually reached,
Yos, on tho assumption it is Paul, the person you are
looking at? - A, That is right, sir, yes.
Then in respect of tho photograph MTIl/l, I-ir.
IIollinghuret*s ,,,,

Mot photograph - plan, I think? - A. Yes. Ke has
indicated a position again in no. 4 Enclosure and in
this position here, in Enclosure no, 4,
 'jici, or course, Hr. Ilollinghurst *s csvidenco "ns quite
cJ.eor t.liat «io !:a.s in Enclosure 4, vns it not? - A, That
it? ri;;ht, sir, yes.
                t,.v>
                *s  y,,
                      •      o quc;otions, sir, thrnJc yo*u.
      ICl. LIi<T»:        ?:o, than!; you.

       ?. CA.TCJU'CL.'S:       I\o, thank you.
       fii-1. FftASSii: Sir, just before you conclude, vill
you lot ne road a very short note that the family gave
to r.:o thi.-j Morning which contains words of thanks
which cone better from then than me, sir.
                             Yes, thank you.
      I*'?. FfiAiJMII: Tlie note is frow tlie family in
perioral, sir, and I road it as it stands. They want
to thank Ilichael I.ayton and To tor Hogan who, I
understand, is an Officer who assisted Inspector
Layton, sir, for their help throughout tho Inquiry.
They want to thank the two Officers, Goulding and
Pont, for tho assistance which they cave to Paul on
the day, together with the ambulanceman whose name has
not been traced. Sir, they want to thank Maureen Tiroe
and Peter Hyde from Moseley Social Services and they
have been, in the family*s words, sir, a "lifeline for
us throughout tho last year." Sir, they want to thank'
Ilichael Hollinghurst for trying to save Paul. They
say, »Vnrc!s will never express how we feel but knowing
that he was with Taul, we are all grateful." Finally,
sir, they want to than!-: you for toeing, again their
words, "so thorough and a gentleman" as you ha\re
been throughout those Inquests and, in particular,
the Inquest; into their loved one.
     THE C0R0I,TDT>;         That is very kind of you.    Thank
you over so much.          l.Tiich is Donna?
     I think I have told you, ladies and gentlemen,
that there are very few families that I have the
opportunity of speaking to but I have spoken to you,
in fact, and I have probably spoken to Michelle as
well but I did not know who you were at the t irae.
So you are one of tho few families whom I have had an
opportunity to speak to and it is very good of you to
say nice things about me. I appreciate it very much.
I appreciate it even more that you have said nice
things about the Officers, in fact, I think they are
both in Court, and, of course, all the other people
who you have mentioned and who we have heard about.
I must say that I was very pleased that we managed
to get the evidence from Mr. Hollinghurst because
not only does it help with the technical problems as
to whore he was, it is the fact that he was a nurse — — ■
okay, ho did not succeed in reviving Paul but at least
you have tho comfort that fairly immediately after
tho incident there was     * ’ ho was actually near
Paul doin'; hid host and that is some cncoux-acenont and
all credit to him and all crodit to you for r.cknovledgin
it. TI\"nk you very r.mch indeed.

      T ;Mii - in a sense I an just ochoinj ’.-.-hat you ha\re
said - very very conscious in all Inquests but the
only one I ar.< thinking about at tho reorient is this ono,
thinking* about l-aul. I an very very conscious Jiov
(jrnatly loved people are who uo hoax’ about and today,
at the nonient, we have hoard about Faul end I would like
you to Icnov how much we Tool for you and fox- you, Mrs.
Stx’injcr, a very hard time for you and I am sorry that,
if you like, we have added upset to you this r.iox’ning
but you are here, you have got your family, and they
will support you, I am quite sure.

     Tho last point is I am exceedingly sorry that you
had tho delay because, of course, that would have added
to your stress today. It was notanybody's fault but
there is nothing I can do about. I an very sorry that
it happened to you today. Anyway we waitedbecause wo
did net want you not to be here. Thank you for coming.
God blocs you.
                                                            61


                                           M. T. HQLLINGHURST

               MTrH&F!T. THOMAS HOLLINGHURST Sworn
                        Rv THE CORONER:

Q. It is Michael Thomas Hollinghurst? - A. Yes.
Q- Of                                                - A.
   No, I have changed addresses since tnen.

Q* Tell us what it is now? - A.
                    since June last year.
Q. You are a charge nurse by profession? - A. Yes, that
   is right.
Q. And also a football fan? - A. Yes.
Q.   Following Liverpool I take it?   - A. Quite right.
Q.    Is it right that on 15th April 1989 you went to the
     football ground in Sheffield to see the Semi Final? -
     A. Yes.
Q. Am I right in thinking that you went by car? - A.
   Yes.
Q. You left I think at about 10.30 with four friends? -
   A. Yes.
Q. What time did you arrive in Sheffield? - A. We
   actually parked the car up at about 2.15.
Q.    That was quite a long journey. Was there any reason
     for that? - A. There was quite a lot of traffic in
     and around the Stockport area but when we got almost
     to the end of the Woodhead Pass we decided to call
     and have something to eat as a couple ofus had not
     brought anything to eat and we called infor
     something to eat and a drink.
Q. You stopped at the Woodhead Pass? - A. At the very
   end, the Sheffield end.
Q. What time did you get to this place where you
   stopped, about? - A. About 1 to 1.15.
Q. You had something to eat and then you came on?- A.
   Yes.
Q. Having parked, you made your way to the ground? - A.
   Yes.
Q. You do not know where you parked I take it? - A.
   Overton Road.



                         ©
                                                          62


                                          M. T. HOLLINGHTTRgT

Q. How far from the ground? - A. I would say it is about
   a ten minute walk.

Q. Were there other supporters going to the ground at
   the same time? - A. Yes.
Q. Liverpool or others? - A. Mainly Liverpool.
Q . Did you notice anything about their behaviour which
    worried you in any way? - A. No, everybody was good
    humoured.
Q. Did you see anybody drinking cans of alcohol? - A.
   There were the odd ones but not excessive numbers.
Q. What I am interested in is - and I am not trying to
   pin you down to say if there were 22 - an approximate
   percentage of the total crowd that you saw in your
   judgement? - A. Of people who were walking to the
   ground who were actually drinking?
Q. Yes. - A. Not a high percentage at all.    As I say, we
   saw the odd one or two.
Q. Very few as far as you were concerned and their
   behaviour was fine? - A. Everybody was good humoured,
   yes.
Q. I think you got to Leppings Lane at about 2.25? - A.
   Yes, an approximate time.
Q. What was it like outside? - A. We immediately made
   towards where the turnstiles were and there were a
   few hundred or maybe a thousand or so people already
   around the turnstile area.
Q. When you say the   turnstile area do you mean the
   actual turnstile   area or the area outside the
   perimeter gates?   - A. The area that actually leads
   down towards the   turnstile.
Q. Had you been there before? - A. The previous year.
Q. So you had been there before? - A. Yes.
Q. So there were about 500 to 1,000 people? - A. Making
   a rough estimate, yes.
Q. Just look at the model so that we get it right. Just
   show him the turnstile area /indicating). Are we
   talking about that area there or the area outside the
   gates? - A. We immediately went down to the area that
   has got a partition dividing it down the middle
   leading towards the turnstiles.
                                                            63


                                           M- T. HOLLINGHURST


Q. That is the turnstiles A to G? - A. I think that is
   the area we went down to, yes.
Q. That is     the area where the people   were? - A.Yes.
Q. Did you  see any mounted Officers or anybody else? -
   A. I noticed in particular one mounted Officer who I
   had seen several times outside Liverpool's ground.

Q. Where was he? - A. He was in that area.
Q. Did you see what he was doing, if    anything?- A. He
   was trying to get some kind of order, people to queue
   in some kind of order.
Q. Why did he not succeed? - A. There were already a
   mass of people. There would be no particular queues.
   There didn't appear to me at that stage to be anybody
   sectioning people into queues which is the kind of
   arrangement I am used to when I go to football
   matches at Liverpool certainly.
Q. Because the configuration at Liverpool is completely
   different, is it not? - A. Yes.
Q. Was there any pushing? - A. As I say, there was no
   order at all and so there were no orderly queues and
   there didn't seem any facility for making any orderly
   queues. People were just sort of massed in what was
   really a small area trying to get through a few
   turnstiles.
Q.   Did you     see anybody distressed? - A. Yes.
Q.    In that area I am talking about? - A. Yes,becoming
     more so over the next few minutes.
Q.    Why was    that? - A. The crush got more and more.We
     arrived and more and more people were arriving behind
     us and so the numbers we are talking about originally
     obviously were swelled by the people arriving behind
     us .
Q. Did you feel anybody pushing you? - A. Everybody was
   being pushed. It got to the stage where there was a
   crush of people and, in fact, some people were
   distressed and trying to make their way back out of
   the crush outside the turnstiles.

Q. You did not take that course? - A. No.
Q. Does that mean you were not particularly
   distressed? - A. Yes, I was quite frightened at that
   stage actually as most people around me were, you
   know.
                                                        64


                                         M. T. HOLLINGHURST


Q. At this point, as I understand it, you could not help
   yourself any more? - A. No, as I say, I got into that
   area and people were arriving behind us and it just
   gradually got worse.
Q. Did you hear anybody making appeals for people not to
   push? - A. People were shouting all sorts of things,
   "Don't push, there are people getting hurt, there are
   people getting crushed".
Q. It made no difference? - A. No, it didn't seem to
   make any difference at all.
Q. You entered through a turnstile, is that right? - -A.
   Yes.
Q. You did not see any of the big gates open, is that
   correct, or did you? - A. I didn't, no.
Q. Having got in, do you know what time it was that you
   got in by any chance? - A. Only judging by the next
   few minutes I would say between ten to and five to
   three.
Q. That is an estimate, is it? - A. That is an estimate,
   yes.
Q. You do not actually know the exact time? - A. I don't
   remember looking at the time.
Q. Having got in did you go down the tunnel? - A. Yes.
Q. When you got to the entry of the tunnel before you
   went down did you by chance look towards the pitch? —
   A. Through the tunnel?
Q. Yes. - A. Yes, that is what I am basing the time on
   because as we were entering the tunnel the players
   were on the pitch. The match hadn't started.
Q.    We know what time that was and your time is quite
     accurate actually. At the entry of the tunnel the
     players were on the pitch. You could see them, could
     you? - A. Yes.
Q.    What was the tunnel like? Wasit empty, full, or
     were you able to get down it?   That is what I am
     trying to find out? - A. We were getting down it.
     There were a lot of people going down but it wasn't
     crushed. A lot of people were making their way
     through the tunnel.
 Q. Before you went in you actually heard people talking.
    I think you mentioned that you heard stewards or
    somebody saying, "Plenty of room inside" or words to
    that effect? - A. Yes.
                                    M. T. HOLLINGHimST


Where was that? - A. Once we got through the
turnstile everybody thought they were out of the
worst of it because it was such a bad crush outside
and we were relieved to get through. Of the four of
us who were making their way through the turnstiles
we lost one and so the three of us were still left on
the groundside of the turnstile and we met up
together. Obviously we wanted to make our way
straight into the ground and there were stewards
around and a couple of Police Officers. I distinctly
remember a Police Officer saying, "Make your way
straight in. There is plenty of room on the
terraces, plenty of room inside".




                             /Q. Did he point you in.
                                        M, T. HOLLINGHPRST

Did he point you in any direction or did he just say,
"May your way through"? - A. Just generally.   He just
said, "Make your way in."
He didn't point in any way.   He just said, "In lads", or
words to that effect, "There's plenty of room"? - A. Yes.

Was it said to you personally or just generally? - A. No.
I mean, within a couple of feet of me as I was making my
way.
Down you went   down this tunnel andyou got to theother
end of it, of   course? - A. Yes.

You went left   or right? - A. Left.
When you got on to that terrace - wecall it pen 4 - tell
me what happened and how it was? - A. Well, on the way
through the tunnel the three of us were still together.
Having been there the previous year, as I have said, when
it was quite full the previous seasons we had noticed
that the terracing to the left corner had been
particularly empty yet where we were was crushed, the
season before.   Even going through the tunnel, and as
far as I can remember even on the way to the match that
day, we said we would make our way to that left terrace.
That is the banked one, the high one? - A. The left hand
corner behind the goal.   Of course, not knowing that
that end was penned off in separate pens. We thought it
was all one complete terracing.
So that was your objective to get... - A. Out of where it
was crushed.
You entered pen 4, however, because you were expecting to
walk along the terrace? - A. Yes.
Just describe to me what that pen was like wnen you
entered it? - A. It was quite full - well, very full, but
nothing that I had not seen on a football terrace before.
It was fairly fluid because we could make our way
through, albeit it was a struggle at first for a few
minutes.   Then it suddenly became more and more tightly
packed by the minute really.
Do you recollect when you first entered, when you said it
was quite fluid, had the match kicked-off? - A. No.

It had not? - A. No.
Then you say it became tighter, that was the word you
used.   Do you recollect what time that was in relation
to the match?   I am not asking you to tell me what time
                                                        M- T- uniXINGHURST


it was  but in relation to what was going on on the
Ditch? -    I think we are  t   a  about a rom d kick-off
                                    l   k   i   n   g


time that it really became oppressive and go
more so in the next few minutes.
The tightness, was it coming from behind you? - A. As far
as I could gather it was coming from behind m .

You had initially made your way in,                     ^ “. ^ ^ “think*”

i S a f ^ U y


Against that fence? - A. We came back in slightly and
then...
So you were able to move off the fence at that stage? -
A. Yes.
 befor^kick-of f^time^e'^hi^that^fence.'^Roundabou^kick-
 off time we are talking about now.

 asrrs:
 to become really frightening then because...
                                                    s.j Mavises-
 You are saying at kick-off time it became frightening? -
 A. Yes.


 Unlike any football crowd 1 had ever been in before.

 1 think you were rotated once or twice, is .t^“tb^ | ht?
 A Certainly once, yes. At one stage I had my
 completely to the pitch, facing upwards towards the
 stand.
. Did you see people being pulled up at that point? - A.
  Yes.
. Then did you manage to turn round again or were Y ^ o v e d
  round? - A. I just remember that...   i axn g
  other way.   I don't know how I managed to do it.
. You had lost your friends by that time? - A. Yes.                          ^

 What happened then?   What did you see or                  (
 The crush got worse rather than better and after a f e w '
 minutes I las aware that somebody was on the ground right
 by where I was standing, by where I was positioned.
                                                M. T. HOLLINGHURST


                  ,    ,-- • m»Aorpcfi wtl£H VOU bGCSlBG flWflrC of
Q,     Was thematch still m p 8        . Yes the match was
      this or can you not remember? - A. Yes, w e u.
      going on.
Q.    Thiswas in fact a young man?      - A. That's right.
              ,         .    checked to see whether his pulse
Q * was^oing and6things G S . ' S S f « soon as you could? -
    a ! M s, but not at that particular moment.

Q.     I realise that. - A. As soon     as th? crowd cleared...

Q.     That is in fact my next        <*“*s^ ° ? ^ is ladl'^A.'^really
      before you were able                  because it just seemed
       like^forever^ * “ “ ee?ed like it
       prlbablyaonly°a S S J 1S     « 5 -i nuLs at the moment, five
       or ten minutes.
       I presume the match had stopped by then? - A. By that
 Q
       stage, yes.
                   # . a      a  x w a s not aware of whflt was
       Did you see it stop? - A. I was not
 Q     going on to be quite honest.
             , ....if.    _ a . i was not aware        of when the
 0. Most people aren t...       A
    match particularly stopped or when...


 *■ bmssms
       ease and a space...
                                              s.%srBr»
 Q- and”more ^ l e ’aiS ^ h a f i s ^ n i a i t ^ S ^ s o ^ f o n
    the ground below me.


 «• s           .       -
        this lad?_- A. Yes.
                                i        s       *           -
     Q.Cin fact i;t|jink you came «     the
      ^ S E t S ? 2 l « There was somebody        just a couple
       Of feet further away.   He was also in the sane
       condition.
     Q. So you tried for both of them? - A. Yes, I was going
        back*••
                                                       69

                                          M. T. HOLLINGHURST


Q. Did you know whether the other person recovered.   Have
   you any idea? - A. Pardon?

Q. Do you know anything about the other          ??* didn't*
   We know about the lad because you identified him, didn t
   you, in due course? - A. I believe...   well,      .
   identified the other person as well.   I believe they are
   both deceased.
Q. It was somebody called Paul Carlile? - A. The young man
   was.




                Q. He was the first




                      ©
                               M.T. HOLLINGHURST


He was the first one of the two whom you tried to help?
- A. Yes, he was the one who was immediately next to
-me and the one who I had been aware of originally.
Did you see any activity on the perimeter fence? - A.
By that stage people were trying with their bare hands
to rip the fence, you know get the fence down. That is
what I was aware of going on around me, people were
pulling at the fence.
Were you attempting to help the lad when people were
attempting to pull the fence down or was it earlier.
Can you remember that? - A. From what I can remember as
I was helping the young lad and the other fellow people
were frantically trying to get the fence down.
But it had not yet come down? - A. No, they had made
a hole. There may have been a gate opened, I don't
know.
Would that have been at the same time as you were
resuscitating the lad or had you already started
resuscitation earlier? - A. Well immediately there
was any space at all when I saw the lad under my feet.
Of course that is what you were concentrating on? -
A. Yes.
And how did you get out yourself? - A. Through a hole
in the fence eventually.
 You went frontways? - A. Somebody picked me up and
 said: "It is time for you to get out yourself". By
 that time I think two ambulancemen had arrived and
 taken over from me trying to resuscitate.
 Somebody had come into the pen? - A. Yes.
 Well I know, I think I know anyway that the family
 were very grateful that you were there with regard
 to that young man, Paul Carlisle.
       Do you remember this was the witness whom we
 discovered so to speak half way through the Inquests
 in April and May so I thought it would be good to have
 him in here.

               Cross-Examined by MR. KING:
 Mr. Hollinghurst, can you just help us a little about
 your experience in 1988 the previous semi-final. You
 gave some evidence that you had made your mind up in
 1989 that if you could you would go to a different
 place? - A. Yes.
                                M.T. HOLLINGHORST



Where had you been on the terraces in 1988? - A. I think
we were, it would probably be Pen 3, the one to the
right of the tunnel.
As you come down the tunnel ....   A. Rather than the one
to the left, yes.
And what had been your experiences in that pen in 1988
which had led you to make the decision you had for 1989?
- A. Well it was quite crushed. It was quite crushed
in relation obviously to the situation that we could see
in the corner of the pitch which is why we made the
decision in 1989 to try and make our way in that directio
I am sorry to press you a little, but when you mean
"crushed" could you put that into perhaps a little detail
of what it meant as far as space went of the people aroun
you? - A. Well it was a heavy football crowd. As I said
when I first came in 1989 it was probably still fluid but
there were quite a lot of people in that particular area
compared to an area which was a few yards away where
there was nobody as far as we could see.
I just want to go back to 1988 because you clearly had
been concerned of what had happened in 1988? - A. Yes.
What had been your concern? - A. I thought somebody may
have been injured in 1988 and at half-time people were
clambering into the Stand in 1988 during the half-time
break out of that pen.
Do you mean clambering up ....   A. They were being    ,
helped up into the seated area at half-time to get out
of the standing area.
      MR. KING: Thank you. I ought to say because as
you know I represent, or you may not know, a large
number of the ba.reaved and injured including the
family of the boy who you helped. Can I say also on
behalf of them how grateful they are for what you did.
Thank you.

            Cross-Examined bv MRS. McBRIEN:
Mr. Hollinghurst, when you said you got to Lepping's Lane
at 2.25 did you mean right at the top of Leppings Lane
or did that mean right by the perimeter gate? - A. No,
we made our way straight down to where the entrance was.
What I am trying to find out   is where you were at 2.25?
- A. We went straight to the   turnstile area. From
walking from the car we went   straight to the ground, we
didn't make a stop anywhere,   we just went straight to
the ground to get in.
                                     M:T. HOLLINGHURST



HOW did you know it was 2.25.  Why did you say that
time? - A. That is just a rough estimate. Approximately
2.25 judging on the events that, you know, my perception
of the events that followed.
So you are not absolutely sure about the time then? -
A. I did not look at my watch at that particular time.
What was it like anyway when you got to Ljppings ^ne,
was it easy enough to walk right down to the perimeter
gate? - A. Down to the area where the turnstiles was but
I s I say there were probably 5 0 0 / 1 0 0 0 people already in
that area. They were in that area, the immediate ar
before the turnstiles and obviously trying to get into
 the ground at that time.
So the crowds were mainly congested just near the perimete
gate, they weren’t spreading up the Lane at the time.^
A. I don't know what you mean by the perimeter gate .
The main gate before the turnstile area? - A. They
in the area that you funnelled into before the turnstiles.
       MRS. McBRIEN:    All right.    Thank you very much.

                  Further Bv The CORONER:
1988, do you know what time you arrived in 1988 as a .
matter of interest? - A. I could not tell you sorry.
 We want you to mark the plan, want you to show us where
 you wereT We are asking all the witnesses. If you would
 walk up to the overhead. - A. Is it where I ended up.
 What I want you to show me, I want you to mark the positio
 where you were with a cross where you finished up near the
 lad whom you helped. Point out which is Pen 4? Before
 you mark it you had told me that you were next to Jhe
 perimeter fence. Are you saying that you managed ■to *°ve
 back off, the radial fence, you moved back off it, aian t
 you? - A. When we came to a halt in the fence we just
 stepped back inside.
        THE CORONER:   Mark it then.That is fine.

        MR. BEECHEY:   345 sir.
        THE CORONER:   Thank you.
 When you   got to the radial fence before you moved back
 off, was   that when kick-off had taken place or had
 kick-off   not yet taken place. I just can't remember
 what you   told me? - A. I don't think the match had kicked
 off.
                                                              57
                                                    P. EDWARDS



Q. I am sorry? - A. I was worried about how packed it
   was in 1980.
O. When you say very packed, I want to know which bit
   was very packed. Are you saying that the whole of
   the terrace from one end to the other was packed?
   Sergeant Griffiths, can you put the ground plan up?
   This, of course, is a ground plan of 1989 but if you
   just turn round and look. Just indicate the
   terracing from one end to the other. Ignore all
   those radial fences because you are quite right that
   they were not there. Are you saying that the whole
   of that was packed or are you saying that just a
   central section was packed? - A. When we first came
   in to the right that was less packed. As we moved
   across it was packed for a good distance. It was not
   just the centre. A wide area was packed.
Q. It was sufficiently dense there for you to want to
   move towards the front? - A. Yes.
Q. Is that because right at the front it tends to be a
   little bit easier? - A. Yes.
Q. Because people   do not actually like standing there or
   whatever? - A.   At the time I was young and that is
   where a lot of   young people go at the fence, out of
   the way of the   crowd and you have got a better view.
Q. I do not think you are very old now but you were
   younger. Thank you very much indeed. - A. Yes.
                     TAN JOHN FEARNS Sworn

                         Bv THE CORONER

Q. You are Ian John Fearns? - A. That is correct.

Q. Is it Still                ? - A. It is, yes.

Q-                           I believe? - A. That is right.

Q. Mr. Fearns you are another lifelong Liverpool
   supporter? - A. Yes.
Q. You came to the 1989 match anyway on the 15th
   April? - A. That is correct.
Q. Did you come to the 1988 one as well? - A. Yes, I
   did.
Q. Let us talk about 1989.     I think you had a ticket? -
   A. I did.
                                                             58

                                                    P. EDWARDS


Q. You came by train I believe, is that right? - A. That
   is correct.
Q. It was not a football special but it was just a
   regular train? - A. It was a shuttle train that was
   on its way to Norwich which passed through Sheffield.
Q. You stopped off and you got off I think at about
   quarter to twelve I think the train arrived, is that
   right? - A. That is approximately quarter to twelve.
Q. It does not   have to be to the minute or anything like
   that. When    you got off how many people were there?
   Were you by   yourself or did you travel with a
   group? - A.   I travelled with one friend on the train.
Q. Which one was that? - A. Terry Mainwaring.
Q. I think you met two or three other people I think? -
   A. We met three other friends when we were actually
   put on to the buses that were laid on to take us to
   the ground. We actually met them on the actual bus
   itself.
Q. Was that Paul Carlisle, Paul Murray and Ian Ford? -
   A. Yes, that is right.
Q. Were you wearing football gear? - A. No, I was
   wearing casual jeans and a jeans shirt.




                                 /Q. So how come.




                        32
                                                                     59


                                                   I.J.   fearns



q           So how come that you got on to the football coaches?
            A Well as we were coming off the train the Police were
            saying: "Liverpool supporters this way, Nottingham
            Forest supporters the other way", so we 3ust followed
            their directions.
o           Then you were steered towards these coaches? - A. We
            w a i t e d in the forecourt, car park of the area till t e
            buses actually arrived.
n           <?o vou were quite pleased because you came with one
            friend and you had met three more so there were five of
            you at that point? - A. Y es, that is correct.

Q . YOU then, I think the coach eventually or bus took you
    towards Leppings Lane. Is that right.    A. Y .
o           I think you got off near the ground about half-past-12
            something of that order? - A. Something about that.
    o       I think the first thing you did was find yourself a
    Q ‘ shop* got something to M t ,       and then I think ^ b o u g h t
             four cans of lager each. Is that right? - A. That was not
             specifically what I said during the course of the interview
             . h e S o l.
             ^            L_! %-r _
                        ij_       said ua
                                       we nnmhased
                                          purchased a couple of cans of
             lager. I did not give any quantity.
             I see, so how many cans did you actually have yourself.
    Q.
             -   A. I myself only purchased two.
    q   . It does not matter to me whether it is one or ten. Well
          ten might matter to me but all I    tryJn® ^ °    Riaht’
          as briefly as I can, you had a couple ^ j a n s . * ^ ht;h
          I think you sat on some nice grassy slope? - A. Yes, tnere
          was a verge just across the road.
    q   . Because it was a beautiful day? - A. Yes.
    O    All I want todeal with at this point, I want you                 to tell
    Q ‘ me about PaulCarlisle, all right, because he was                  with
        you at about 12.30? — A. He was.
    Q. How long did he stay with you? - A. He stayed for approx­
       imately I would say, what, half-an-hour at the mo .
     Q. In other words you are saying he left you for whatever
        reason at about 1 p.m.? - A. That is correc .
        Q. You never sawhim again after that, did you,             on the day.
           - A.. Unfortunately not.
        q   . so when he left you that in fact was goodbye, unfortunately
              - A. Yes.
                                                             60

                                           I.J. FEARNS



Q. Now Paul, why did he go? Tell me why he left, as far as
   vou know. Don't tell me what other people have told you
   at this stage, just what you know as to why he left? -
   a  Paul was saying previously when we met him on the bus
   and for a number of days before that he wanted to obtain
   a Stand ticket. Unfortunately he only had a season ticket
   at Anfield for the ground so he was only allocated a ground
   ticket and he wanted to actually try and swap this ticket
   and obtain a Stand ticket.
q   . I see, so when you say "ground ticket" he had a terracing
      ticket? - A. He did indeed.
Q. And what he wanted was to have a Stand ticket to go upstairs;
   - A. Yes.
Q. Was that the reason why he left because he hoped to do a
   swap? - A. He hoped to do a swap.
O        And in fact I think you went towards a place   called the
        Horse and Jockey but you have got no idea, he   ^ s t said
        "That is where I am going". Is that right. -    A. Well he
        said he was going up to the pub up the top of   the hill to
        try and swap his ticket. We gave him roughly    three-quarters
        of an hour and followed up.
Q.       Oh I see. Andhaving followed him you neverfound him?
        - A. We didn't no.
Q. So you can't say whether he succeeded or not but you know
   that that is what he was trying to do? - A. That is the
   reason he left.
 Q. Hoping to do, shall we say? - A. Hoping.
    Q. So   you then followed him up and eventually you came back
       to   the turnstile area at about half-past-2 I think,
       is   right, isn't it? - A. Yes, approximately quarter-past
       to   half-past. I could not be sure.
    O   I am not going to take you through the detail ofhow you
        qot in apart from asking whether you went through a turn­
        stile or through a gate? - A. I went through a turnstile.
    Q. The only other question I want to ask you is did you see
       any of the big gates open? - A. No, not at all.

    Q. You never saw that? - A. No.
    O. When, you got in tell me who you were with when you got
       through your turnstile? - A. When I entered the actual
       ground I was with Terence Mainwaring; I a n Ford; Paul Murray
       and we had met up with a friend just outside called
       Carl Lewis.


                                 3^
                                                           61


                                        I.J. FEARNS


Q. So it was Ian Ford, Paul Murray .... How well did you
   know Paul Murray, did you know him well as well? - a .
   We went to home games. I knew him more through Paul Carlislt
   who knew him a lot better than myself. He was a friend we
   went to the matches with.
Q. And then you met up with this other lad called Carl Lewis?
   - A. That is correct.
Q.    You   met him on the inside? - A. On the outside. We were
     actually in the area outside the turnstiles with him and
     we all entered the ground together.
Q. Did he come through a turnstile as well as far as you know?
   - A. He did.
Q. Now on the inside there were the five of you including
   yourself, I think you noticed some Police Officers in that
   concourse area. Is that right? - A. I did indeed.
Q. Do you know about how many you saw? - A. No, it was just
   about three or four, five at the most.
Q.    And   did they search you, can youremember? I don't mean
     all of them? - A. I recall them   searching some fans but
     I myself never got searched.
Q. So you saw that was happening but you weren't? - A. Yes.
Q. Did you wait any longer for Paul or did you decide you
   did not know where he was and you were going .... A. No,
   we assumed if he had swapped his Stand ticket we obviously
   would not meet up with him until the way home or if he
   hadn't we told him we would be in the ground at a certain
   place, you know, hoping to meet him in there, so we made
   our way straight there.
Q. And did you go down the tunnel? - A. Yes.
Q. Now something peculiar I think about Carl Lewis. Did
   he actually have a terrace ticket? - A. He didn't, he had
   a Stand ticket.
Q. What did he do, did he go to the Stands or did he come
   with you? - A. Unfortunately he came in through the turn­
   stiles with us and we were waiting for Paul Murray who
   was still outside at the time. I don't know exactly what
   happened but between the time we were actually going in,
   which must have been all of about two minutes, Carl did
   not have his stub so he was not allowed up into the
   Stands.
Q. Was your ticket torn, can you remember, your ticket I am
   talking about when you came through or was it intact? -
   A. No, the person on the gate had taken the stub from
   the ticket.
                                      I.J. FEARNS



I am not too worried precisely what happened to the ticket,
but what you are saying is he could not get up to the
Stands because he could not prove ... A. He could not prove
he had a Stand ticket.
So if hewas going anywhere he had to go down        onto the
terracing? - A. Well that was the way.
And in fact that is what he did with the rest of you? -
A. Yes, he did.
And you all went down I think the tunnel.     Is that right?
- A. That is correct.
Did you know there were other routes into the ground? -
A. Yes, I did.
     do I   take it thatyou liked being behind the goal.
 Id on °tm ean d irectlybehind the goal but in that centre
 section? - A. Well at Anfield that is u s u a l l y where we
 stand so therefore to make it easier when Paul Carlisle
 had gone awlj to swap his ticket that is where we said we
 would be.
 I see. So that was where you were hoping Paul would come
 if he had not succeeded with his swap? - A. Tha      g
 And you went down the tunnel. The tunnel I take it was
 reasonably clear. You did not have any P*rtlc£ ^
 difficulty in the tunnel? - A. No, no real problems at
 all.
 And when you exited from the tunnel did you turn right or
 left? - A. Right.
. Have you any idea what time this would have been that you
  got there? - A. Roughly about 25-past, half-2.
 How long would you say it took you to get through the
 turnstile area? - A. From the outside I would say between
 15 minutes, you know about 10/15 minutes.
. If you got to the turnstile area at the time
  you would have had to be later on the terracing wouldn t
  £ou? - A. Yes. As I say they were given as approximate
  times.
. In your statement you put 20-to-3. Would that s°|“jd
  reasonable to you or would you prefer to change that.
  - A. 20-to-3 was when we actually got on to the terracing.

  Yes, that is what I am trying to find out.    You have
  understood what I am asking? - A. Yes.
                                                              63


                                         I .J . FEARNS



Q. At that point were you able to find, select a spot where
   you wanted to be? - A. We obviously had to push through
   because obviously there was a crowd there but we didn't
   find any great difficulty at all except when we got in
   obviously the crowd was still increasing and there was a
   lot of pushing going on.
Q. Did you feel any surges? - A. Yes, I did. The first surge
   must have been about quarter-to-3 but that was just with
   people singing and what have you because as I say at that
   time there was nothing out of the ordinary. Then it must
   have been some time between 10-to, 5-to-3 there was the
   surge that came and that just pushed me right down to the
   front.
Q. Can you remember whether the players were already on the
   pitch at that point, not for playing but for pre-kick-off?
   - A. No, they weren't.
Q. They weren't or you can't remember? - A. No, they weren't
   on the pitch.
Q.    They were not. So you felt this surge which carried you
     forward before the players came onto the pitch? - A. I
     did.
Q.    Some time after 10-to-3 you would say but before the players
     were on the pitch? - A. It was before the     players came
     on the pitch.
Q.    Before, that is right. Did you hear the         teams being
     announced? - A. I can't honestly remember.       I probably
     did but I can't honestly say.
Q.    Did you    see the   players come on        to the   pitch     atal
     A. No.
Q. Did you see any bit of the match? - A. No.
Q. I don't mean the detail, but did you .... A. I never got
   to focus on one player or the ball at all.
Q. So you are not able to say any of your events in relation
   to what was going on on the pitch apart from being sure
   when the surge came it was before they had come out? — A.
   It was before they came.
Q. Did you get split up from your friends? - A. Yes.
Q. But I think you did actually see Carl at one point, he
   was slightly over to the right, wasn't he? - A. Carl was
   originally standing to my right just in front of Terry
   who was also standing to my right. When the surge came
                                                         64


                                       I.J. FEARNS



   that pushed me right forward to near the front I went
   off sort of to the left and Carl went straight forward
   and that was the last I saw of him.
Q. Was it at this point when this big surge came? -   A. Yes.
Q. Did this surge go forward and ease back at all or did it
   stay continuously forward? — A. No, when the surge came
   the pressure was so intense with the surge that I decided
   me and Paul Murray had been pushed that way, we will see
   what it is like down the front because usually there is
   a gap between the railings and where the terracing smarts
   coming up. We got into this gap and then the surge just,
   you know, it became more and more and then we became
   trapped unfortunately.
Q. Tell me: when you first got down to the front was there
   in fact a gap there? - A. No. We assumed there would be
   a gap there but when we got there there wasn't and there
   was no way back.
Q. Obviously we know things became dreadful in the front
   there, we know that. What I am trying to find out when
   you first got to the front bit where you were hoping
   things would be easier, was it in fact any easier at
   that point when you were moving or being moved by the
   surge? - A. No, when we actually got to the front it was
   just as packed as what it was up the back and then it
   just gradually got worse.
Q. Could you see the little gate? — A. I saw it when I
   was further up the pitch being opened once but when I
   was forward I had no view of the gate at all.
Q. Tell me about that. When did you see this little gate
   open then, tell me? - A. It was just before the surge
   came the gate opened. I don't know for what reason or
   whether there was a fan trying to get out. I honestly
   don't know. I just remember the gate opening and the
   Police Officer pushing the fan back in and closing the
   rrate
Q. You say this was before the players were on the pitch?
   - A. That was before the players were on the pitch.
Q. You are quite sure about that? - A. Positive.
Q. And you say you saw it opened and the fan being pushed
   in at that point? - A. Yes.
Q. After that you lost sight of it? - A. Yes.
                                                        65


                                      I.J. FEARNS



Q. How did you yourself get out as a matter of interest?
   - A. I was stuck in the crush for about a full 20, 25
   minutes and when the pressure did finally ease off a
   little and I was able to move my body and turn, I
   literally panicked and forced my way to the back.
   A gentleman who was nearer the back actually took hold
   of me and he did literally hit me and told me to calm
   down and then him and a friend passed me up into the
   Stand above.




                         Q. You did the. right
                                            I. J. FEARNS


You did the right thing to go back actually. I am sure
that was the right thing for you to do. I want you to
show us on the plan where you, were when you took your
match viewing position, and then show me the second
position, where you finished up near the front.
(The witness marked Exhibit C467) I think you said
that in 1988 you were in one of the stands, is that
right? - A. Yes, that is correct.
There was one other thing I wanted to ask you. Do you
remember a beach ball being knocked about? - A. I do,
when I first went in, yes.
Was that the position which you have marked with a   1 ?
- A. Yes.
Were you there at that time? - A. I was there at that
time.
 So the big surge happened sometime after that? - A. It
 did.
              Cross-Examined by MR. KING
 Mr. Fearns, you tell us that Paul - this is Paul
 Carbide - wanted to swap his ticket? - A. That is
 correct.
 So he obviously did not want to be on the terrace in
 the standing area, he wanted to be in the stand. Did
 he say anything to you as to why he wanted to swap it I
 - A. He never said anything to me personally but me and
 my friend Terry Mainwaring came to the assumption that
 obviously he was a bit worried about this. For what
 reasons, I didn't get into ....
, I am just interested in whether he spoke to you. Mr.
  Terry Mainwaring is here, isn’t he? - A. He is not, no.
      THE CORONER:   Ask him for the hearsay.   I am not
 intending to call Mr. Mainwaring.
      MR. KING:   I see. Sir, I want the best evidence
 but this may be the best I can get.
      THE CORONER:   Yes.   I don't mind you taking the
 hearsay on this point.
      MR. KING:    Thank you, sir:
. Let me investigate a bit further then: what did you
  assume and why did you so assume was the reason for why
  Paul did not want to be on the terraces? - A. For the
  whole of that season, even being at Anfield on the Kop,
                                                          67
                                                 I. J. FEARNS

     on numerous occasions Paul when he did stand behind the
     goal, moved away to either the side or nearer the front
     because the pressure, he felt it was too much for him.
Q. Do you know whether he had been to the semi-final in
   1988? - A. He had been, yes.
Q. Were you there with him in 1988? - A. No, I didn't
   travel with Paul.
Q. Did you ever speak to him about his experiences in
   1988? - A. Only about the game itself.
Q. Not about his experience on the terrace? - A. Not about
   any experiences, no.
                Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN

Q. Mr. Fearns, did you say you saw the perimeter gate
   opened before the players came out? - A. The perimeter
   gate in area "C" was actually opened once to my
   recollection, that I can remember, but that was
   immediately shut by the Police Officer who was on the
   track.
Q. Yes, you are talking about in the perimeter fence,
   aren't you? - A. Inside the ground itself. Not gate C,
   as in the concertina gate, no.
Q. No, gate 3.' I was wondering if you could look at C277,
   the sixth time from the bottom. Can you see there it
   says 14.59.20, I think it is, "Gate 3 open"? - A. Yes.
Q. So that was a little later than you havesaid, wasn't
   it? - A. No, I said ....
Q. You said you saw it open before the players came on the
   pitch? - A. Yes, itdid open once.   As I say, there was
   no big flood onto the pitch. The Police Officer just
   closed it straightaway.
Q. It is just the time that I am trying to get correct. -
   A. As I say, I couldn't be certain on it. It was
   before the teams were on the pitch though.
Q.    Because we know the teams came out at 6-minutes-to-3
     and 14.59 is when gate 3 opened, so all the events that
     you have mentioned in the pen, could they have been
     just a few minutes out, do you think? - A. As I say,
     that is possibly the case, but I can remember that gate
     being opened before the teams were on that pitch.
Q.    Yes, it isnot the events themselves, it is just the
     timing. They could be that little bit later?
                                           I. J. FEARNS

     MR. KING:   Sir, to help Mrs. McBrien, it is a
long time since I made the point, but all we know for
certain is that 14.59 shows the gate in a state of
openness. Sir, I think Mrs. McBrien, probably not
deliberately, has rather misrepresented to the witness
when indicating at 14.59 the gate was in the process of
being opened.
     THE CORONER:   I think what Mrs. McBrien is trying
to find out is whether this witness could be five
minutes wrong with his time but we don't know.
     MR. KING:   We don't know. I am only trying to
make sure that there is no confusion over the
significance of 14.59 on the chart for gate 3. That is
only a time when we know the gate was in a state of
openness.
     MRS. McBRIEN:   And it doesn't say anywhere that
gate 3 was opened before, does it, sir?
     THE CORONER:   No, it does not, but you cannot
from that figure say that it didn't open before; you
cannot say that it did; and you cannot say what
happened after it. All you can say, as Mr. King
correctly points out, is that at 14.59 it was open.
How long it was open, whether it was shut again,
whether it stayed open continuously, from the figure
itself you can't tell. What this witness is saying,
and he will correct me if I misrepresent what he is
saying, is that his recollection is that the gate did
open, but that it was considerably earlier, before the
players were on the pitch, that somebody came out and a
Police Officer put him back in, and then it was shut,
but he has no further recollection of any events on the
gate. That is his evidence.
     MRS. McBRIEN:   Mr. Fearns, you do say that your
timings could be a little out, don't you? - A. Yes, but
I do know distinctly that the teams were not on the
pitch when I first saw that gate open. As I say, when
the gate was opened it was closed virtually immediately
by a Police Officer who was on the track, so for the
record that might not go down as the gate being open,
but as I say, it was opened and closed straightaway.
When you saw that gate open what was the state of the
pen then? - A. From where we were it was starting to
get really quite packed at the time. It was just
before the surge actually happened. As I say, then the
surge came and recollection from then was just panic
really.
                                                       I. J. FEARNS


You didn't feel in any danger at all when you saw that
eate first opened? - A. No. I was feeling a bit
worried about the intensity of the pushing, but itwas
just like any cup game to me at the time.
Did you see how the gate was opened? - A * N°* i
only recollect the actual gate opening and the Police
Officer closing it virtually straightaway. I couldn
tell you who opened, why it was opened.
Did anybody gst out at that time? - A. No,the gate                    was
closed virtually immediately.

Nobody at all? - A. No.
         THE CORONER:     Did you say nobody got                    J ± ?
                                        ^          was the £ . \ i £ .

    I see, yes.   I understand.
         THE CORONER:     Mr. King, are you h ®P?j'?it)}!1w5 at
    you have h^   d . " ^ dr t!a! a U 0Mr!'MainSaring because I
    S iik it isn't really terribly ~
    thy                                     nJ t^      &   ” rS « « n t
                        iTyll   want to ask hi. any further
    questions?
         MR. KING:   Yes. I don’t want to suggest
    something which he has no knowledge of.
              Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING
. Did you know Mr. Carlile in the previous season, that
  is Paul Carlile, in the 1988 season! - A. Yes.
. Would he go to the Kop at Anfield in the 1988 season! -
  A. Yes, he did.
     In the 1988 season did he exhibit the *“ «
•    to be on the Kop and worried a b o u t crowding?       ^         Yes
     I myself only started going to .oo        a           £        since
    Paul Carlile, it was about the      87 season. ^            ^    large
    then I knew for a fact tha*          actually came out
    crowds, but as I say, he never, ever actual y
    and said it to me personally.
    In the 1987 and ’ 88 season he was still going on the
    Kop as far as you knew? - A. Yes.
. Then he went to the ’88 semi-final at Hillsborough? -
  A. Yes.
IAN THOMAS GLOVER




1.   Ian Glover, the son        of the Applicants John and Teresa
     Glover was born on        20th January, 1969, and was twenty
     years old when he died at Hillsborough football ground
     on 15th April, 1989.


2.   He   was accompaniedto        the    ground by   his    brothers
     Joseph Glover and John McCarthy but only he and Joseph
     entered enclosure        3 of     the Lepping    Lane end     of the
     stadium.


3.   At the     inquest the     jury heard      first from Professor
     Alan Usher about        the cause of death which          he gave as
     death through        traumatic asphyxia.       Evidence    was then
     put by Officer        Geraldine Evans in which         details were
     given, inter alia, of         what had happened to Ian Glover
     between 2.30 p.m. and           shortly after 3.40 p.m. when he
     was certified dead        by Dr. Alan Redgrave.           In summary
     that evidence        was to the      effect that Ian     and Joseph
     Glover took up a position in the centre of enclosure 3
     at approximately 2.30         p.m.     Following a     surge in the
     crowd they     were both      pushed forward.        Joseph states
     that     both were    being     crushed from     about 2.40    p.m.
     onwards.     Joseph managed         to escape from the enclosure
     via a     gate in the     front perimeter fence but         Ian was
                                         -    2 -




     left    inside        about     4       feet     from the     front        of    the
     enclosure.       Joseph tried to                climb back in to help Ian
     but was pulled off the fence                     by a police officer.              He
     spoke     to     Ian    through            the     fence    until     Ian        lost
     consciousness.            There is         video evidence           of Ian        and
     Joseph together           in enclosure 3               and of Joseph        on the
     fence outside of the                enclosure.          Approximately twenty
     minutes later          Joseph saw              Ian being    pulled from           the
     enclosure on to           the pitch by two               unidentified police
     officers.         He attempted             to resuscitate          Ian who       was
     then carried on           a makeshift stretcher to                  a gymnasium
     which   was       serving          as     a temporary       mortuary.            The
     officer reported that Joseph                     had that morning said to
     her    that     while         in    the        gymnasium     a      doctor        had
     identified        Ian's    pulse           and        attempted,     for        about
     fifteen        minutes,        to        resuscitate         him      but        was
     unsuccessful.           Joseph          assented that        it was        himself
     together       with     other           fans    who     carried     Ian.          His
     statement was then            changed by a West              Midlands police
     officer        to read     "may          have carried       .... "     Shortly
     after 3.40 p.m. Dr.            Alan Redgrave, in the presence of
     P.C. Glave       certified that Ian                   Glover was dead.            The
     transcript        of this       part           of the    inquest hearing           is
     exhibited to this memorandum at Ex]


4.   The jury never           heard from Joseph (__
     were merely        presented with                excerpts from       statements




ANNAAC
     that he had made to the police.              They did not have the
     benefit of         hearing relevant matters which            related to
     the period after        the 3.15 p.m. cut-off           point.    These
     matters are set         out in a note of a           statement made by
     Joseph      Glover    which     was     taken   by    Sheila     Coleman
     (researcher) and is            exhibited at exhibit              to this
     memorandum.         Of particular       relevance are the notes at
     the       end of    the record    which state         first, that     the
     ambulances         had great     difficulty     in    getting to      tJfe
     gymnasium      because     of     the    presence      of    crowds    of
     supporters         trying to     leave the      stadium and      second,
     that Ian, upon being taken out of the enclosure by the
           2
     police, was left on the pitch lying on his back.


5.   These matters when        combined with the evidence              of Dr.
     Phillips and Dr. Ashton are all highly relevant to the
     issue of whether Ian           Glover's death was aggravated by
     lack of      care, this being         an issue which        should have
     been left to the jury.




ANNAAC
STATEMENT OF JOHN MCCARTHY RE IAN GLOVER
   brother of Ian Glover.
Got Ian out of bed on the morning of the disaster to give him a ticket
for the Leppings Lane terracing.
- John had a ticket for the North Stand.
He saw people spilling onto the track and   turned to his friend and
said 'Our Ian and Joe are in there'.
He saw a fat man being carried from the Leppings Lane end to the Spion
kop end. His friend was trying to revive him. He obviously failed as
he began punching the ground. John knewthen that the man was dead
and his fears for Ian and Joe grew.

He stayed in his seat because although he wanted to get on the pitch
and search for them, police with dogs were lined up in front of the
stands.

Another friend, who was on the front row of the stands, shouted John
and said: 'Your Ian's dead. I'll take you to Joe'. This was
approximately 3.25pm.
The friend (Paddy Starkey) took John to Joe outside the gymnasium
(3.30pm approx). John asked:
        'Where's our Ian?'
        Joe answered:
        'He's in there.'

John and Joe then went to the door of the gymnasium. There were two
police officers at the door (one had glasses on). They said 'You
can't go in there.' John replied:
        'My brother's in there.'
He moved them out of the way and entered the gymnasium.
Joe took him to Ian who was in the middle of a row of bodies.
Bodies were very close to one another.
John knelt down to see Ian and stood on somebody's head.
He began shaking Ian* trying to wake him up.
Ian had wet himself. His stomach was compressed and his chest was
protruding.
His face was bruised.
John and Joe staying with Ian for what John thinks was about 5
minutes.
They were very upset and were taken outside.
John asked a police officer if he could use a phone. He was directed
to a pay phone but could not get a line. He returned to the police
officer who produced a telephone from under the table and he
immediately rang home and informed his Aunty of Ian's death.
Outside the gymnasium John saw people on stretchers. One of these was
Danny MacArthur (Ian's friend). He was looking at John but John was
unable to respond to him in his state of shock.           »
John and Joe were taken in an ambulance to BARNSLEY Hospital (18 miles
away). This was approximately 4.20-4.30pm.
- They arrived at the hospital where a doctor told them that they
were suffering from shock and were given a drink of water.
John Glover (father) arrived at the hospital and took them to look for
Ian.
They travelled to the Police Station and Hammerton Road Boys' Club
where he remembers names being shouted out.
Travelled on bus back to the Hillsborough ground.
Had to look through all the photographs and John picked Ian out. His
(Ian's) body was brought to them and it was then that John noticed a
footprint on Ian's face.
They were taken to a table and were questioned by plain clothes police
officers (who we know to be CID).
NB   John remembers about 3 rows of bodies in the gym when he arrived
     at approx 3.30pm. He estimates about &Q bodies. This would be
     about right as there were bodies still at the back of Leppings
     Lane.
m    John's timings as to his arrival at the gym are quite accurate as
     he remembers seeing Danny MacArthur on a stretcher before Danny
     was taken to hospital.
JOSEPH GLOVER RE IAN GLOVER

-  Travelled to Sheffield with brother Ian.
  In Pen 3.
  Both being crushed from 2.40pm onwards.
  Shouting to get out.
- Gate was opened. Few people got out then it was closed again.
- Gate opened again. Joe got out. Police directed him to side pens
  but he went back to the fence to Ian.
  Ian approx 5 yards from front fence.
  Joe was shouting to Ian to move.
  Ian was saying 'I can't, I can't move'.
  Joe was shouting to people around Ian to move and help him, but
  they said that they couldn't move either.
  Joe saw Ian's eyes closing.
- Joe climbed on fence (see video) and was shouting to Ian.
- Joe ran to ambulanceman and pleaded with him to help Ian.
  Ambulanceman went to Policeman who said 'we can't do anything yet'.
- People were being pulled out.
  Joe was still on the fence. Ian was unconscious but was standing
  up.
- Two police officers brought him out, laid him on the pitch then
  returned to get more bodies out.
  Joe tried to resuscitate him.
  Someone else also tried but said 'it's too late'.
  Ian was placed on a hoarding and Joe andLiverpool supporters
  carried him to gymnasium.
  In gymnasium Doctor (unidentified) felt for pulse and said 'There's
  a pulse there'. He tried for about twenty minutes to resuscitate
  Ian but then said he was dead.
                             - 3 -


-  Plain clothes police officers in Gym kept Joe with Ian. They asked
   Joe for Ian's name and address and they wrote it on a tag and put
   it on his wrist. They emptied Ian's pockets and put his
   possessions in a brown bag.
-• The gym at this time was being partitioned off and Joe was asked to
   move to the side where the injured were being dealt with. Instead
   he went outside where he met John McCarthy's friend (Paddy
   Starkey). Joe told him that Ian was dead and Paddy went to find
   John.
MB   Joe remembers that the ambulances had great difficulty getting to
     the gymnasium area because of the Nottingham Forest fans leaving
     ihe ground (the gym was at the 'Forest' end of the ground).
NB   When Ian was taken out of the pen by the police he was laid an Ilia
     back and left.
JOHN GLOVER RE IAN GLOVER

Ian's father.
Was informed that Ian was dead and travelled to Barnsley Hospital
where he met Joe and John.
Was told at the hospital that Joe was dead - but Joe was standing with
him.
Went to Police Station then to Boys' Club.
- Was taken to ground on bus.
Looked through photographs for Ian.
John McCarthy picked out Ian (no 37).
- Ian was wheeled out.
He had a dirty blanket over him.
His leg was hanging off the trolley and his head was to one side.
John straightened his head and a catholic priest gave him the 'last
rites'.
John and family were then led to a table where they were questioned by
CID officers.
They were asked how Ian had travelled to Sheffield. How much he had
to drink etc.
They were then told that they might as well go home.
NB   John states that looking through the photographs was "the worst
     think in [his] whole life".
NB   It was unnecessary for John and the others to go through this
     process of identification as Ian had a tag on him bearing his name
     and address from Joe's earlier identification.
                                            15 October 1990
Dr Stefan Popper
The Medico-Legal Centre
Watery Street
Sheffield
Dear Dr Popper
I am the father of Ian Glover, one of the 95 victims of the
Hillsborough Disaster and I am writing to you in order to voice my
concern regarding the forthcoming inquests. In particular, I am
concerned that there are specific issues relating to Ian's death which
might not be addressed.
I am aware that the inquest held earlier this year was meant to deal
specifically with who Ian was and when and where he met his death.
However, I have to state that I found the limitations of this format
extremely frustrating and intimidating. Consequently, there were a
number of issues relating to Ian's death which I felt were
inadequately addressed yet I felt powerless to pursue answers. It is
for this reason that I am writing to you to ask that you consider
calling evidence in an attempt to find the answers my family and
myself so desperately seek.
I fear that my family has been irreversibly damaged by the
Hillsborough disaster. My wife and I have lost our son Ian, but we
also have to watch our other sons suffer daily. Our youngest son
Tommy, who is 13 years of age, will not go upstairs alone nor sleep
alone and he is presently undergoing psycho-therapy. Our other two
sons are consumed with guilt because they survived and their brother
died. John feels guilty because he gave Ian the match ticket for the
game. Joe, our other son was in Pen 3 with Ian. Both were being
crushed but Joe got out and despite his attempts to save Ian he could
only talk to him through the wire fence until Ian eventually lost
consciousness. He attended to Ian on the pitch and helped carry him
to the gymnasium.
This horrific experience has seriously damaged Joe. His condition is
exacerbated by the fact that the true details relating to Ian's death
are not being revealed. Given that Joe was with Ian from his leaving
home on the Saturday morning until he carried him to the makeshift
mortuary I request that you consider calling him to give evidence
relating to the specific details surrounding Jo c Hb death.
                                              tftA/S
There are a number of other issues that I feel need raising. These
are as follows:



                                        continued.
    W h e n Ian w a s l i f t e d o n t o the p i t c h he w a s p l a c e d in a p o s i t i o n
    c l o s e to the g o a l m o u t h .            Hi s br ot h e r Jo e was w i th him w he n a
    p o l i c e o f f i c e r p r o n o u n c e d h i m d e a d a n d c o v e r e d hi s f a c e w i t h a
    pullover.             J o e a n d a g r o u p of f an s c a r r i e d Ian on a m a k e s h i f t
    s t r e t c h e r to the g y m n a s i u m w h e r e he w a s e x a m i n e d b y a d o c t o r who
    f o u n d a p u l s e on h i m a n d a t t e m p t e d r e s u s c i t a t i o n ( N B t h i s w a s
    a p p r o x i m a t e l y t w e n t y m i n u t e s a f t e r the p o l i c e o f f i c e r h a d
    pronounced him dead).                     I be li e v e that this issue wa s i n a d e q u a t e l y
    d e a l t w i t h at the i n q u e s t a n d r e q u e s t t h a t a d e t a i l e d e x p l a n a t i o n
    is s o u g h t at the s o o n to be r e s u m e d i n q u e s t s by c a l l i n g t h e
    relevant witnesses.

    Th ere are three issues                                                     r e l a t i n g to th e n o t i f i c a t i o n of   Ian's   deatn
    and his i d e n t i f i c a t i o n                                         w h i c h I feel n eed ad d r e s s i n g :

    (a)         On the e v e n i n g of th e d i s a s t e r I t r a v e l l e d to E a r n s l e y
                h o s p i t a l to s e e m y i n j u r e d son, J o e ( h a v i n g b e e n i n f o r m e d o:
                his w h e r e a b o u t s b y m y o t h e r so n J o h n ) .        T h e p o l i c e at t hi s
                s t a g e k n e w t h a t I a n w a s d e a d ( J o e h a d i d e n t i f i e d h i m in the
                g y m n a s i u m in th e a f t e r n o o n ) . , H o w e v e r , an of f i c i a l * at the
                h o s p i t a l c h e c k e d a c o m p u t e r p r i n t - o u t and i n f o r m e d me that
                Ian w a s a l i v e b e c a u s e he w as n o t on th e list.

(b>             W h e n I w a s at t h e g y m n a s i u m and b e f o r e I had l o o k e d at the
                 p h o t o g r a p h s of the d e c e a s e d I w a s t o l d by a p o l i c e m a n in
                 r e c e p t i o n a r e a t h a t b o t h Ian .aOil J o e w e r e d e ad .

<c)             W h i l s t I w a s b e i n g g i v e n the a b o v e i n f o r m a t i o n in Y o r k s h i r e a
                p o l i c e o f f i c e r v i s i t e d my h o me in L i v e r p o o l and i n f o r m e d my
                 w i f e that J o e w a s injure'.;! yet m a d e n o m e n t i o n of Ian e v e n
                 t iio     ii l     was    oine t h r e e and a n a i f noij i.^         iie e ■■•-•<- .ia d
                u n o f f i c i a l l y i d e n t i f i e d him in the g y m n a s i u m g i v i n g hi s n a m e
                and a d d r e s s to a p o l i c e o f f i c e r .

I r e q u e s t t h at w i t n e s s e s be c a l l e d to e x p l a i n how t h i s i n a c c u r a t e
in f o r "a t i on w a s di.^sRininar.ed . M o r e o v e r , an o f f i c i a l c o m p i.a m
m a d e b y m v s e i £ r e g a r d in s the a c t i o n s of S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e p o l i c e
                4 - .*».           1 -, . - . f~-. *—•   ■* /~ f t-*       v*
n   a   o   .   i_ o       C   .       u     c    O m       A 6 n      ^        ^   u   *




w he n Ian w a s b r o u g h t h o m e f r o m S h e f f i e l d h i s n e c k w a s m               a collar.
We w e r e t o l d by the u n d e r t a k e r t h a t it w a s n e c e s s a r y b e c a u s e hi.-:
n ec k was broken,              W h e n t h i s i ssue w a s r a i s e d at the i n q u e s t in
May, P r o f e s s o r U s h e r ( P a t h o l o g i s t ) s t a t e d that the c o l l a r w a s
d e v i c e u s e d by u n d e r t a k e r s to s t o p the d e c e a s e d s c h i n f r o m
f l o p p i n g b e f o r e r i g o r m o r t i s s e t s in.       F o l l o w i n g t h i s e x p l a n a t ion
the c o r o n e r a s k e d M r F r a s e r if I w a s s a t i s f i e d .            H o w e v e r , I h av e
to s t a t e t ha t g i v e n t h e f o r m a l s t r u c t u r e of the c o u r t I d i d not
feel a b l e to s p e a k o u t a n d r e g i s t e r m y d i s s a t i s f a c t i o n w i t h the
e x p l a nation given.             Moreover, I received yet another possible
e x p l a n a t i o n f r o m a L i v e r p o o l b a s e d c o n s u l t a n t w h o s t a t e d t h a t tr.e
us e of the c o l l a r w a s p r o b a b l y a d i r e c t c o n s e q u e n c e of t h e f o s t
Mortem examination.                   It is c l e a r t h e n t h a t t h e r e a r e t h r e e
e x p l a n a t i o n s as to w h y I a n ' s n e c k w a s in a c o l l a r a n a p e r h a p s tne
c o r o n e r w i l l u n d e r s t a n d m y c o n c e r n o v e r t h e i s s u e w h e n I t e l l the
c o r o n e r t h a t w h i l e Ian w a s r e s t i n g in o u r h o m e h i s h e a d f l o p p e c to


                                                                                                    con t i n u e d
                              _ 3 -
•
                  Hsu   ,
     one side and '^i   f nnrrri— -tif from his neck. The undertakers had
     to be sent for and my brother-in-law who remained in the room
     whilst they attended to Ian has stated that when Ian was stripped
     what had appeared as a collar was in fact a harness covering his
     shoulders and chest.    I believe that my family is entitled to a
     true explanation for the use of this device.     I thereby request
     that the coroner recalls the pathologist who carried out the post
     mortem examinations on my son Ian.

4.   At the resumed 'mini' inquests my son Joe pointed to a factual
     error in the summary which was to be read in the court.  The
     summary referred to a named police officer carrying Ian across the
     pitch to the gymnasium.  In actual fact as I have previously
     stated, it was Joe and a group of fans who carried Ian across the
     pitch. When Joe indicated this inaccuracy the Summary Officer
     altered the summary so that it read that the officer may have
     carried Ian across the pitch.

     I am most concerned that a police officer's statement could, in
     effect, be altered with such ease and without the officer being
     consulted, particularly as this new information apparently
     contradicted the visual evidence.

     I request that an explanation be given as to how the summary
     officer could alter the summary and further request that my son
     Joe be called as a witness in order to give evidence relating to
     who carried Ian to the gymnasium.

I would ask that you give serious consideration to the issues outlined
and to the possibility of these being raised at the forthcoming
inquests.

Yours sincerely




John Glover
SENT BY;DSC                            ■ 20-   -5-92     16:33 : DOUGHTY ST CHAMBERS-   051 225 2135:# 2/11




                         riday.   4th May,     1990


                                        THE INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
                                                       IAN THOMAS GLOVER
                 B
                                MR. FRASER:   Sir, the evidence now relates to Ian
                           Thomas Glover.   Sir, Ian's father and a Hr. Pedder are
                           in court.   Two members of Ian's family simply feel
                           that although they have come over from Liverpool to
                           attend the inquests they really cannot come into court.
                           I am sure you understand that, sir.

                                  THE CORONER:            Yes, indeed.
                                MR. FRASER:   Sir, they are with us via the
                           facility of the video link and in the circumstances I
                           introduce them as well.
                                THE CORONER:    Thank you.                 They are welcome and
                 D         it is quite understandable.
                                MR. FRASER:    Sir, Ian's family is represented by
                           a practice which is a member of my group and I
                           therefore appear on their behalf as agent in the usual
                           way through the steering committee.
                                 THE CORONER:    Let me explain to you what we are
                            going to do so you can follow the sequence because it
                            is easier for you to understand the procedure.
                                 I      am going to read to you the evidence which we
                            took on the opening when I dealt with the release of
                            the body.   That was on the 18th of April, 1989.    When
                            I have read that to you I am going t.o just confirm that
                            the details are correct.   Then I will tell you what
                            the blood alcohol level was and when we have completed
                            that Professor Usher is going to give us the
                            pathological evidence.
                                 When that has been done a West Midlands Police
                            Officer will present a summary of the evidence and will
                            tell me and particularly the Jury, the facts and then
                            Inspector Layton will deal with the visual evidence.
                            He will describe it and then come over here on these
                            big plans and show us what he is talking about.




                     H
                                                            - 1 -


J. L. H arpham Ltd
                 sc                    ■ 20-   5-92 : 16:34 : DOUGHTY ST CHAMBERS-   051 225 2135:# 3/11




                                  If I tell you what happened on the 18th of April,
                            1989.    Neil Anthony Parkin the acting Coroner’s
                            Officer said:
                                 "The body which is the subject of this inquest has
                                 been identified to PC 465 Glave of the South
                                 Yorkshire Police as that of Ian Thomas Glover by
                  B              Joseph Glover his brother.
                                 He was 20 years of age having been born on the
                                 10th of January, 1969 at Liverpool.
                                  He was a single man and lived at 63 Roxburgh
                                  Street, Liverpool.   He was a street paver by
                                  occupation.    He died at Hillsborough football
                                  ground following an incident there on Saturday,
                                  15th April, 1989.   PC 465 Glave caused the body
                                  to be moved to the Medico Legal Centre and there
                                  he identified it to Detective Constable Simon
                                  Weigold who subsequently identified the same body
                                  to Professor Usher.
                                  It is the family wish that the body should be
                   D              buried."

                             As I did with everybody I wrote to the families and I
                             sent out a form to double check the evid e n c e and John
                             Glover signed it.   That must be you?
                             signed it on the 28th of April and you contirmed the
                             name was right.   I think we said 63 Roxburgh Street,
                             Liverpool, but is that the Walton district?
                                  JOHN GLOVER:    We live on the borderline between
                             Kirkdale and Walton.    I am actually in Kirkdale.
                             Across the road is Walton.

                                  THE CORONER:    So the correct address ought to be
                             63 Roxburgh Street, Kirkdale, Liverpool.
                                  All the rest of the information was in fact
                             correct.   Now Dr. Forrest did the blood alcohol levels
                             and he told us all about these on the first day and in
                             the case of Ian the result was negative.

                                               PROFESSOR ALAN USHER Called

                                                      By THE CORONER:

                           Q. Alan Usher, Professor of Forensic Medicine and Home
                              Office Pathologist? - A. Yes.
                           0. Professor Usher this is about a lad who was identified
                              to you as Ian Glover? - A. Yes.

                       H
                                                          - 2 -


J " L H sfp h am Lid
                  iC                      •20-   5-92 : 16:34 : DOUGHTY ST CHAMBERS-   051 225 2135:# 4/11




                         Q.    Uhat number did you have? - A. Number 37.

                         Q.    Can you tell me what your findings were? - A. Yes, sir.
                               The body I examined was that of a slim but muscularly^
                               built young white male with light brown hair, 1 >1 cm m
                               height, weighing 65 kg.     He body presented both
                               externally and internally the typical appearances of
                    B          traumatic asphyxia.     There were a few grazes and
                               scratches, only minor
                                                minor any of
                                                      any  or them,
                                                               tnem, and there was i
                               swelling of the lbrain
                                                —      which is ffairly     tvoical of
                                                                  s i r l v typical or this
                                                                                       1
                               condition.
                               Apart from this he was normally developed and healthy
                               and he had an average expectation of live in my view.

                               I give the cause of death as traumatic asphyxia       That
                               means he died because his chest wall was compres  sed  so
                               it could no.t move in and out.   When that happen s you
                               are not able to breathe properly and you die rea lly in
                               that way.    Mercifully, anyone caught in that po sition
                               once the chest becomes fixed they become unconsc ious
                               very, very early, between ten and twenty seconds
                               Once this boy was unconscious then he would have no
                     D         knowledge or any sensation subsequent to that,     He
                               would take between four and six minutes to actua  lly
                               die.   It \*ould only be the first ten to twenty seconds
                               he would be aware of.

                             Q. Professor Usher, there is one point I want to check.
                                Can you look at your PM report where you have got
                                "Skeleton"? - A. Yes.

                             Q. Can you tell me whether there is any indication in your
                                findings whether there were any broken bones of any
                                sort? - A. No, sir.

                             0. I take it if you say, "No bony disease or injury ,
                                it would include in particular the neck?   I f there had
                                been a broken neck you would have recorded it? - A- Oh,
                                ye s .
                             Q. The reason why I ask this is because at one point there
                                was some concern that this lad might have had a broken
                                neck, but there is no question... - A. It is a very
                                common mistake, made by people who see the head lolling
                                on a dead body.   We often get stories when we examine
                                - even routine PMs - that the neck is broken.   It very
                                rarely is and it was not on this occasion.

                             Q. You can assure the family about that? - A. Yes.




                         H
                                                           -   3   -


J - L. H a ro h am Ltd
           -.20- -5-92 -• 16-35 ; DOUGHTY ST CHAMBERS-   051 225 2135-.# 5/11




             Cross-Examined by MR. FRASER:

 Perhaps if we could pursue the problem about the neck a
 little further.     I hear what you say,
 When Ian came home, when the family saw him, he had in
 fact g o t a collar on his neck and the people who looked
 after Ian and brought him home actually told the family
 that they thought the neck was broken.     Just to
 reinforce the point, Professor Usher, can you assure
 the family beyond any doubt that Ian dl*            is a
 broken neck? - A. It was not broken.          beneath the
 device sometimes used by undertakers      Put beneath
  chin to stop the mouth from falling open before rigor ^
  sets in.
       HR. FRASER:      Thank you.
       THE CORONER:        Any questions?

       MR. LIMB:      No, thank you, sir.
       MR. CATCHPOLE:       No, thank you, sir.
        OFFICER GERALDINE ELIZABETH EVANS Called

                        By THE CORONER:
        THE WITNESS:   Geraldine Elizabeth Evans, Officer
   of the West Midlands Police.
0. Yes, Officer? - A. At about 1100 hours on_Saturday,
   15th April, 1989, Ian Thomas Glover and his brother
   Joseph Glover left the family home to travel to
   Sheffield with the intention of watching the semi-fma
   football match which was to be played at the
   Hillsborough Stadium that day.   Both were in
   possession of tickets £ot the Leppings Lane terraced
    area of the ground.
   At about 1430 hours the brothers arrived at the stadium
   and entered through a turnstile before going through
   the tunnel and into enclosure 3.    They took up ,
                                                    a
   position in the centre of the enclosure which at that
   time was packed with spectators.    Joseph states that
   following a surge in the crowd he Jnd h^s, brot
   pushed forward in the enclosure and that he managed
   eet out on to the pitch via a gate m the front
   perimeter fence.    He then saw his brother Ian in a
   distressed condition standing in the crowd about tour
    feet from the front of the enclosure.
    About twenty minutes later Joseph saw his brother being
    pulled from the enclosure and on to the pitch by two
    police officers who have not been identified.
           ■   20   -   5-32 : 16:35 : DOUGHTY ST CHAMBERS-   '   051 225 2135:# 6/11




Joseph attempted to resuscitate his brother who was
then placed on a temporary stretcher and carried across
the pitch by a number of persons into the gymnasium
where a temporary mortuary had been set up.             '
Sir, I have to include here that I have spoken with
Joseph this morning and he wishes to state that in the
gymnasium a doctor was present and when he examined Ian
he did in fact find a pulse and attempted to
resuscitate him for about fifteen minutes but was
unsuccessful.

At about 1540 hours PC Glave assumed responsibility for
the body of Ian and shortly afterwards the officer was
present when Dr. Alan Paul Redgrave examined the body
in the temporary mortuary and certified life extinct.

Later that day Mr. John Glover identified the body of
his son, Ian Thomas Glover, to Police Constable Glave,
and the officer later escorted the body of Ian to the
Medico Legal Centre and confirmed the identification to
DC Weigold.

At 1100 hours on Sunday, 16th of April, 1989, following
identification by DC Weigold, Professor Alan Usher
carried out an autopsy and submitted a report giving
cause of death.

This concludes the summary, sir.

I think it is only fair to say that Joe, when he made
his first statement, referred to the doctor? - A. Yes,
sir.

But he never mentioned anything about the pulse being
found? - A. No, sir, that is something he has brought
to my attention this morning.
     MR. FRASER:             I have no questions, sir.
     HR. LIMB:             I have no questions, sir.
     MR. CATCHPOLE:               I have no questions, sir.
     THE CORONER:    Perhaps before we listen to
Inspector Layton, you know we are resuming an inquest
this afternoon and we will be dealing with some of
these points about pulses and so on then.   I mention
that now so that you know we will be dealing with this
matter in relation to that other inquest, but of course
it will apply generally to all situations.
                  JSC                 :20- -5-92     16:36 : DOUGHTY ST CHAMBERS-   0-51 225 213-5:# 7/11




                                 DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON Called

                                                   By THE CORONER:
                                THE WITNESS:   Sir, I am Michael Layton, Detective
                           Inspector of the West Midlands Police.

                    B Q.   Yes, Inspector? - A. Sir, an examination has been made
                           of video film and photographic evidence and Ian has
                           been identified alive in enclosure number 3 on a
                           video tape referenced MAP.l and timed, sir, at
                           1456.32.02.   Joseph has been identified on a number ot
                           photographs, sir, but specifically referring to a
                           photograph PR.1/10A, which is timed at 1503, Joseph is
                           shown on that photograph, sir, on the pitch, basically
                           in the circumstances described in the summary.

                         Q- 1503? - A. 1503, sir.   Sir, in the summary you will
                            see reference to circumstances described by PC rojut
                            the South Yorkshire Police.   He initially made an
                            identification from clothing and felt that he at one
                            stage had assisted to carry Ian across the pitch.
                    D    Q. When you say "in the summary", that is in the printed
                            version but not in the version we have presented to the
                            court, that is right? - A. That is right,
                            printed version where copies have been supplied.
                            That's right. - A. Sir, it is now apparent again from
                            having spoken to Joe this morning, bis recollection is
                            that no uniformed police officers were present when Ian^
                            was carried across the pitch.
                         Q. The evidence of PC Fojut was based on_identification of
                            clothing, as opposed to... - A. That is right, sir.
                         Q. That is, of course, is relatively weak identification?
                            - A. That is right, sir.
                         Q. If a brother says there was not a police officer there
                            we are probably inclined to believe the brother. - A.
                            That is right.
                         Q. Which is why we have not dealt with it in the evidence?
                            - A. That is right, sir.   Sir, can I then refer you to
                            a plan which has been given the reference number
                            MWJL.59 and that is a plan of the terraces?
                         Q. C.244. - A. Sir, that plan, MWJL.59 refers to the
                            identification made on video by Mr. Glover.   In fact
                            this is enclosure number 3 and the position we believe
                            that Ian is shown at that time is in this location
                            approximately here.   The dotted line indicates the

                                                       - 6 -

J. L. H a rp h a m Ltd
         f C                   :20“ 5-92 : 16;36 -• DOUGHTY ST CHAMBERS-   051 225 2135:# 8/11




                    barrier that subsequently broke so we are looking, sir,
                    in enclosure number 3.

                         MR. FRASER:     No questions for the officer, sir.

                                 Cross-Examined by MR. LIMB:

             B Q. This is just a question concerning Joseph Glover.   You
                  mentioned when referring to photograph referenced
                  PR.1/10A that that was one of a number of photographs?
                  - A. That is right, sir, yes.

                 Q. Can I ask this: is that photograph the first of a
                    sequence of photographs showing Joseph on the pitch or
                    are there previous ones?

                         THE CORONER:    In other words, you are trying to
                    find out whether 1503 hours is the earliest?

                         MR. LIMB:     Sir, exactly.
                         THE WITNESS:   Sir, the earliest photograph
                    showing Joe on the pitch is PR.1/8A, but in fact it is
             D      still at the same time, 1503.

                                     Further bv THE CORONER:
                 Q. That is a photograph of Ian? - A. No, sir, of Joe,
                    actually on the pitch.   It was referred to in the
                    visual evidence, sir.

                 0. That is right.   This is an important point.    Joe, of
                    course, is a surviving brother? - A. That is right.

                 Q. What about photographs of Ian? Have you got any of
                    him? - A. No, sir, the only visual evidence we have is
                    the video evidence that we have referred to which is
                    timed at 1456.

                 Q. So 1456 is Ian on the terraces and enclosure.          1503
                    Joe out on the pitch? - k. That is right.
                 Q. Then in what Joe said, according to the summary, he
                    said that about twenty minutes later he saw his brother
                    being pulled from the enclosure.   What time did he go
                    out on to the pitch according tohis statement?      I see
                    what you are driving at. - A. I think he makes
                    reference, sir, in the summary to seeing Ian some four
                    feet from the...   I think that was my recollection,
                    sir.

                 Q. That is right. - a . It is apparent from those
                    photographs that Joe is actually -      as you look fromthe
             H
                                            - 7 -

Harpham UO
                -on c                                               '''?1 r'r'c 01 ^
                    •5-92 : 16:37 : DOUGHTY ST CHAMBERS-           0-51 22-5 2135:




 pitch to the terraces that Joe is to the left of gate 3
 in the first section of fencing, looking inwards.
 Yes*   What he says - X will read you the relevant bit
 from his statement.   He is talking about the gate on
 to the pitch - not gate C, not the perimeter gate -
 just show us which gate he is talking about. - a . we
 are talking about this gate here.
 He says:

        "I managed to get out on to the pitch because the
        police had opened the small gate.   This was the
        second time the gate had been opened.”

 Then he talks about it being opened the first time                    and
 t en he got out at the second opening of gate 3.                      Then
 later on he says he saw his brother and he says:

       '"About twenty minutes later two police officers
       pulled Ian out..

 and attempted resuscitation, or words to that effect
       THE CORONER:          Does that assist you?
       MR. LIMB:        It does, thank you, sir.

     TI9iE          1 have got that right, Inspector
Layton? - A. That is right.

                PROFESSOR ALAN USHER Recalled

                         By THE CORONER:

!rLfi ^ 0 rt,US!ler’ thanJ you for comin£ back*                   This was
c i S r i f i i first.
a                  a f o s e You   ru
                             5 f t e will
                                     r     l e f t and 1that
                                          recollect       j u s you
                                                                t want t o
comire-^Ht0 iU%     * tl?is y°un§ster had had his chest
t-hTnJ       lost consciousness and would have died, I
think you said, between four and six minutes.      In this
P rJ ^ lar lnstance he was in company with his brother
?hat
that, inda£htWSnt!^PaSi
       and the brother hasthrSe’ ProbablV
                            told us throughlater than
                                             the officers
saw himeanHehK0 tKintk the temP°rary mortuary a doctor
saw him and the brother says the doctor detected a
pulse and tried for ten or fifteen minutes to revive
was hn«A?*n         ha^ t 0 §ive up bacause he thought it
m l hopeless.    Assuming for a moment that that is
timing      k6         } 3 Pulse» can y°u help us about
 lmings and how you relate that to the period which you
have mentioned? - A. I think the only vSy that coSld^
have happened would be if this lad had sustained severe
           :20- -5-92 ; 16:37 : DOUGHTY ST CHAMBERS-   051 225 2135-#10/11




brain damage but not quite got to the point whsre
respiratory and pulse centres faded out.

He did not say there was any respiratory           a?e
said there was a              ;he’case then if he had
beenSrev!ved he would have been severely brain damaged.

Is It a possibility that if you getto that point in
fact further damage to the cerebral      « " “ es         >
at least to the brain s t e m centres, can        w^ £ , ly.
would lead to death? - A. Oh, yes, that is very u s e y

The other possibility is, of course, there may have
been a mistake about the pulse? - A. Yes.
Because it is not easy to feel a pulse if it is veryI
faint? - A. That is right, or if it       is very slow. It
ifofien the case that in cases of cerebral °^ema, so
it really m e a n s that either the doctor was
thinking he could feel a pulse or that this lad
severely brain damaged and then went on to die.

 Would it make any difference to your °PinioJ    to hlS
 state of consciousness? - A. He would have been
 unconscious all through that period.

 No questio-n of his suffering pain? - A. No, he would
 have been unconscious.
      THE CORONER:        Hr. Fraser?
      MR. FRASER:   No, sir.          Thank you for coming
 back, Professor Usher.
      MR. LIMB:      No, thank you, sir.
      MR. CATCHPOLE:        No, thank you, sir.
      MR. FRASER:   Sir, just before you conclude t^i n g
 the evidence, I rise again at the specific instruct
 of Ian's family.   They are very conscious of the
 efforts that were made to save Ian on the day and they
 are very appreciative of everybody at the ground who
 did everything they possibly could and thereafter.
       Sir, they are particularly impressed by the way
  the people of Sheffield, with whomthey had dealings
  the day and since, responded to this tragedy to their
  family and they very much appreciate that.
       Finally, sir, this family is a member of a group
  formed to support families following the loss of their
  loved ones.   You will have heard of it, sir, lhe
            :S0- 5-92 : 16:38 ; DOUGHTY ST CHAMBERS-   051 225 2135;*11/11




Hillsborough Family Support Group.   They say that
without the support of that Group the distress and the,
grief they have suffered would have been much greater.
They are pleased to have been able to have the support
of people in a similar position to them.   It has
helped them enormously and they wish to thank that
Group through you, sir.

     THE CORONER:    Thank you very much indeed.   Mr.
Glover, and I know the rest of the family whom I cannot
see but who may be able to see me, thank you very much
for saying those very kind words about the people of
Sheffield.   Also for saying what you have said about
the support group because as far as I remember you are
the first family which has actually mentioned that
particular support group in this way, but it is rather
nice for the other families to know that they have been
of help to you and to your family at this very, very
tragic time.

     It must be obvious to you that we are all very
sorry that you have lost Ian.   I think obviously your
son, who was there, it must have been an awful
situation for him and we feel for them in this terrible
loss; not only the loss but also the trauma which he
axperienced, particularly your son when he saw his
brother and he could not get at him.   That must have
been a very, very difficult thing for him to sustain
and we feel for you as far as we are able in the
circumstances.

     Thank you for coming.   I hope you have understood
the point about this breathing and so on.   It is a
difficult problem, but I wanted Professor Usher to say
because otherwise you would go away and when you
thought about it later you would not be able to work it
out.   It is better to hear it now so that you know
there is some rational explanation to these things.
  (The inquest into the death of IAN THOMAS GLOVER
        was adjourned to a date to be fixed)'




                       - 10
                                                                15

                                                 I. SOUTHGATE


                Cross-Examined by MR. PAYNE:
Q. When the great big surge came whereabouts did xt come.
   Go up to the plan and just point. - A . The surge seemed
   to come from directly behind and I seemed to get pushed
   this way and Phil got pushed forward downwards towards
   the pitch.
       THE CORONER:   Thank you very much indeed.        I am
  very much obliged to you.
       Mr. and Mrs. Hammond, your lad was very young and it
  is very very sad you have lost him.   I have said this
  before already I know, but it is still the same.    I
  wrote to you to check on Mrs. Hammond's occupation.
  Have you sent it back?   In that case we will just use
  the note.   It pure formality.
                     (Short adjournment)
                     JOSEPH GLOVER Sworn
                       By THE CORONER;

Q. You are Joseph Glover? - A. Yes.
Q. Of                                 A. Yes.

Q. You are the brother of Ian who unfortunately lost his
   life? - A. Yes.
Q. It is our dad at the back? - A. Yes.
Q. You went by car with Ian and others to the match on the
   15th April, 1989? - A. Yes.   In my statement I made a
   while ago, it was the day after I buried my brother and I
   have left a lot of things out of it.
Q. Yes,   that is why you have come so youcan tell us.      At
   the   moment I am trying to find out howyou got to
   Sheffield.   You came by car? - A. Yes.
Q. What time did you leave? - A. About eleven o'clock.
Q. Youhad a ticket? - A. Yes.
Q. Did   Ian have one as well? - A.   Yes.
Q. Having left by car, did you drive straight to Sheffield?
   - A. Yes.
Q. What time did you arrive in Sheffield? - A. It was
   roundabout two o'clock, just after two o'clock.
                                                                 16

                                                       J. GLOVER
Q. Did you stop en route at all? - A. No.
0. That is quite along time     froth Walton? - A. Coming up on
   the motorway we hit a bit    of traffic, there were hoi -
   ups.
Q. Which way did you come?   Did you cdme across the Passes
   or did you come on the motorway? - A. No, on the
   motorways.
Q. You were in a car so I assume you weren't stopped and
   searched? - A. No.
0. Did you notice whether the   Police were searching coaches
^ as you were driving along?     - A. Well, when we got not too
   far away from the ground,    I am not sure how many miles it
   was, I think we saw a few    minibuses getting stopped and
   coaches.
Q.   Ofyou just drove on? - A. Yes.
Q.    It was of no interest toyou.     Having got toSheffield.
     You weren't driving? - A. No.
Q. Somebody-else was driving.        Was the car parked up? - A.
   Yes.
Q.    In fact you parked quite a long way from theground?    - A.
     I think it was a mile or a mile and a half.
Q. You then had to walk to the ground? - A. Yes.
Q. What time did you arrive at the ground, about? - A. I
   couldn't really say.
Q. How long does it take you to walk a mile or a mile and a
   half, normally? - A. Ten minutes, fifteen minutes.
Q. That is quite good walking.    Did it take as long as that
   or longer? - A. I am not sure.    I think it is at
   Penistone...   I am not sure the road we parked in but it
   was just a straight walk down.
Q. Don't worry about the time. - A. I am not sure of the
   times.
Q. It isn't that important what time you arrived. I just
   like to know if I can find out.   Walking down did you
   see other supporters? - A. There were a lot, all walking
   towards the ground.
Q. Did you see any of them carrying cans of alcohol? - A.
   No.




                   ©
                                                           J. GLOVER
You didn't see any? - A. No.

None at all? - A. No.
                         nast a bie roundabout before you
Do you remember walking pa        |     «t p iace it.
got into L ep pmgs Lane? - A. no, 1 can    f
Were you checked for alcohol at any point as you were
coming down? - A. No.
Did you see whether anybody else was? - A. No.

Of course you were driving in the car and you hadn't
stopped from Liverpool to Sheffield? - A. No.

whenr H    aiL^tSr M          riorssef« fm          e“
turnstile or "through a big gatS? - A. We entered through
the turnstiles.
Do you remember the big outer perimeter gates? - A. Yes.
You do remember those. - A . As we walked down we got to
the Leppings Lane turnstiles.    We left D a n n y . ^ u s t ^ e ^


 K K sSS& .‘H"
        &

 s     S    S    ii g   S      a   f f &   s   S   s   r    ............

 Are you saying you were actually crushed at the
 turnstiles? - A. Yes.
 Did you see any Police horses there? - A. We noticed one.

 Was that outside the perimeter gates or             it
 perimeter gates.when you noticed that? - A. I think it
 was inside.
. Which way on was it to you?          Was it broadways or
     longways on? — A. Long.
. Was he communicating with you or the otker people in the
  crowd?   Was he shouting or waving his arms or    y   g
  that you can remember? - A. No.   1 think he was just
  longways by the gates.   There is like a barrier.
. How crushed were you in the area outside the turnstiles?
     - A. It started getting pretty bad.
. Could you feel any pressure from anywhere? - A. Yes.

. Where was it coming from? - A. From the back of us.
                                                        J. GLOVER
Did you shout out a b o u t pushing or anything at t K were "
                                                       that
Voinh     Pardon?     I didn’t hear y o u . ^ A d h e r e ^
t   u   r   n   s   tilesSthere are   ,   but there d i d ^ t s e - to be a n y ^
people entering ^ h e ^ u r n s t i l e s t o q u e u e up for the match,
but there were no queues.
Did you see any Police Officers outside the turnstiles? -
A. Not outside the turnstiles, no.

You didn't see any? - A. No.

 Officers’111- ^ ? H h i n k ^ h e r e ^ i ^ ^ en^ ttWOs°f1esree
 on the side.      There wasn't any outside the turnstiles. .
 Were they saying or doing anything that you noticed? - A.
 No.
 T didn't hear your answer to my question when I asked
    w h e t h e r y o u w e r e shouting out to people not to push.
    D id you do t h a t o r n o t o u t s i d e      the   tu rn stile   , y
    y o u r s e l f ? - A. Y e s .

    Did it make any difference as far as you c o u l d " A#
    I think there was just that many coming down and there
    i t n m s tucj-c           tJipu iust all tried to come
    was no-one to stop them.-  Tti y J              witH there
    towards the turnstiles to queue up to get m .
    not being any queues it just formed into a crowd.

    I don't know whether you will be able to £®lp    did^ou
    because the perimeter gates were behind you, but dxd y
    notice whether they were open or shut?   A. I dian
    notice.
. Did you hear any messages over the tannoy while you were
  out there? - A. No.
. Did you hear any messages from a Land Rover behind you? -
  A. No.
. Did you see it by any chance? - A. No.                Me and Ian had
  S D l i t up by then as we got into the entranc             _       lt
  t u r n s t i l e s and he shoutSd over, " I ' l l meet you inside.
  As I got through the turnstiles Ian was waiting inside
     f o r me.
. So he had got in before you? - A. He got in before me.

. So once you had got through - there is a biggish area
  there? - A. Yes.
                                                                  19
     A
«•       Q. Was it quieter in there?                    A.
                                       Was it easier? - A
            Once you got through the turnstiles, yes.
                                                            J. GLOVER
                                                           Yes


         Q. Were you searched in that area at all? -A. No
         Q. Did you see any Police Officers? - A. No.
     B   Q. None at all? - A. As we got through the turnstiles there
            was none on the turnstiles.
         Q. Pardon? - A. There was no-one searching at the turnstile
            as we went through.
         0 . Was anybody searching on any other turnstile? - A. I
             couldn t tell you. The turnstile I went through, there
             was no-one on that one.
     C
         Q. How long did you stay in this big area behind the
            turnstiles? - A. As we got through the turnstiles?

         Q. Yes. - A.How do you mean?
         Q. Did you go through the turnstile, saw Ian and walked
            straight into the ground or did you go to the toilet, dia
            you buy a programme, did you buy a cup of coffee. - A.
     D      Ian was there waiting for me as I came through we just
            went straight down the tunnel.   That was the only
            entrance we saw.
         Q. Had you been to the ground before? - A. No.
         Q. So you could see the tunnel ahead of you? - A. That was
            the only place we could see.   Usually as we go through
            the tunnel we would usually go towards the left or the
     £      right, to the corner, so we could see.   We would have a
            better view with only being small, but we didn t know
            there were the dividing fences dividing it into pens.
            We just thought it was it was one big area.
         Q. When you got to the tunnel entrance on the concourse
            side, were you able to see the pitch at all? - A. Through
            the tunnel?
     F   Q. Yes. - A. Yes, we just seen the tunnel and like daylight.
         Q. But you couldn't see what was happening on the pitch? -
            A. No.
         Q. Before you left the turnstile area had you noticed...
            There was a big gate there, we call it Gate C.   Did you
            notice whether that gate was open or shut?- A. I think I
            just caught it getting shut, so I presume it had just
     G      been opened.
                                                         19

                                                   J. GLOVER
Q. Was it quieter in there?   Was it easier? - A. Yes.
   Once you got through the turnstiles, yes.
Q. Were you searched in that area at all? -A. No.
Q. Did you see any Police Officers? - A. No.
Q. None at all? - A. As we got through the turnstiles there
   was none on the turnstiles.
Q. Pardon? - A. There was no-one searching at the turnstile
   as we went through.
Q. Was anybody searching on any other turnstile? - A. I
   couldn t tell you. The turnstile I went through, there
   was no-one on that one.
Q. How long did you stay in this big area behind the
   turnstiles? - A. As we got through the turnstiles?

Q. Yes. - A.How do you mean?
Q. Did you go through the turnstile, saw Ian and walked
   straight into the ground or did you go to the toilet, did
   you buy a programme, did you buy a cup of coffee? — A.
   Ian was there waiting for me as I came through we just
   went straight down the tunnel.   That was the only
   entrance we saw.
Q. Had you been to the ground before? - A. No.
Q. So you could see the tunnel ahead of you? - A. That was
   the only place we could see.   Usually as we go through
   the tunnel we would usually go towards the left or the
   right, to the cornerj so we could see.   We would have a
   better view with only being small, but we didn't know
   there were the dividing fences dividing it into pens.
   We just thought it was it was one big area.
Q. When you got to-the tunnel entrance on the concourse
   side, were you able to see the pitch at all? - A. Through
   the tunnel?
Q. Yes. - A. Yes, we just seen the tunnel and like daylight.
Q. But you couldn't see what was happening on the pitch? -
   A. No.
Q. Before you left the turnstile area had you noticed...
   There was a big gate there, we call it Gate C.   Did you
   notice whether that gate was open or shut? - A. I think I
   just caught it getting shut, so I presume it had just
   been opened.
                                                          20

                                                   J. GLOVER
Q. You actually saw it being shut? - A. Yes.
   Did you notice whether a lot of people were still coming
   through that gate at that point? - A. No, I just seen
   them getting closed.   They were just finished filtering
   through.                           ^
0. Are you quite sure that you saw it closed because in your
   statement you say you actually saw it being opened.    was
   it being opened or was it being closed? -A. No, it was
   being closed.




             Q.   How wide open - when.
                                                                                   21
                                                                          J. GLOVER

0. How wide open - when you first caught a glimpse of it,
   okay, let's assume it was being closed, was it at that
   point when you saw it being closed wide open, or was it
   only a narrow little opening? - A. Ho, it was about
   three feet wide.
Q. So it had been opened quite wide? - A. It was as though
   it had been open full, people have come in, they have
   let a few in and they have sort of like closed it, then
   we walked down to the tunnel and went into pen 3.
Q. When you got into pen 3, when you first got into pen 3,
   did you have a quick look to see what was happening on
   the field? - A. There was nothing happening on the   ..
   field.
Q. No one was on it? - A. No.
Q. Now you are quite sure about that? - A. I think the
   players had been out, a couple of players, and had just
   gone off the pitch as we came in to pen 3.
Q. You are quite sure - I am going back to the gate,
   because you say the gate had been wide open and was
   being shut, you are quite certain about that? - A. Yes.
Q. And yet when you got out of the tunnel there was nobody
   on the field? - A. I think they had just left the
   field, yes.
0.. Kick-off had not taken place yet? - A. No, it must have
    been about 20-to-3 by the time we came in, 25-to. I am
    not sure of the times but it was a while before the
    players came out.
Q. How long did it take you, once you got to Leppings
   Lane, when you joined the crowd, how long did it take
   you to get through? Have you any idea? - A. I couldn't
   tell you, no.
Q. The reason why I ask you this is that if the gate had
   been wide open and it was being shut, we know from the
   video, at least we think we know, that that gate was
   opened at 8-minutes-to-3. - A. No, it was before that.
Q. And it was shut at 3-minutes-to-3. - A. No, it was
   before that. I would say the gate had been open before
   that.
Q. Okay, so you went through, you think, at about 20-to.
   You don't know but you think it was about 20-to? - A.
   Yes, it was about that time, yes.
Q.   You t h o u g h t   the p layers   had   le ft   the   field ?   -   A.   Y es.
                                                          22

                                                 J. GLOVER


Q. But not pre kick-off? - A. No, not pre kick-off, no.
Q. You are right, there were players on the field at about
   20-to-3 or thereabouts, and they were going off at
   about that time. Did you actually see them disappear
   off the field or is that an assumption you have made? -
   A. That was an assumption, yes.
Q. You are not sure, okay. So you got into pen 3, yes?
   Did you see at that point a beach ball being knocked
   about? - A. I am not sure. I can't remember, no.
Q. You can't remember, or you didn't see it? - A. I can't
   remember, no. I never seen it.
Q. Sorry? - A. I can't remember, no.
Q. Did you hear the players being announced over the
   tannoy? - A. No.
Q. You didn't hear that? - A. No, I never heard it, no.
0. Sorry? - A. I never heard it, no.
Q. You didn't hear it, okay. Did you see the players come
   out before the kick-off for their .... - A. No, by that
   time in pen 3 me and Ian, we were worried, before the
   players came out.
Q. Yes, I will come to that. I am just trying to find out
   what you saw. Did you see .... - A. No, I never seen
   the players come out.
Q. Did you see any players on the pitch at any time? - A.
   Just after kick-off or ....
Q. So you saw them at that .... - A. I ended up on the
   pitch.

Q. Did you see them before you ended up on the pitch? - A.
   No.
Q. Right, so you came out - now we will go back to your
   story - you came out into pen 3, you say? - A. Yes.
Q. Tell me in your words what happened. You and Ian were
   together, right? - A. We went into pen 3, sort of like
   got through the crowd, took up positions to the right
   of the gate.
Q. Fairly near the front, were you? - A. Fairly near the
   front, yes, and then we sort of like, I think it was
   like a surge, we sort of like just got pushed over a
   bit and then it just started getting tighter where you
                                                        23

                                                 J. GLOVER


  couldn't move. You were just crushed against people,
  where you couldn't move at all. Then Ian was, you
  could see as though he was choking.
Q. Sorry? - A. You could see him as though he was choking.
   As I was looking at him, he just, I couldn't explain
   it, his face was changing, and I couldn't move. His
   face just kept changing.
Q. That is what you can remember, isn't it? - A. Yes.
   Just changing colour in his face.
Q. What happened after that? Was thatwhile you were
   still in the pen or had you already left it when you
   saw his face change? - A. It was just before leaving
   the pen. I was right by him and then there was a lad
   in front of us who vomited. There was a lad in front
   of us who vomited on his jumper and there was another
   lad who fell onto the floor ....
0. Have a little drink of water. - A. Could I just have a
   break for a minute?
Q. Yes, by all means. Just leave us for a few minutes and
   settle yourself down.
               (The Witness left the Court)
        THE CORONER:    Ladies and gentlemen, I should
   perhaps, while he has gone, say that on the whole I do
   not insist on relatives giving evidence. Basically
   where a relative gives evidence it is because he wants
   us. Of course this poor young boy is obviously very
   distressed but I d.on t want you to think that I have^
   made him give evidence against his will and indeed, if
   he were to say to me now, "I have had enough, I don't
   want to say any more", I would stop because we have
   plenty of evidence from other people and we can piece
   it together.
        On the other hand, it is only fair that if
   somebody was there who is a relative and he wants to
   give evidence, that he ought to be given that
   opportunity, otherwise quite rightly he will feel, "Why
   wasn't I allowed to speak?", so we will wait for him to
   settle down and then I might, in fact, ask him whether
   he wants to carry on. I suspect he does want to carry
   on.
         While we are waiting, can I mention something else
    to do with Rule 37 and documentary evidence? You will
    have noticed that I was asking earlier whether Mrs.
    Hammond had filled in a form which I had sent to her,
    to do with names and things of that nature. What I
                                                     24




intend to do is right at the end we are going to have a
wad of these, and in fact those of you who were here in
April/May time may remember that with every single case
I referred to the form which I sent put, where I asked
people to check that we had got the names and the
spellings right. As far as I can see reading the
transcripts I don't think I actually said in so many
words, "and I admit these forms as documentary
evidence", so I think for the sake of good order, and
so that we have got a complete picture, rather than
just viva voce exchanges across the Court, right at the
end what I propose to do is to admit these documents as
documentary evidence. I don't propose unless you
insist that I read them all out in detail. I will     ..
probably read one so that you know the format in which
they were. They contain basically name, address,
occupation, date of birth, a little bit of information
about the GP which is not actually relevant but when we
did them we thought we might need that so we thought we
would get it.

      I am quite certain that these matters will not and
cannot actually be disputed, but I don't intend to do
it now, I will do it right at the end at a convenient
point, and finally, while I am on documentary evidence,
because of the way we took the medical evidence, you
will recollect those of you who were there, that I had
the pathologists. Normally I get the pathologist to
produce his PM report and say, "Here it is, I produce
it", but for some reason I did not use my standard
formula and again, just as with these forms, certainly
in some cases, in fact, probably most, I did not
actually refer to the typed PM report, and again
similarly I intend to produce them as a wad, simply so
that the information forms part and parcel of the
Inquest proceedings. All the information that is
relevant was given viva voce and in fact as far as I
know everybody who has wanted a copy of the PM reports
has had one anyway, but I take it that will be
acceptable? I hope it will be acceptable to all of you
because I will be reluctant to read 95 PM reports in
full.

     MR. PAYNE:^ Thank you for that information. The
procedure certainly would be acceptable to us. I think
1 can speak for everybody. I don t think anybody will
dissent from that.

     THE CORONER:   I will probably do it right at the
end, or at some point when I know that I have got five
or ten minutes, when I have got them here. It is just
dotting "i's" and crossing "t's", so that the record
for the future is complete, rather than having little
gaps in it.
                                                R. B. KING


I am   asking you   to look at the density of the crowd
that   you pushed   through? - A. I can't really tell you
from   looking at   the photo how thick the crowd is. All
as I   know is it   was packed tight.
     THE CORONER:   Okay, that is fair enough. What
you are saying is that when you started your movement
down towards the gate, you have no recollection of
anybody being on the pitch side of the ...? - A. No.
Forgive me, I just want to check this. When you* were
actually outside, when you had got through, did you say
you do remember Beardsley hitting the crossbar or riot,
I can't remember? - A. No, I donYt remember. I don't. .
remember anything of the game.
No, but you do remember that the game finished almost
immediately after you came-out? That is what you told
me, and I just want to be sure that we have got that
right? - A. Yes.
You    are sure about that? - A. As far as I am concerned,
all    as I seen when I got on the pitch was my two mates
and    Bruce Grobbelaar was looking back. I presumed it
had    stopped.
I see. It is very difficult with times, I know that.
That is why we like, if possible, to get the witness to
say he saw this or that, because it is much easier, but
if you did not see it you did not see it, that's all
there is to it. Okay, Mr. King, thank you very much
indeed.
     THE CORONER:   I think Mr. Glover is ready to
carry on, so we will go back to Mr. Glover.
                    JOSEPH GLOVER Recalled
                By THE CORONER (Continued)

Okay, Mr. Glover? - A. Yes.
Now, I think you and Ian were on the terrace, you were
telling me, and I seem to remember you said that you
could not really remember what was going on, on the
field, at all? - A. No.
But do you remember the little gate which leads onto
the field? - A. Yes.
You do remember that, and I think I am right in saying
that you managed to get out of that, fortunately? - A.
Yes.
                                              J. GLOVER


Were you able to walk out? Did you walk out through
it? - A. It was more like a scramble.
Do you know whether you were one of £he first people to
get out or not? - A.   No, not the first.
Can you remember it   opening? - A. Yes, it opened, I
think about ten people got out, and closed. Then it
opened again and I got out.
What was the time interval between the two openings,
can you remember? - A. I can't say, no.
Okay. I can't remember, as soon as you got out you
turned round to look for your brother, didn't you? Is
that right? - A. By the gate, before I got out the gate
I could feel myself   standing on someone. There is like
steps, I got out of   the gate but after standing on
someone. Then I got onto the pitch and just went
straight for my brother because I knew where he was,
then I climbed on the fence, just trying to pull the
fence down or reach over, shouting to him to move. He
was saying he couldn't.
You were actually shouting to him, you were talking to
him? - A. Yes. He was just talking back dead faint.
You could see his eyes just closing in front of me.
Did he speak to you at that point?   Was he speaking to
you? - A. Dead faint.
Pardon? - A. Dead faint.   His voice was sort of like
going, yes.
In fact, you have looked at a lot of photographs and
you have found yourself on a lot, haven't you? - A.
Yes.
Did you start calling to your brother as soon as you
got out or was there a little time while you had to get
your breath and sort yourself out? - A. Just a matter
of seconds.
So almost immediately you .... - A. I knew where he was
straightaway, yes.
Yes, because you had been with him, of course. - A.
Yes. Before I did get out there was a lot of shouting
to the Police at the gate, not the gate, sort of like
the fence, we were shouting for help. He was just
looking and just waiting for something, something to
happen, waiting for an order over his radio or
something.
                                                J. GLOVER


Sorry? - A. As though he was waiting for an order to
come to him over the radio, to do something.
Can you speak a little bit slower because I am having
difficulty hearing. - A. Before I got out of the gate
there was a lot shouting to the Police Officers, sort
of like on the track, for help, to do something, but it
was as though he was waiting for an order to come
through before he would act.
Was it just one Officer who was there or were there
several Officers at that point? - A. I think there was
one or two. There weren't many.
There weren't many. Did he have a radio, can you
remember? - A. I couldn't remember.
You can't remember. Is there anything else you want to
tell me, at least that you want to tell the Jury, that
is? - A. As I was on the fence more Police Officers
came round then. I was just interested in my brother
and one pulled me off and just dragged me away, told me
to get off the fence.
Hr. Glover, can I say how sorry I am that you lost your
brother. It is obviously a very distressing time. I
think you have also been very brave. I know, because I
have been told, that this was not going to be an easy
session for you so you have done well, a credit to
yourself and to your dad, and of course I am sorry for
him as well. Thank you very much for coming.
     MR. HUMPHREYS:     Sir, I am sorry ....
     THE CORONER:      Have you got a picture of 15.03?
      MR. HUMPHREYS:   This is PR1/12A - C354. Perhaps
 Mr. Glover could identify himself on that for the Jury.
      THE CORONER:   Yes. Did he mark a plan, I can't
 remember? We will get him to do that at the same time.
 What time is that one?
      MR. HUMPHREYS:     The time is 15.02.
      THE CORONER:     The number again?
      MR. HUMPHREYS:     354.
      THE CORONER:   Go ahead, Mr. Humphreys. Ask him
 what you wish with regard to this photograph?
                                                            J. GLOVER


           C r o s s - E x a m i n e d b y MR. HUMPHREYS

Mr. Glover, could you go up to the screen?                 Is that you
being pointed out now? - A. Yes.
It is.   Thank you.
     MR. HUMPHREYS:   Nothing more, sir, except that
the time of 15.02 should be recorded.
     THE CORONER:   Can you show us where you were with
your brother within the pen, on a plan? (The Witness
marked his position on Exhibit C402)
     THE CORONER:   Did you say you had a time?                 I
can't read it on mine?
     MR. HUMPHREYS:   Sir, I have a schedule of timed
photographs from album 2. I don't know if that is the
list before you or one compiled by our team. The time
shown on the photograph would be 15.03, but the true
time would be 15.02 because the clock was slightly out.
     THE CORONER:   Yes, we have accepted that as being
an accurate representation of time. Mr. Glover, thank
you very much indeed.




           HENRY JOHN CLARK Called
RICHARD JONES


1. Richard Jones,          the son      of the     Applicants Leslie            and
    Doreen Jones       was born         on 5th    October, 1963,            and was
    twenty five       years of age        \^en he died       at Hillsborough
    football ground on 15th April, 1989.


2. He   was    accompanied         to    the     stadium    by    his       sister
    Stephanie       and a     woman named        Tracey Cox.          All      thre'e
    entered     enclosure 3         of the     Lepping Lane           end of     the
    stadium.        Stephanie       Jones became       separated from            her
    brother and Tracey Cox              after a surge and pressure from
    the crowd in       the enclosure forced her              forward towards
    the front of the terracing.


3. During     the    course        of   inquest the        jury   heard        from
   Professor Usher that in his view the cause of death was
    traumatic asphyxia.            Photographic      evidence showed that
   Richard Jones was standing with Tracey Cox in enclosure
    3 at 2.56       p.m.     The only evidence of           what happened to
    Richard Jones after this time came from Police Sergeant
    John    Killoch        who    disclosed that,       some      time       later,
    Police     Constable         Paul    Bromley      joined      a    group      of
    supporters who          were carrying Richard Jones               across the
    pitch     to the       north    stand on       a makeshift         stretcher.
    Once there       the Constable attempted to              resuscitate him
    but was     unsuccessful.            He then     assisted in         carrying
                                       -   2 -




     Richard into the temporary             mortuary where at 4.00 p.m.
     he was certified dead by Dr. Nicholas Seivwright.


4.   The jury heard no evidence relating to what happened to
     Richard Jones either        between 2.56 p.m. and           the moment
     when he was      carried across the pitch, or              after he had
     been taken into      the mortuary prior to            being certified
     dead.     The   Applicants        are       extremely concerned      that
     nothing in the evidence that was put before the inquest
     discloses that Richard Jones                received any medical care
     whatsoever.      The facts        of his being carried across the
     pitch by supporters alone, and resuscitated by a police
     officer     point    to     the       opposite   conclusion.          The
     Applicants also believe that such a conclusion would be
     reinforced had the evidence              of Dr. Glynn Phillips, Dr.
     John Ashton and      Mr. F. Eccleston, in            particular, been
     put before the jury.          During the course of the resumed
     inquests the Applicants wrote to the Coroner requesting
     that these people be        called as witnesses together with
     a Dr. Burns      (Pathologist) , and that their            evidence be
     put before      the jury.     This evidence, a large            part of
     which concerned events taking place after the 3.15 p.m.
     cut-off point,      demonstrated the           woeful inadequacy       of
     the     organisation and      provision        of emergency     medical
     care.    The Coroner refused the Applicants request.                  Had
     such     evidence    been     placed        before   the     jury,    the
     Applicants      submit that       good grounds       would have      been
     established for a jury      to draw the conclusion that the
     death by    traumatic asphyxiation      of Richard   Jones was
     aggravated by lack of care.


5.   In   addition, that    there   was no    evidence of   medical
     intervention     prior to   4.00 p.m. when     Mr. Jones was
     certified dead, means that      no conclusions can be drawn
     as   to   when   death actually occurred      and    hence all
     evidence of what happened      to Mr. Jones   after 3.15 p.nf.
     is entirely relevant to the question of how he died.




ANNAAG
HER M A J E S T Y 'S CORONER FOR SOUTH Y O R K S H IR E
                    ( WEST DI STRICT)



         INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                 STADIUM DISASTER

             ON THE 15TH APRIL, 1989



            INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF


                     RICHARD JONES




                           B efore

. S.L.    POPPER,     LL. B,    B .M E D .S ci,    BM, B S ,   MRCGP

              ( Her M a j e s t y ’s C o r o n e r )




                               At

            The M e d i c o - L e g a l C e n t r e ,
                 W atery S t r e e t ,
                     S h effield .

                               On

                     3 r d May,      1990.




             TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




    From t h e N o t e s o f J . L . H a r p h a m , L t d . ,
           O f f i c i a l Shorthand W r ite r s ,
     5 5 , Q u e e n S t r e e t , S h e f f i e l d S I 2DX
F O L K ;•> t?753>£CTOU IITCFATOT/ TAYTOK Ca.13.cd

      TVy TTT'O G O R O I'IS R   ..................................................... ...




                                                                                             1145
 3-rr*      ,   1?f.O




          ITl. FlIAS^R:           S i r , t h e e v i d e n c e t h a t y o u v i l l nov?
h e a r r e l a t e s t o R ic lia r d J o n o s .      R i c h a r d ' s p a r e n t s aro
i n C ourt w ith s o c i a l w orker                m d m em b ers o f t h e f a m i l y
The p a r e n t s a r e r e p r e s e n t e d b y a p r a c t i c e w h i c h i s a ,
member o ? my G roup a n d J. a p p e a r o n t h e i r b e h a l f a s a g e n t
t h r o u g l : t h e u s u a l S t e e r i n g C o m m it t e e a r r a n g e m e n t .

                OROI             How, I t h i n k , K r . J o n o s , 3 'ou w e r e h e r o
o n t h e f i r s t d a y , w o r e y o u n o t , s o y o u kn ow t h 3 g e n e r a l
fo r m s o I am n o t g o i n g t o g o o v e r t h a t g r o u n d now a n d
•we w i l l s t a r t s t r a i g h t a w a y .

        T h is i a a resu m ed I n q u e s t w h ic h was o p e n e d on t h e
1 8 th A p r i l , I 9 8 9 . On t h a t o c c a s i o n N e i l A n t h o n y P a r k i n ,
A c tin g C oron er’ s O f f ic e r , s a id :

             "The b o d y w h i c h i s t h e s u b j e c t o f t h i s
             I n q u e s t h a s b e e n i d e n t i f i e d t o FC 2 2 2 0
             D r o m lo y o f t h e S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e a s
             t h a t o f R ic h a r d J o n o s b y L e s l i e J o n e s ,
             h is fa th e r.         He w a s 2 5 y e a r s o f a g e h a v i n g
             b e e n b o r n o n t h e 5 t h O c t o b e r , 19^3 a t
             L iv e r p o o l.      He w a s a s i n g l e man a n d h o
             l i v e d a t SO R a v e n n a R o a d , A l l e r t o n .
             He •v s g a n o f f i c e x /o r is e r b y o c c u p a t i o n .
             Tie d i e d a t H i l l s b o r o u g h F o o t b a l l G round
             f o l l o w i n g an i n c i d e n t t h e r e on S a tu r d a y ,
             1 5 t h A p r i l , 1 9 8 9 * PC B r o m l e y c a u s e d t h e
             b o d y t o b o r e m o v e d t o t h e M e d ic o L e g a l
             C e n tr e and t h e r e ho i d e n t i f i e d i t t o
             D e t e c t i v e C o n s t a b l e S im o n H e i g o I d who
             s u b s e q u e n t l y i d e n t i f i e d t h e sam e b o d y t o
             T ro f. U sh er.          I t i s th e f a m ily w ish th a t
             th e b o d y s h o u ld bo b u r ie d ."

          And. I t h e n a d j o u r n e d t h e I n q u e s t a n d , a s w a s my
n o rm a l p r a c t i c e , I w r o te and c h e c k e d w h e th e r t h e i n f o r m a t i o n
w as c o r r e c t a n d , i n f a c t , Ilr . L e s l i e J o n o s —         t hat i s
you, I th in k , i s i t n o t                  y o u s i g n e d t h e fo ix i and
yo u c o n fir m e d t h a t , i n f a c t , th e nam es, a d d r e s s e s , d a te
a n d p l a c e o f b i r t h w e r e c o r r e c t a n d I t h i n k y o u h a v e now
t o l d me t h a t , i n f a c t , y o u r s o n h a d a B Sc w h i c h I am
h ap p y t o a c k n o w le d g e b u t i t i s n o t one o f th e r e g i s t r a t i o n
c r i t e r i a w h i c h we n e e d f o r t h e p u r p o s e s o f t h e I n q u e s t .

          B lo o d a l c o h o l s w ere e s t im a t e d i n t h i s c a s e a s w e l l
a s , i n f a c t , a l l th e o t h e r s and D r. F o r r e s t gave th e
r e s u l t s f o r t h e s e on th e f i r s t d a y , i n f a c t , I t h in k y o u
w o r e h e r o t h e f i r s t d a y s o you. h e a r d h im , a n d t h e r e s x i l t
i n t h e c a s e o f R i c h a r d w a s l o s s t h a n 10 m g /1 0 0 m l .


                                                                                               114 i
I                                                   PT70F. /j,/,?: ZT&r:'>. C a l l e d

                                                           Bv t i : ; c c ^ n ' m n :


I                   'l . A l a n U s h e r ,

                    O.   P r o f.    o f
                                                     is   it

                                             F o r e n s ic
                                                               n o t? - A. Y es,

                                                               Ileclicin o     at
                                                                                          it   is,

                                                                                     S h e f f ie ld   a n d 1: o i : : q   C x -tice
                         ]?a tJ'-.o 1 o   g i s t   ? -   A.   Y es.
               B    0.   And y o u a r e g o in g t o t e l l ms a b o u t a l a d w i-.o t.as^ - ^
                         i d e n t i f i e d t o y o u a s R i c h a r d J o n e s a n d y o u a l s o nac.
                         a n i d e n t i f i c a t i o n n u r ib e r 6 3 , I b e l i e v e ? - A . l o s , t h a t
                         is r ig h t.

                    ft. C'U' v o u t e l l me t h e n w h a t t h e p a t h o l o g i c a l f x n ^ i n g s
                        a r o r e l a t i n g t o t h i s man? - A . Y o s , s i r , t h e b o d y t h a t
                        7. r>;:ar.ined v r .s t h a t o f a h e a v i l y - b u i l t , b r o w n —h a i r e d
                        y o ;:n g w h i t e n a n , 1 7 9 cms i n h e i g h t , w e i g h i n g S? k g s .
                        T here w ere o b v io u s s ig n s o f tr a u m a tic a s p h y x ia b o th
                        e x t e r n a l l y and i n t e r n a l l y . T h ere was v e r y s l i g h
                        d i l a t a t i o n o f t h o h e a r t a n d som e e n l a r g e m e n t .    I
                        th in !: t h a t i s p r o b a b l y p h y s i o l o g i c a l b e c a u s c ho was
                        n o t a t an ago when h y p e r t e n s i o n i s l i k e l y t o h a v e
                        caused t h a t .        I n my v i e w h o h a d a n a v e r a g e e r r p c c t a t x o n
               D        o f l i f e ar.d w a s n o r m a l l y d e v e l o p e d .     I g i v e th o cattse
                        o f d e a th a s tr a u m a tic a s p h y x ia .

                    n    And t h i s w a s a n o t h e r y o u n g man who h a d a t r i c o s t a t e
                         v a l v e d i l a t e d ? - A . Y e s , I t h i n k t h a t m ay b e t e r m i n a l
                         r e a lly in h e a r t f a ilu r e r ig h t a t th e end.

                    n.   In f a c t , b o th th e v a lv e s w ere m a r g in a lly d il a t e d b u t
                E        y o u w o u l d s a y t h e sa m e f o r b o t h - t h a t y o u t h i n k i t
                         i s l i k e l y t o h a v e b e e n te r m in a l? - A. Y e s.

                    n.    How, we h a v e a l r e a d y h e a r d t h i s b u t l o s s o f
                          c o n sc io u sn e ss.       1 /h a t w o u l d y o u s a y w i t h r e g a r d t o
                          t h a t ? — A . T h i s y o u n g man d i e d e s s e n t i a l l y b e c a u s e
                          h e c o u l d n o t m ove h i s c h e s t i n o r o u t a n d t h a t m e a n t ,
                          o f c o u r s e , h e c o u ld n o t b r e a th e and t h a t m eant oxygen
                          was c u t o f f t o h i s v i t a l o r g a n s a n d , o n c e t h a t c h e s t
                          w a s f i t t e d , h e w o u l d h a v e b e e n u n c o n s c i o u s *in a m a t t e r
                          o f s e c o n d s , p r o b a b l y b e t w e e n 10 a n d 2 0 s e c o n d s , a n d
                          ho w o u ld b e c o m p l e t e l y u n k n o w in g o f a n y t h i n g t h a t
                          h a p p e n e d s u b s e q u e n t t o t h a t , t i i o u g h n e w o u lo . t a k e a
                          m a tte r o f m in u te s, p erh a p s b e tw e en k and 6 m in u te s ,
                          to d ie .
                          B u t o n c e h e w a s u n c o n s c i o u s h e w o u l d n o t know a n y t h i n g
                          more a b o u t i t ? - A. T h a t i s r i g h t .

                                                           Tlv KR. FIv.A S i r ; :

                           nr o f . U s h e r , c a n y o u h e l p a l i t t l e a b o u t t h e a l c o h o l
                           co n ten t.     I t i s r e c o r d e d i n t h i s y o u n g man a s " l e s s
                H          t h a n 10 m g", i s t h a t b e c a u s e t h e l e v e l i s s o s m a l l
                           t h a t i t i s d i f f i c u l t to m easure i t a c c u r a t e ly ? -

I
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                           A. Y es, i t i s .
                                                                                                                                        114

I
     r - n , ; - o u r . - man may hc.vo h a d n o a l c o h o l             ext a l l »v.„,
     r o w " t'"o ci-v'P.rr tr.3 thtvfc t h e y o n u s e -                  _ ^i.; u o t ...
     b io c ^ c m is t - i t i t q u i t e c u s to m a r y to             express i t
      ...            , , pv>  " L e s s th r .n 10" nr.y tr.can            a n y t - n r .c up
     t o 10 b u t i t n a y w e a n n o n e a t a x ± .
         r;u t i f i t v e r o n o n e a t a l l , p r e s u m a b l y i t v o u l d show
•        ,r, a d i s t i n c t n e g a t i v e ?         tf h a t I h o v c i n         ”     * * ;in e s
         ov-5c-or.cc t h a t wo h o a r d o n t h e f i r s t c ^ y . . b o u t s o m e t i m e
         w h e n s o m e b o d y l o s e s t h e i r l i f e ‘t h e r e i s a l m o s t a
         s - .o n t t v n e o u s p r o d u c t i o n o f a l c o h o l v / i t h m oho o o d y
         o r d c o u i d t h e o p e r a t i o n o f t h a t p x o c .u c e a r e a e . m g
         a v c ^ ' s m a l l a l c o h o l l e v e l w it h in th e body? -                     Y es,
         1 suppose i t c o u ld b u t o n ly a v e r y s n a i l l e v e l .

o . /a id t h a t c o u l d b e l e s s           th a n   1 0   ? - A.   Oh, y e s .

         T hank v o ”., I ' r o f . - A . T h e r e i s n o e v i d e n c e a t a l l t o
*        shotr t h a t t h i s b o y h a d i n h im a n y a m o u n t o f a l c o h o l
         t h a t would h a v e a f f e c t e d h i s j u d g m e n t o r v a l a n c e o r
         any tilin g l i k e t h a t a t a l l .

Q. I t c e r t a i n l y p l a y e d n o p a r t i n h i s d e a t h s o f a r a s y o u
   a r c a w a r e ? - A. A b s o l u t e l y r i g h t *

                               F u r t h e r b y TFB COROHDR:

n . P r o f . U s h e r , I do w a n t t o j u s t c l e a r t h i s up b e c a u s e
    D r. ? o r r e s t d e a l t w it h th e q u e s t io n o f y e a s t
    p r o d u c t i o n o f a l c o h o l a n d i n h i s o p i n i o n , my r e c o l l e c t i o n
    5 s , b e c a u se th e h ig h a lc o h o l l e v e l s w ere n o t p r e s e t
    lie' s a i d t h a t h e w a s s a t i s f i e d t h a t i n d i g e n o u s P r o d u c ­
    t i o n o f a l c o h o l h a d n o t o c c u r r e d b e c a u s e h e cou.<.d n o t
    f in d any o f th e h ig h e r a lc o h o ls ? - A. Y o s.

 o . I<ow, I w a n t t o b e q u i t e               stir e - do y o u d i s a g r e e w i t h
     ])t'. F o r r e s t ? — A . H o .

 O. Or n o t , w i t h r e g a r d t o t h e p o s s i b i l i t y . . . . - a . N°»
    I do n o t d i s a g r e e w i t h h i m .       He k n o w s a b o u t t ;. e h i g h e
    a lc o h o ls.     I d i d n o t know t h a t .        I h a v e ° n l ?r ° Ge* \
    g iv e n th o f i g u r e s w it h r eg a r d to e t h y l a lc o n o l b u t
    w o u l d a c c e p t t h a t a r g u m e n t fr o m h i m .

       -'o u ld i t b e r i g h t t h a t w hat y o u a r e r e a l l y s a y i n g i s
    *’ t h a t i t i s t r u e t h a t i n d i g e n o u s p r o d u c t i o n o f
       a l c o h o l can o c c u r i n t h e body? - A. Y e s , I a g r e e w i i
       th w .t.
    0.     You a r c n o t s a y i n g t h a t , i n t h i s p a r t i c u l a r          in sta n c e ,
           i t d i d o c c u r ? - A . ITo, 7. c o u l d n o t s a y t n a t , .

    o . ’H-:ut v o u a r e s a y i n g i s t h a t m e a s u r i n g l e s s tiV ,n 10
        m i - h t ” m ean a n y t h i n g f r o m t h o m i n u t e s t a m o u n t up oo
        i n “ b a s i c a l l y ? - A. Or t o n o t h i n g .




                                                                                                            1148
                                                                                                                       -r




                                                                     '
                                                                    * •   *«
                                                                               -t!’■?v w- r l so
                                                                                            . . . .
                                                                                                      r-.risir."
                                                                                                               w
                                                                                                                 out   o f thr-tl

                                                                  No, th an k y o u ,                 sir .
I                                   Tt r . CORONER:         TJicnlc y o u , ?:r o f . U s h e r .
                            -r.occi y o u a g a in . a t a b o u t Z o ’ c l c c l : . —
                                                                                                  Vo w i l l _
                                                                                           T harl: y o u ,. s i r .

I                   B
                                            • Vj T
                                                 J'/
                                                   1/t*-V
                                                        ^ O :/‘f-x
                                                                 v/
                                                                  -"rr->
                                                                    •v1/..•
                                                                          »*
                                                                           . .       v 1. "
                                                                                          "T?
                                                                                          V •


I                                                               r-y ?1!TD CORC/TTy’.

                            YoaT - A . P o l i c e S e r g e a n t J o h n                  s i r , oi t h e
                            V e s t l-IidlcMirls P o l i c e . I h a v e p r e ^ L o n s i y tn lc o n t h e o a t h .
I                       " . C;-n y o u t a k e ne t h r o u g h t h e summary'-, p l e a s o ? ^ -
                            A . A t IM O h o u r s o n S a t u r d a y , 1 5 t h A p r i l , "•9 ^ 9 ,
I                           R i c h a r d J o n o s l e f t h i s hone i n Sheffield w i t h h i s
                            s i s t e r , H is s S t e p h a n ie L in d a J o n e s t o g e t h e r w it h
                            T r a c e 3 -' T G liz a b e th Co:;. T he C o u r t h a s a l r e a d y ^ h o a r d ,

I                           L iir , t h a t T r a c e y a l s o l o s t h e r l i f e a t H i l l s b o r o u g h . ^
                            I t w a s t h o i r i n t e n t i o n t o a t t e n d t h o S e m i F in a 3 . f o o t b a l l
                            m atch w h ic h was t o bo p la y e d a t t h e H ill s b o r o u g h
                            S ta d iu m t h a t d a y . A l l t h r e e p e r s o n s h ad t i c k e t s f o r
I                   D
                            th e t e r r a c e s a t t ie V e st S tan d .

                            On a x - r i v a l a t t h e s t a d i u m t h e y j o i n e d a l a r g e c r o w d
I                           o u t s i d e t h e L o p p in g s Lane t u r n s t i l e s .       A f t e r son©
                            m i n u t e s t h e y e n t e r e d t h e s t a d i u m v i a G a te C anc. w a l k e d
                            t o g e t h e r c o lo n s t h e t u n n e l b e n e a t h t h e Ti e s t S tan d and

I                           on to th e t o r r a c o s .        S t e p h a n ie i s im a b lo t o s a y w h ich
                            e n c l o s u r e t h e y e n t e r e d b u t i t h a s now b e e n e s t a b l i s h od
                    E       a s J iic lo s u r e No. 2 .          S te p h a n ie was w it h h e r b r o th e r

I                           and T r a c e y a s t h e y e n t e r e d t h e t e r r a c e s a n d , a f t e r a
                            few s e c o n d s , T r a c e y was s u b j e c t e d t o a su r g e o f
                            p r e s s u r e w h ic h f o r c c d h e r to w a rd s th e f r o n t o f t o e
                            te r r a c in g .      I n ’ . i c r u s h t h a t f o l l o w e d sh e was s e p a r a t o r
I                           fr o m b o t h h o r b r o t h e r a n d T r a c e y .

                             F o llo w in g th o s e v e r e c r u s h in g i n th e V e s t S tand

I                            t e r r a c i n g , P o l i c e C o n s t a b le P a u l B ro m ley v e n t o n to
                             t h e p i t c h a n d a s s i s t e d a n u m b er o f i n j u r e d p a r s o n s .
                             T he o f f i c e r s a w t h a t a m im b e r o f s v i p p o r t e r s w e r e

I                            c a r r y i n g a n a n , now loioirn t o b e R i c h a r d , a c r o s s t h e
                             p i t c h on a h o a r d i n g w h ic h w as b e i n g u s e d a s a te m p o r a r y
                             stretch er.             T he o f f i c e r a s s i s t e d t o c a r r y R i c h a r d t o
                             th e r o a r o f th e N o rth S tan d w here h e a tte m p te d
I                            r e s u s c i t a t i o n - b u t w 5 .th o u t s u c c e s s . T he o f f i c e r w a s
                             a s s i s t e d t o c a r r y R i c h a r d i n t o t h e g y m n a siu m w h e r e
                             a tem p o ra ry m o rtu a ry had b e e n s e t u p .

I                            A t 1 6 0 0 h o u r s D r . N i c h o l a s A n d rew S o i v e n w r i g h t                  ....

                        Cl. I   think it is a c t u a l l y Seivewright.              I think it is a
I                             sir .
                                    ]■>^ e r r o r . Tho ’ n^ s h o u l o n o t o e t h e r e . ™ A . o o r r ^ ,
                    H
I                                                                                                                                   114S
I   J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                                                            J. VTTTC-r
                                                                                                            v. I         v7"



I                                            ^-orinod rJ.ch.ard in tho tauporcry mortuary and
                                    c o r tif io - ’ life o n tin c t.
                                                                                   1 -'^’-
                                                                                         ,       HI 1^30                Leslie
                                     t  n        ’' o u r s on ouiior; , iota
I                                   tot, ; ; ^oor.tified tJio body of l a s son oo ^ - - c .
                                    Cor.i-'tc'-blf:     ~ r o n l = y =-<;t> .c t e m p o r a r y r . c r t v . - i . .


I                      B
                                                                  . _,n
                                    The o f f i c e r la«,er osco to -
                                    to 3=?ective C o n so le iJeiseld.
                                                                        ni-’-'-rd *s body to the
                                                                                     „t i t:G-.-»tific a tio n
                                    L -^ c o Le-r.l Centro curt confxmoc, o.i~t xc.e„.-u.


I                                                    ..    10n0      roil o-’i n r the i d e n t i f i c a t i o n by
                                    On IT^Ii -•?*-!> 19^9> -el_.o..xio
                                    L 'o to c tiv o C ons t a b l e V e i£ p l“ .
                                                                                                      TTg^or c a rrie d
                                                                                                              cauSo o f
                                    o u t Ml a u t o p s y nnd s u ' a n it t o t . a r e p o r t „ i v - n -
I                                   doM
                                      til*
                                                                                   •         .m——/•**-In 01 4“ln(5 t'llCllVSXS Of*

I                                    o f eth a n o l
                                     continuity o- th*..t - .„     nptective Sergeant
                                                                                        ^
                                                                                             M    ^ l ^ o r o            th o p r e se n c e

                                                                                                 S t o c t ’ vo S o n T ta b le       G reen,


I                                    Detective Sergeant Turner ana Detective
                                     F letc h er. Tlie analysis was c a m e o
                                     Alexander Robert F o rre st.
                                                                                „
                                                                                                                -



I                          D         .o u n d i n
                                     f ir 1 t ^ A
                                                           th e p er so n a l
                                                             o 'S e ^ d         th e 's ta d i^       v ia      G a te   0 to o th er

I                                    w ith         S te p h a n ie
                                                   tea t
                                                                     and T r a c e y .
                                                             c o n c l u d e s my e v i d e n c e ,    s ir .       T here i s     v isu a l

I                          E
                                         evidence.
                                                   THE CORONER:               No questions from me.                        1'r. Fraser?


I                                                  UR. FRASER:               No, thank you,                s ir.

                                                   m i,     J.XMB:       No, thank you,               s ir.

I                                                  I.'Tl. CATCHPOLE:               No, thank you,                s ir.

                                                              POT.TCB INSPECTOR MICHAEL T.AYTON Called:
I                                                                                Bv THE CORONER:


I                                        yes, -           A. S i r     M ic h a e l T a y to n ,



I                                        S a e       o r dv S t :
                                          Richard has been                  d
                                          and also in Enclosure i;o. _>, anc.
                                          l a t e r lyinc o n the pitch.
                                                                                                           then subsequently


I                                         S ir ,     a p to o to p r a p l. « f o « n c ^                                             ^    oey
                                          S r ^ e r t ^ t f “e n t r r ^ o 3- r ^ d                 v ia     G a te 0 and t h a t

I                              HI
                                          photograph i s timed at \ h 5 5 y


I                                         On a BBC video tape,
                                          lU56:31 :0^j Rxchard i
                                          3 and, a t t h is point,
                                                                                       - x      .
                                                                                                       i n Enclosure No. .
                                                                                                    r ^ -h. together with
                                                                                        hei s , ^ju^ac ,
                                                                                                                                                 11

I
    J . L   H a rp h a m   L td
                                                                                       -5-
                                                                             ?'. T ■YT<"*




S ir . th e r e aro th r o e p h o to g ra p h s, in c lu d in g a
      ’                              . -   /   /■       .   .   .    « • n       v .           _
p h o t o g r a p h r o f e r o n c e d . ulZ 1 / 6 , w h i c h show R ic iia r c i
lv i n > - on t h e p i t c h b e i n g t e n d e d t o b y s u p p o r t e r s

N r . ancl M r s . J o n e s h a v e , i n T a c t , v i e w e d v i s u a l
e v i d e n c e , s i r , and t h e y h a v e b e e n a o l e t o a s s i s t u s
i n c o n f i r m i n g t h a .t e v i d e n c e .

PC U r o m lo y h a s     sig n e d a p la n o f th e p it c h in d ic a t in g
where he f i r s t        sa w R i c h a r d a n d t h a t p l a n i s r e f e r e n c e d


S i r , i f I c a n , f i r s t o f a l l , r e f e r yo u t o a p l a n w h ic h
h.'-.s b e e n g i v e n t h e r e f e r e n c e n u m b er Kl/JL 1 6 7 .

That w i l l        be C228. -                      A . And t h e n a f u r t h e r p l a n ,
ir..rJL 1 1 3 ,     w h ic h i s a                  p la n o f   th e t e r r a c e s .

That w i l l       b e C229 . -                     A. And,              sir ,         P B /1, w h ic h i s   PC
B ro w lo y ’ s p la n .

That w i l l be C230. - A. S i r , f i r s t o f a l l , i n r e s p e c t
o f t h e p l a n MtfJL 1 6 7 , r e g a r d i n g t h o i d e n t i f i c a t i o n ^
o u ts id e th e ground, r e f e r r in g to t h i s p la n , th e p o in t
a t w h i c h t h a t p h o t o g r a p h i s sh o w n i s i n t h i s l o c a t i o n
h e r e , w h ic h , a s you h ave a lr e a d y h e a r d , i s , i n f a c t ,
v e r y c l o s e t o G a t e C.          In r e s p e c t o f th e v id e o
i d e n t i f i c a t i o n i n s i d e th e ground I r e f e r to p la n
rr.vJI, 1 1 3 .        T h i s i s E n c l o s u r e I’o . 3 a n d t h e v i d e o
i d e n t i f i c a t i o n o n BBC t a p e MAP 1 , we b e l i e v e , i s i n
th is p o sitio n h e r e .            As I h a v e s a i d , a t t h a t t i m e ,
R ic h a r d i s s t i l l a l i v e and w it h T r a c e y .

D i d wg u s e t h e sam e p l a n i n T r a c e y ' s                       case,           d o y o u know?
A. 7 c d i d n o t u s e t h e sam e p l a n , s i r                         ....

I am s o r r y , I m e a n t t h e same v i d e o ? - A . T h e y a r e
a c tu a lly to g eth er, y e s.         S i r , PC B r o m l e y * s p l a n ,
P B /1 , t h e p l a n o f t h e p i t c h , t h e l o c a t i o n shown i s
i n t h i s p o s i t i o n h e r e , a t th e L e p p in g s Lane end b u t
f u r t h e r dow n t h e p i t c h .

And r e m i n d m e,      th a t i s a r e c o l l e c t i o n , i s i t n ot? -
A. I t i s , s i r ,      yes.       S ir , u n fo r tu n a te ly , in r e sp e c t o f
th e p h otograp h        w h ere R ich a rd i s sh o r n a c t u a l l y b e i n g
t r e a t e d on th e     p i t c h , i t i s n o t p o s s i b l e t o s a y fr o m
th e p h otograp h        w here i t i s on t h e p i t c h .         T here i s
not s u ffic ie n t       d e t a i l to id e n t if y i t .

 Y e s , t h e r e i s a p h o t o g r a p h s h o w i n g h im b u t y o u c a n n o t
 l o c a t e i t b e c a u s e th o i - o a r c n o la n d m a r k s ? - A. Ko.

            i;il. FRASICR:        No q u e s t i o n s f o r t h o O f f i c e r ,                     thank
 y o x i.

            IIR. LI1EB:       No,     th ank y o u ,                sir .
                                                                                                                   115
                                        >G'       o x r . w i l l y o u j t j s t c i v c nie a r«2.r*iite
                    b o fo ro v o u ’ co n c lu d e t h i s p a r t i c u l a r In q u e st?

                             Tin: ccr.o:n:n:              Y os.

                           t       vt t SSTl *          s i r , t h e r e a r e tw o m a t t e r s              w h ich
                Ic o n c e rr n t hh e fr<.-mii.y
                                         f a- n
                                              m iill vy -"li-ich
                                                        v nj ax. c n d
                                                                     a oo rhot
                                                                     o-u   j-ouo
                                                                               t, d i r e c t l v a r. i s7 e    fro m t h e
                I s u m m a r i e s w h i c h h a v e b e e n p r e s e n t e d bhilt
                                       « •   -                          -iT'ftc.orrhnd      ut w V/bl
                                                                                                   h i cdhl     tj.T©\
                                                                                                                tn e } w w OoUu—- d
                                                                                                                                  (
              B l i k e , i f r . t a l l p o s s i b l e , y o u t o d e a l w i t r . uo                      * c .t_ sl_
                [t h e m .
                             '7 'jr;^ cC’’C'I7r»u.:       7"t i t t h e f i r s t     o n s t i ie x i.

                               »—.                    S i r , i t i s c l e a r f r o m o h e v c i3 -’
                    Jd e t a i l e d r e p o r t o f L o r d J u s t i c e T a y l o r t h a t h i s f i n d i n g s
                     w e r e th:vfc a l c o h o l p l a y e d n o s i g n i f i c a n t p a r t i n t ,io _ ^
                     d i s a s t e r on t h e 1 5 th A p r i l .       That r e p o r t has boon v i a e l y
                     ■o u b lis h e d and t h i s f a m i l y w o u ld l i k e p e r h a p s t o
                     u n d e r s t a n d a l i t t l e m o re w h y s u c h e m p h a s i s s e e m s t o
                    Ih a v e b e e n p l a c e d o n t h e a l c o h o l a n a l y s i s .    C e r t a i n l y on
                    l t h e o p e n i n g d£*y o f t h e s e . . . .

                            TTrni CCTlCi^TD'R:      Can I i n t e r r u p t y o u ?     I    th in k I d id
                    ,s a y   r i'" h t    a t t h e b e g i n n i n c t h a t we w e r e n o t g o i n g t o                          _
               D L e a l w i t h t h e q u e s t i o n o f how a n d I t h i n k i t w o n l y f a i r
                   t o s a y t h a t we h a v e n o t i n t r o d u c e d L o r d J u s t i c e T a y l o r
                   r e p o r t i n t o t h i s I n q u ir y and w h i l s t , o f c o u r s e , t h a t
                   r e p o r t i s p u b l i c p r o p e r t y , s o t o s p e a k , I w o u l d r.o
                 l i t to bo p u t to th e J u ry t h a t t h a t i s th e c o n c lu s io n o f
                   L ord J u s t i c e T a y l o r ' s r e p o r t .   I t may b e o r i t may n o
                   be.       *fhon t h e t i m e c o n i e s , i f i t i s r e l e v a n t , we w i l l
                   d e a l w i t h i t no I c a n n o t a c c e p t a s a s u b m i s s i o n t-ic.        ^
                    th a t i s c o r r o c t.    Y ou n a y p u t i t f o r w a r d a s a v i e w b u „
                  j l am n o t a c c e p t i n g i t a s a p r o p o s i t i o n o r a s e v i d e n c e
                    o f t h a t f a c t , th s-t h e c o n c lu d e d t h i s o r t h a t a b o u t
                  !a l c o h o l . I a n s o r r y b u t I h a v e g o t t o s a 3 ^ t h a o .

                            Y our seco n d p o in t, I th in !: I h av e u n d e rs to o d y o u r
                     second p o in t.        I f I have n o t, of co u rse, you w ill c o rre c t
                IT I m e .  T h e s e c o n d p o i n t i s t h e y s a y w h y <*re w e c . ^ e - l i^ - g ^
                   |w it h th e q u e s tio n o f a lc o h o l l e v e l s .    That i s n g n t , i s
                     i t n o t?
                                      tt'^ASIDR:
                                              P e r h a p s m o r e w hy s u c h e m p l i a s i s a p p e a r s
                      to have b een p la c e d upon i t .

                               tw™     GC^CI-nSI:           'H ie d e c i s i o n     as    to    w hat ev id e n c e          to
                       call,'of course, is n i n e . I do not think v e have placed
                       any undue snjlasia on alcohol, on the contrary, I thin.,
                       a t t h i s s t c ^ - e w e h a v e n o t b e c a u s e a l l x am c i o m g i s
                       r e c o r d in '7 th e f a c t , n o t d ra w in g an y c o n c lu s io n s , o e c a u se
                       t h a t w o u ld im p in g e o n t h e i s s u e s o f how o r w hy w h ic h I ,
                       as you know , s p e c i f i c a l l y e x c lu d e d .               F erh ap s I ought to
                                            Mr.
                       . i u s t s a y , xij. . F r a  s e r   -   a n
                                                    ------------------ d  f o r g i v e  me   i f , I s a y- t h a t . -
                                                            _        - -        1 _ _~          i.J.               <*»4*
                       th a t th e is s u e o f a lc o h o l has been a m a tte r o f p e - t
                H      m om ent t o a l o t o f t h e f a m i l i e s .                 T hey w a n te d tn e f i g u r e s .
                       T h e y w a n te d t o know i t .               I f I h a d s u p p r e s s e s t.ie
                        i n f o r m a t i o n I think I w o u l d h a v e b o o r , o p e n t o v e r y s e ^ ° ^ s
                        c r i t i c i s m a n d s o I d o n o t a c t u a l l y fififiSPt tne p r o p o s i t i o n                       115
J. L. Harpham Ltd
                                                                       _7-
                 that vo    arc c^vin*; it lUv-'.uo crrphatsis but I do_ acccpt
                 that, within each ;xnC -vory cr-.yo, wc jivo the fx./ur^
                 bo cav.i5o that ic part o x cnc cviaonc-*               —c .       ,
                 if any,    it has vo will deal with who.: we cono ----
                 vhon i (.'ocitio, j.j? wg -o to any j-urtxicr jv?<—              t
                 r ,-      evidence to call r.nd x will        thoi call      to /«.i
                 vitncslioc wo need to cloal with that question,
                 that hoi • vou or your clients?
            B            •      FTU.S:£':        I hope so ,         sir ,    yes.

                            T he s e c o n d p o i n t r e a l l y r e l a t e s t o t h e c o n c x t i o n
                 o f r.asr/ o f t h e T a n s who a p p e a r t o h a v e d i e d .                 Gr± 'cnc
                 d a y t h e r e v 'o r c no n : u t i l a t e d - if* I c a n u s e t i v ’t './ora -
                 L>odieu a n d '.:o h a v e h o a r d e v i d e n c e t h a t t h e m a j o r i t y o f
                 f a n s h a d sor.ie b l u e d i s c o l o u r a t i o n b u t t h e r e w a s no
                 a p p a r e n t a c c u r a t e d i a g n o s i s made a t t h e g r o u n d a n d
                 I l i c h a r d ' s f ' l - ’i l y w o u l d l i k e t o k n o w w h y p e r h a p s t h e i r
                 s o n was n o t t a k e n t o h o s p i t a l and j u s t assu m ed t h a t he
                 w a s d o a d a n d r e s u s c i t a t i o n a t t e m p t s made a t t h o
                 h o sp ita l.

                        TT7L2 CC7KJII2I!;          l ‘r . F r a s e r , I u n d e r s t a n d t h e x r
              c o n c o i'-i b e h i n d t h o q u e s t i o n b u t I t h i n k t h a t e a c h a n d
            D e v e r y f a n , a s y o u k n o w , e v e r y o n e o f t h e p e o p l e who
              d i e d , was c e r t i f i e d d ea d e i t h e r a t t h e h o s p i t a l o r a t
              t h o g r o u n d b y a p r o p e r l y q u a l i f i e d n o d i c a l m an .           That
              i s th e f i r s t p o in t .           That h as to be a p p r e c ia te d .              It
              i s n o t a c ;v .o stio n o f p e o p l e j u s t s a y i n g " H e 's d e a d " .
              ISvory s i n g l e o n e w a s l o o k e d a t m e d i c a l l y .            S e c o n d ly ,
              one h as t o th in k b ack to th o s i t u a t i o n .                     I n an i d e a l
              w o r l d i t may b o t h a t e v e r y b o d y s h o u l d f i n i s h u p i n
              h o s p i t a l h u t , fr o m a p r a c t i c a l p o i n t o f v i e w - I do
              not" w a n t t o d e a l w it h , t h i s a n y f u r t h e r b e c a u s e I do
              n o t t h i n k we c a n - b u t fror.; a p r a c t i c a l p o i n t o f vie-..'
              i t i s , w it h a l l due r e s p e c t t o y o u r c l i e n t s , an
              u n r o a l i s t i c e x p e c t a t i o n i n t i i o s i t u a t i o n i n r/hicji
              e v e r y b o d y fo a r 'd t h e m s e l v e s o n t h a t d a y a n d i t i s n o
              u s e u i n c i n g w ords en d s a y i n g a n y th in g ' d i f f e r e n t .            I
              th in k th a t'V n a t i s th o tr u t h o f th e m a tte r .

                         T h i r d l y , I c a n n o t s a y w hat p e o p l e * s ju d gm en ts
               w ere a t th e t i n e .           I f t h a t i s a r e l e v a n t p o i n t , and i t
               jvji^vV)t h o w h e n wo come t o d e a l w i t h t h e q u e s t i o n oa h o w ,
               t h e n f'jjr.iin we w i l l d e a l w x t h i t a t t n a t s t a g e .ouc i t
               i s n o t^ a p p r o p r ia te to d e a l w ith i t now.                 I ar.i c o n c e r n o d ,
               in a s e n s e , abou t th o q u e s t io n b o c a u so I th in k i t show s,
               w i t h t h e g r e a t e s t o f - r c s p c c t , a r a is e o n e o p t i o n a s t o
                th e p r a c t i c a l i t i e s o f th e s i t u a t i o n and a l s o th e t r u t h
               o f th o ." a t t e r .        »re h a v e h e a r d f r o m I - r o f . U s h e r a n d w h a t
               h e s a i d a b o tit l o s s o f c o n s c i o u s n e s s , d u r a t i o n , l e n g t h
                o f t i m e t h a t i t m i g h t t a k e f o r somebod}*- t o d i o - o v e n
                i f th e y had gone t o h o s p i t a l h a .lf-a n -h o u r o r an hou r
                l a t e r i t w o u l d n o t h a v e made a n y d i f f c x - e n c e .         I th in k
               wo h a v e L; o t t o f a c e i t .          T hat i s th o t r u t h .          I an n o t
             H v o r y h e l p f u l b u t I th in k t h a t t h a t i s th o b e s t I can d o .
                Anyway wo w i l l h a v e t o d e a l w i t h t h a t ^ i f we d e a l w i t h
                i t , a s p a r t a n d p a r c e l o f t h e how,
                                                                                                                     115
f| W^rrihamIfH
           7-r. J o n e s , I lcnoi: y o u *.:cre h e r o v/hen we d e a l t v.'zs.th
 • r a c e y 1s d e a t h a n d I A i ' p r c c i f i t c d y o u r p r e s e n c e t n e n .
Tf vol.; ro- '.or.ioor X said that and., in JTr.cc, olictt ••>—- true.
I also know that you *.:ould be coming again be cause t.'2
kijev: vc t;oro going to ’ir.ve 7J.chr.rd1h case a little bit
In.ter. J quite, quite understand vliat a droiic’ful olov
t h i s n u s t b e ------- v e i l , I k e e p o n s a y i n g X q u i t ©
u j i d c r 3 t'.’.?':d — —— T c o r r e c t r.vycj-elf ~ h e . / c im I p o s s i b l y '
u i i d c r 1 a : i d v.rh a t a d r e a d f u l b lo i .r t h i s h iu ct b e t o y o u .
T he b e s t J. c a n d o i s t o i m a g i n e i t w o r e o n e o f m y sons
a n d I ccn t h e n i m a g i n e --.'hat I w o u l d f e e l l i k e , s o J.
u n d e r s ta n d , to a c e r t a i n c :: t e n t , th e p a in and th e
c o n c e r n ’..rh i c h y o u a r e f e e l i n g .

          I h ave t r i e d to answ er th e             p o in ts       you have
r a i s e d f a i r l y fir r r .ly r e a l l y , X t h i n k , b e c a u s e X t h i n k
v/ht'.t T i-Ta s s p y i n g h a s t o b o s a i d .        X do n o t s e e t h e r e
i s anv n o in t in d o in g a n y th in g e l s e .            At le a s t th a t i s
my judgr.’. e n t .     S u b j e c t t o t h a t , X f e e l f o r }'o \i a n d f o r
th o r e s t o f y o u r f a m il y i n th o l o s s t h a t you h a v e
su ffered .
         L a d i e s a n d g e n t l o n e n , v;e a r e g o i n g t o r i s e .  X
t h in k - jo m u s t h a v e a r e a s o n a b l e t i m e .     S h a ll ve say
t e n - 1> n .st-tv ;o ? :J o u ld t h a t b e a l l r i g h t ?     T hank y o u
vei’i*' i.:ucii.
                              (L uncheon      Ad i o u r n in e n t)




                                                         S O
                                                                                                115
          Kir
S©ssGMtt ipdaoaa ppsdaiasd


     Identified Alive.

0-   Id entified Appar ently Dead.

     Unconfirmed Identification

     Identified Alive and Apparently
     Dead in the Same Location.
z
C229




      £
t%
*


 I
«.
      A



 3?       .
- -i


rI
      t4. i
       N G S LA«e EHO   NAME   P-KHAao
                                              C230
                                         PCXZZO S& qv-sUL




SPiOH KOP ENO
                                                   S. L. JONES

     MR. PAYNE:   Before you resume, sir, the lawyers
present would like to thank you for the courtesy in
arranging transport this morning. Thank you very much.
     THE CORONER:   Before I say anything else I would like
to thank Mr. Catchpole and, through Mr. Catchpole, the Club
for making it available, having everything unlocked, having
people there and being more than helpful. I am most
grateful to you. I think, although I have seen it before,
it was helpful to see it again. You must remember that it
has changed a little bit. You will have noticed that. I
do not have to point out to you that there were no
perimeter fences and so on but one learns a lot, does one
not?
     MR. KING:   Before Miss Jones starts her evidence,
sir, can I tell you something that I have been asked on her
behalf to tell you?
      THE CORONER:   Yes, please.
     MR. KING:   She has identified herself on one of the
photographs which has already been produced to the Inquest
which is C.295.
     THE CORONER:     Yes, we will put it up at a convenient
point.
     MR. KING:   I know she wanted you to know that from
the beginning, sir.
                  STEPHANIE LINDA JONES Sworn
                        Bv THE CORONER:
Q. You are Stephanie Linda Jones, is that right? - A.
   Yes.

Q.                                         in Merseyside,
     tnat is rignt, is it not? - A. Yes.

Q. Is it mum and dad who are here? - A. Yes.
Q. You are I think a receptionist? - A. Yes.
Q. Or you were at that time? - A. Yes.
Q. You are in fact the sister of Richard Jones, are you
   not, who unfortunately lost his life at Hillsborough?
   - A. Yes.
                                                    S. L. JONES

Q. Of course, technically you were not related to Tracey
   but she was Richard's girlfriend, was she not, and
   she unfortunately lost her life which is very sad
   obviously? “ A. Yes.
Q. I want you to tell me as much as you can and as much
   as you feel able. I will ask you questions like I
   did with all the other witnesses and we will see how
   we get on. Okay? ~ A. Yes.
Q. Richard was a season ticket holder I think? - A. Yes,
   that is correct.
Q. Initially he got two tickets because I think it was
   just him and you who were going to go to the match? -
   A. Yes, that is right.
Q. I think that Tracey decided she would like to come as
   well, is that right? - A. Yes.
Q. He got another ticket? -     A.   Yes.
0. In facthe asked you to get a ticket for Tracey? - A.
   Yes.
Q. He was actually living in Sheffield, was he not,
   Richard? - A. Yes.
Q. It was easier for you to go to the club than for him?
   - A. Yes.
Q. You got   the £12 ticket I think for Traceywhich is
   for the   stand? - A. Yes, my father    got itfrom the
   ground.
Q. Somebody in the family went to the ground? - A. Yes.
Q. As it happens your mum came home that day and she had
   another one and so you finished up with four? “ A.
   Yes, that is right.
 Q. Hers was a £14 ticket for    the stands? - A. Yes.
 Q. You took them. Did you have ail four or did you have
    just these two and Richard have the other two? - A. I
    had three and Richard had his own.
 Q. You looked after them and on the 14th April, the day
    before the Friday, inthe evening you came to
    Sheffield by train? - A. Yes.
 4                                                             7

_A

                                                      S. L. JONES
     Q. Because you had somewhere to stay, that is right, is
        it not? - A. Yes.

 B   Q. Tracey had also come or she may have been here
        already? - A. She lived in Sheffield as well.  They
        both went to university there.
     Q. You all went out that evening. Where did you go as a
        matter of interest? - A. The Broom Hill Tavern pub
        just at the bottom of the road for just one drink.
     Q. You had a nice time? - A. Yes.
     Q. Looking forward to the match I expect at thattime? -
        A. Yes.

     Q. In the morning of the 15th you had an extra ticket at
        that point, did you not? - A. We had to swap one of
        them because otherwise Tracey would not be with us.
     Q. You wanted her with you? - A. Yes.
D    Q. So Richard had his breakfast and he went off and
        exchanged the £12 ticket with a friend, is that
        right? - A. Yes.
     Q. This was really a private arrangement? - A. Yes.    His
        friend obviously wanted to sit down.
     Q. He was getting a good deal, was he not? - A. The more
        expensive ticket.

     Q. It seems to me the sensible thing to have done. He
        then came back and so you had three tickets for the
        terraces? - A. Yes.

     Q. What happened to the fourth one? - A. Before we went
        to the ground we went and apparently Richard knew
        some friend who wanted the other ticket and he was
        going to sell them the tickets.
     Q. He knew somebody, did he? - A. It was a friend of a
        friend.

     Q. Again it was a private arrangement? - A. Yes, it was
        just to get rid of the ticket rather than sell it at
        the ground.

     Q. Then I think you had something to each for lunch.
        You had a light lunch. - A. Yes.
                                                                8




                                                        S. L. JONES
     Q. A't about 1.15 or so did you set off for the ground? -
         A. No, I think we had lunch about that time.
_    Q. I aim sorry? - A. We had lunch at that time.   It was
IS      after that. Just after two some time.
     Q. Just after two? - A. Yes.
     Q. Did you walk or drive? - A. No, we drove.
     Q. Because it was too far? - A. Yes.
     Q. How long did it take you to drive to wherever you
        parked? - A. We drove to meet somebody at a pub to
        give them the tickets which was on the other side of
        the ground.
     Q. I am sorry? - A. It was to the other side of the
        ground, the public house. I am not sure of the name.
     Q. You do not know which pub it was., do you? - A. No.
D    Q•   Did you then park in that car park of the pub or did
          you park somewhere else? - A. No, we parked in the
          car park.

     Q. When you say the other side of the ground, are you
        saying he was at the Nottingham Forest side? - A. No,
        it was right over the other end *o£ the city really.
     Q. It was a long way away? - A. Yes.

     Q. Were there supporters in that pub? - A. No, it was
        very empty.

     Q. Richard's friend's friend was there and you got the
        tickets? - A. Yes.
     Q. Did you stop for a quick drink? - A. Yes, we had one
        drink.

     Q. What did Richard have? - A. He had a pint of beer.
     Q. That is all he had? - A. That is all.

     Q. What time was it when you got to that pub? - A. I am
        not really sure. It was only about fifteen minutes
        away from the house.

     Q. From home and you left about two I think you said? -
        A. Yes.
                                                       S. L. JONES

    Q. So we will say you left about quarter past. We do
       not have to be to the second. Then I think you
       stayed at the pub for about another fifteen minutes
       or so? - A. Yes.
B
    Q. So in round terms that would be about 2.30, would
       that be fair? - A. About.
    Q. We are not pinning you down to a minute or two or
       anything like.
    Q. How did you then get from this pub to the ground? -
       A. It was Tracey's car and she drove to the ground.
       She doesn't drink at all really.
    Q.    How long   did it take    to   drive to the ground wouldyou
         say? - A. About fifteen, ten or fifteen minutes.
    Q.   Then you    had to park? - A. Yes, in Far Lane.
    Q.    Which is   quite close   to   the ground? - A. Yes,notfar
         away.
D
    Q. You were fortunate then to find a space? - A. Yes.
    Q. From where you parked you then walked to the ground,
       is that right? - A. Yes, that is true.
    Q. That would have taken you how many more minutes? - A.
       About ten minutes.
    Q. Again if we add it all up we get to about ten to
       three? - A. Yes.
    Q. Would that be about right? - A. That would seem about
       right.
    Q. Would you agree? If you do not agree please say
       so? - A. Something like that. I am not sure but
       something like that.
    Q. I am just adding up the times with ten minutes here
       and ten minutes there. Did you see lots of fans
       first of all on your drive to Farndale Road? - A. No,
       not on the way to Far Lane, no.

    Q. When you parked and got out? - A. The nearer we got
       to the ground the more fans.




H
                         S. L. JONES

Are you a football supporter yourself, generally
speaking? - A. Not on a regular basis. I have only
been to Anfield maybe A or 5 times, and not away at
all.
So you are not really an experienced football
attender? - A. No.
You had not been to Hillsborough before, had you? - A.
No.
So you were not there in 1988? - A.     No, Richard had.
Richard had but you had not? - A.     No.
As you were walking towards the ground you were
walking down Leppings Lane, or up Leppings Lane, I am
told, is that right? - A. Yes.
Firstly, I want to make sure we have got the right
road. What is the map number? Is it 284? Yes,
C.284. Just put it up. I will just make sure I have
not misremembered the road - Farndale. - A. Far Lane.
I thought perhaps I was getting it wrong. Do you know
where it is on that map? - A. I didn’t know at the
time. It was only afterwards I found out where it
was.
It is Far Lane - F-A-R did you say? - A. I think it is
double RR - F-A-R-R, is it?
In that case, I was thinking of the wrong road. I was
thinking of Farndale. I do not know where Far Lane is
either. Is it off the map?
     MR. HALE:   I can show it to you, sir.
     THE CORONER: Mr. Hale, thank you very much. I
see. It is what I would call below Wadsley Lane, not
that far from the ground, you are right, but not the
one I had in mind anyway.
You are saying that you walked from that road all the
way to the ground? - A. Yes.
I do not suppose for a minute you can remember the
names of the roads you walked down? - A. No, I cannot.
I will have to go over the ground again. Were you on
your own when you were walking there, or were there
other supporters walking with you? - A. To begin with
there wasn't many at all.
                           S. L. JONES


' At one point did you start picking up other
  supporters? - A. I don't know. After 5 minutes we
  started seeing a few and then it just got more and
  more.
 They were all walking down towards the ground as far
 as you were concerned? - A. Yes.
 What was their behaviour like? - A. Happy; they were
 singing. It was just normal. I did think there was
 an awful lot of people but it was just normal.
 Just as a matter of interest, did you see people
 carrying any cans? - A. No, I didn't.
 None at all? - A.   No, none.
 You have told me they were singing and other people
 have described that I think as jolly. Would you use
 that word or not? - A. Yes.
 But you were not frightened in any way? - A. No. I
 did think there was an awful lot of people but I
 hadn't been to that many matches so I just assumed it
 was normal.
 Nobody did anything to you. I do not mean in the
 sense of hitting you, but did people swear at you, or
 anything like that? - A. No, there was no problem at
 all.
 Good.   Then you approached the ground - right? - A.
 Yes.

 As you got towards the turnstiles, which-you had not
 seen before, this was the first time? - A. I didn't
 see them at all.

 You did not see them at   all? - A. The whole   time.
 Tell me what you saw? - A.Nothing, just a       mass of
 people as they went towards the ground.
 I see, so the nearer you got, the thicker the crowd? -
 A. Yes.

 And right at the ground it was an absolute mass of
 people? - A. Yes.
 Did you see any police officers, just as a matter of
 interest? - A. I had noticed I had hardly seen any,
 and then like once I got near the ground I saw one
 officer directing traffic, that was all, and then
 nearer the ground, or once we were in the mass, I saw
                        s. L. JONES


one policeman on horseback and then further back there
were two more on horseback amongst the crowd.
So what you are saying is as far as you remember, you
saw one officer who was directing traffic? -. A. Yes.
Was it near a traffic light, a little bit higher up? -
A. Yes.
Then as you got nearer to the ground your recollection
is of a police officer on horseback? - A. Yes.
Where was he? - A. That was more when   we gotright
into the crowd, right near the gates.
Then a little bit further in there were another two? -
A.No, there were two quite far out, out of the crowd.
Do you mean towards the roadway, that is what I am
trying to find out? - A. On the outside of the crowd,
where the bulk of the crowd was.
I see. When you saw all this crowd of people there
what did you think? - A. I just wondered why there
were so many people there really.
Was the crowd at that point moving, as far as you can
remember? - A. Sort of shuffling. They didn't seem
to be going in any sort of direction.
When happened? Did you, Richard and Tracy join in at
the back? - A. Yes, there seemed no other place to go.
Did other people join you behind? - A. Yes.
I think that as the people joined you behind, you
started feeling a push forward, is that right? - A.
The pressure of people, yes.
So there was pressure behind you? - A. Yes.
Which was tending to make you go forward? - A.   Yes.
That presumably meant that you were getting closer and
closer to people ahead of you all the time, is that
right? - A. Yes.
You and Tracy and Richard were trying to hold hands
because you wanted to stay together but people tended
to separate you, is that right? - A. Yes.
How did that happen? Just tell me how that happened.
Did they push between you, or what happened? - A. It
is just normal. People are just moving along. You
                          S. L. JONES


'can't seem to stay in a whole bunch together.        It is
 just impossible. That always happens.
When this was happening, can you remember - you may
not be able to remember - at the ground the outer
perimeter gates, the sort of blue gates with railings
on them? Can you remember those at all? - A. No, I
can't remember going through those. I did go through
them but I can't remember.

 What I am trying to find out is when you are saying
 you were being pushed, do you think that you had gone
 through these outer gates, or had you not reached them
 yet? - A. I think I had probably gone through them by
 then.

 Okay. Were you going through on the right-hand side?
 - A. Yes.

 Was that because Richard said, "That's the turnstiles
 that we need", or what? - A. I didn’t see the
 turnstiles at all. It was just the movement. That
 was the only way sort of thing.
 But he had been before so presumably you were relying
 to a certain extent upon his knowledge, were you not?
 - A. I suppose so.

 Yes. At some point I think you saw some blue metal
 gates. Can you remember that? - A. Yes.
What sort of gates were they? - A.      Large like.
We have called them concertina gates.      - A.   Yes. that
is right.

I will just show you a picture of one. I am not
saying this is the gate you saw because we have not
yet established which gate you saw, but I think it is
259. I think there are two of them on. No, it has
only got one of them on. This is probably not the one
that you went through, but that sort of gate, is that
right? - A. I would say so, yes.
 If you look at 261, that is a close-up of this sort of
 gate - yes? - A. I think so.
 Something of that sort? - A.   Yes.
I mean that type of gate. It was not a gate with
railings or anything like that? - A. There was such a
mass of a crowd, you couldn't really see.
                          S. L. JONES


Okay. At this gate was there a policeman? - A.   Not
that I saw.
You did see a policeman on horseback, I think, did you
not? - A. He was in the middle of the crowd, yes.
He was not at this gate; he was further away from you
then? - A. No, I think he was towards the second
gate, yes.
                 Q.   Which second gate .....
                                                                   15



                                                        S. L. JOHES



       Q< which second gate are we talking about? - A. Gate C.

  b   .Q. Gate C? - A. Yes.
      ' Q. That is that gate over theret in fact? - A. Yes.
       Q. what was he trying to do as far as you coul'l tell? - A.
          He was trying to split the crowd.
       C. Was he having any success? - A. No.
       0 . Is that because nobody took any notice of hiri? - A. H o ,
          it was just the sheer amount of people there was. iie
          just had no chance on his own, and there was just
          nobody else around. It was just it was an impossible
          task for hia to perform.
          So the only way he could have succeeded would have been
          if everybody had obeyed him instantly? - A. Ho, I think
          if he had had more manpower it would have helped,
          rather than if everyone had obeyed him.
 D
          I agree with you there, obviously the snore people you
          have the easier a task becomes, but are you saying that
          if people had obeyed him he would still not have had
          any success? - A. I can't really answer that. I mean,
          I tried to get over to the right because you don't want
          the horse trampling on you, but the sheer amount of
          people you couldn't move that far across anyway.
 E] q.    In fact, did the crowd pressure, if anything, become
          even stronger at tnat point? - A. Yes, it did.
       Q- Did you feel uncomfortable at that point? - A. Yes.
       Q. Uere you a bit worried about yourself? - A. Yes, I got
          pushed right up against the gate and tny arm was
          trapped.
 Fl    Q. So really you were in quite a difficult position then,
          weren't you? - A. Yes.
       Q. Tracey was still near you and so was Richard, is that
          right? - A. Yes.
       0 . And I take it they were in tne same sort of condition
          as you were? - A. Yes.

Gl Q«     There were another two Police Officers, weren't tnere,
          who;n you mentioned? Where were they? - A. They ware
          out of the crowd towards the back, I did notice.
          Could you see what they were trying to do? - A. U’o, I
          couldn't see.


TLT
You might not have been able to see because of them
being too far away or because of the crowd, but you
just saw them because they were elevated, is that
right? - A. Yes. I just noticed because this one was,
the first one, was right in the sniddle of the melee of
the crowd, but the other two were right outside where
the crowd was.
While you were approaching this gate, before you had
actually got hard onto it, had it opened at all? - A.
It was opened once. 1 saw it open once.
You saw it open once? - A. Yes.
On that opening you didn't get through on that
occasion, did you? - A. No.
That is presumably because you were too far away from
it, is that right? - A. Well, yes.
And also was that opening - it didn't last very long,
did it? - A. No, only a couple of seconds.
On that occasion, just help me on this because I am
just trying to fix the openings, did people corae
through, did people actually go through the gate? - A.
I think three or four, perhaps, people went through -
not many though.
Some did - it wasn't opened wide at that tine? - A. Ho
And I think having got up against this gate, I think
Richard said, "If it opens again we are going in?" - A
We had no choice, otherwise it would have been a lot
worse.
In fact, a little while later that is exactly what
happened, it opened? - A. Yes.
But it opened vide out, is that right? - A. It opened
right across.
And you could see that it was a Police:nan who was
opening the gate? - A. Yes.
Certainly it was an official person? - A. Yes.
Did he open it all the way by himself or did he begin
to open it and did fans then assist to open it
further?- A. The fans helped because everyone had been
screaming for him to open it because we could see
something was going to happen outside if he didn't,
because everyone was screaking for hi.-a to open it.
So what you are saying is that the gate began to open
and you could see it was a Policeman, and then the fans
started opening it with him? - A. The fans on the
inside - tnere was fans on the inside.
In fact, what happened then with regard to the fans and
that gate? - A. They pulled it wide open and we forced
ourselves sort of to the side and in, and got into the
clearing, then I think a whole load ca.-ne right througti
all together with the force.
There was initially quite a rush in, because people had
been squashed tight against it, would that be right? -
A. Yes. It was like taking a cork out of a bottle,
sort of thing.
Anyway, you managed to get into what is called the
concourse area and it was a bit better in there, wasn't
it? - A. Yes, it wasn't packed at all.
Because there was a lot of space, relativelyspeaking?
“ A. Yes.

What happened then? - A. Me and      Richard had both gone
through together because he had      been just in front of
me, and we got through together      and then we just waited
for Tracey and she came through      just in a matter of
minutes, and joined us.
Where did you go then? - A. We just - I could only see,
well, we could all only see the tunnel, and Richard
said to just go down the tunnel, so we just stood there
for a minute or so, and I thought everything was okay
then because it was pretty clear in there, and then we
just started to walk down the tunnel.
So by the time you went down the tunnel, you are saying
it was reasonably clear, is that right? - A. Yes, it
was.

     MISS ADDLEMAH:   Sir, we are having difficulty in
hearing the witness at this end.
     THE CORONER:        He or the witness?
     HISS ADLiLEIlAil:    The witness, sir.
     THE CORONER:   Can you sit a little bit further
forward? You have got to get quite close to these
mikes. You were saying that when you went into the
tunnel it was reasonably clear? - A. Yes, it was.
But there were people walking down? - A. Yes, norraa lly.
                                                                18


                                                     S. L. JOKES



     Q. A normal walk? - A. Yes.
         In fact, you did actually see one or two people, not.
B Iq -   that many, who were passing water down the side of the
         tunnel, is that right? - A. Yes.
     Q . That wasn't something which you would have necessarily
         approved of but you weren't too concerned at that
         point? - A. I wasn't surprised.

     Q . Can you reneraber - you may not be able to remember but
         were you walking down thetunnel in the middle, the
         left side or the right side? - A. I can't really
         remember. We were probably spread right out. i/e were
         probably walking together.
     Q . Yes, because there were three of you? - A. Yes.
     Q. When you got to the end of the tunnel, the tunnel goes
        along and then it has got a dip, hasn t it, and you can
        see the pitch, when you got just to exit of the tunnel,
D       was that part of the tunnel clear of people? - A. Yes,
        it was.

     Q . So you were able to get onto the terrace without any
         particular obstruction at that point? - A. Yes.
     Q . Tell me, because obviously you were interested in the
         match, what was happening on the field at that point? -
         A. I didn't look. We were just going to try ant? get a
         place and then look. As far as I was concerned the
         match hadn't started.

     Q . You don't think it had started? - A. No.
     Q . Can you recollect whether any players were on the
         field? - A. Ho, I didn't look at the pitch.

     Q- So you don't really know? - A. No.
     Q . You then went on the terraces. I think you can't
         actually reinember which terrace you went onto, that is
         right, isn't it? - A. That's right.
         But I think I am right in saying that on the
         photographs you found Richard in Pen 3? - A. Pen 3,
         that's right.
G|   Q . And you can say that you were with him? - A. Yes.
     Q . I mean, you entered the same pen as he did, that is
         right, isn't it? - A. Yes.




H
                                            S. L. JONES




So it is a reasonable supposition that that is the pen
you entered, isn*t it? - A. Yes.
You said to me just a noraent ago that the tunnel was
clear, the exit of the tunnel was clear, you managed to
get onto the terrace and you were going into the right
hand pen. Did you take up a viewing position? - A. No.
So what happened? - A. We just started to walk down and
then there just seemed like an awful lot of people came
behind us and we started to get slow iy moved forward
then, sore of stumbling down the steps sort of thing.
So when you initially went onto the terrace, it sounds
to me from what you are saying that at that point you
were not apprehensive. You were saying, "I want to
find a viewing position", and you were walking down
looking for some convenient spot? - A. Yes.
That's right, and at that point how crowded would you
say it was? Can you say anything about that? - A. Just
a normal amount really. I wasn't really worried. My
worries had gone after we came off the clearing.
Sorry? - A. My worries had gone when we came out into
the clear part, and the tunnel, because I was
frightened outside.
It was outside that you were scared? - A. I was worried
that it was going to be the same inside but I didn't
think it was.
So once you got on the terrace you were relieved? - A.
Yes.

It looked better than it had been outside the gate,
that's right? - A. It did.
And then you say -— was there some crowd that came
from behind and pushed you, a sudden push, or what was
it? - A. First of all it was a gradual movement, sort
of thing, just moving down as though trtere was a lot of
people coming in behind us.




            /C. Behind, yes .
                                     S. L. JONES



Behind, yes. - A. Yes, and then it started to get more
and more surges, sort of thing.
In your statement you have put it a little more
graphically.   You said:
     "Then I was suddenly shoved from behind and I was
     thrown forward down the steps."
I haven't said this to you, but I have said it to one or
two of the witnesses, it doesn't actually matter what
happened.   All I am trying to find out is as far as you
can remember what happened and you tell me now so the
jury can get the picture of what you can recollect.    Can
we just go over that again?   I am interested to know
whether this was, as you put it, a sudden shove, that you
were shoved from behind, or whether it was just a very
gradual pressure? - A. To begin with it started off
gradually and then a shove came.
How far down the terrace were you moved, if that is the
right word, can you say? - A. I have got no idea really,
probably three-quarters.   I really don't know.
I think this particular surge actually stopped at that
point and there was a little bit of relief is that right?
- A. Yes.   Well, Tracey had fell down behind me and
there was a gap where she had fallen.   A lot of
supporters picked her up but she had lost her shoe.
She had lost her shoe at that point? - A. Her shoe, yes.
Can you remember what was going on on the field at that
point? - A. No, I was turned round looking at her.   I
really hadn't paid any attention.
Did you look at the field at all at around that time? -
A. No.
So you can't help me at all on that? - A. No.
In fact somebody picked her shoe up, is that right? - A.
Yes.   I couldn t reach it so they picked it up.
But somebody managed to get down and give it to her and
so she was pleased about that at the time? - A. Yes.
Then what happened after that? - A. Really big surges
came.   I didn't see Richard or Tracey aigain after- that.
In fact I don't even know whether she put her.shoe on.
You just managed to get it and then there was another big
surge? - A. Yes.
                                         S. L. JONES


Q. That surge split you from Tracey and Richard, of course?
   - A. Yes.
0.. You never saw them again after that until much later of
    course.   Were you pushed against any barriers? - A. No,
    not at all.
Q. Where did you eventually finish up, you yourself? - A.
   Right at the very front, turned round facing the back.
Q. Facing the wrong way, so to speak? - A. Facing the wrong
   way, yes.
Q. When you got down there can you remember what was
   happening with the match?   You may think I am being
   cruel in keep asking that, but it is a convenient way of
   timing things, you see, that is why I am asking you. - A.
   No, I can't because I was turned round the wrong way.    I
   have no idea.
Q. So really younever saw anything at   all of what happened
   on the pitch? - A. No.
Q. If you did you can't remember any of it? - A. Well, until
   I got out.
Q. At that point you were pretty squashed, is that right? -
   A. Yes.
Q. Were you calling out* at all?   Were you able to call out?
   - A. Yes.
0. Can you remember more or less what you said? - A. "I've
   got to get out."
Q. Was this in a loud voice or in a little-gentle voice? -
   A. Yes, I was screaming.
Q. Were you able to repeat it? - A. Yes, a few times.
Q. How did you get out? - A. There is a bit of confusion.     I
   am not really sure.    I was faced the wrong way.   I was
   literally face to face with another boy, like nose to
   nose.    I couldn't see anything.   I thought I was s^oing
   to faint and I just heard somebody say at my side, Here
   you are, love," and I sort of stepped on to the pitch, or
   somebody pulled me.    It is not been found exactly how I
   got out.
Q. So your recollection is that you just stepped out? - A.
   That is what it felt like to me but I think somebody must
   have pulled me.
Q. In fact I think we have seen you on the video? - A. Yes.



                     <§>
                                     s. L. JONES


Standing near the perimeter fence.   Do you remember
seeing this young lady?   Having got out did you look at
the pitch at all? - A..Yes, I was facing the pitch then.
What was going on at that point? - A. They were playing.
So all this you have described happened before the match,
and including your exiting out of...   You weren t pulled
over the top? - A. No, out of the gates.
Definitely out of the gates before the match ended, or
was stopped, rather? - A. Well, it had probably just
started as I was getting out.
You don't know that, of course? - A. Well, all I can
assume is thatit had already started because as I got
out of the gates I turned round and I was facing the
television camera and the match was playing.
Was the television camera looking at the match or at the
stand? - A. No, it was turned round to me.
It was already taking pictures of what was going on? - A.
I just looked and it was just right on me.
That is why we have got it, of course. - A. Yes.
So that shot of you which is on the television was taken
almost immediately after you got out, is that right? - A.
Well, immediately, yes.
That shot is timed so we will be able to look at it
again.   I can't remember what time is on it but we will
be able to time what time that was, but do you remember
from your impression how long the game carried on after
that? - A. Maybe five minutes at the most.

A short period? - A. Yes.
I don't want to go into this in great detail, but when
you were standing outside did you notice some fans come
past you and go into another part of the ground? - A.
Yes, that's right.
Which pen did they go into? - A. The corner one on the
right.
Is it the one underneath the police control box?   If you
were standing with your back to the fence, did they come
past you towards the right or towards the left? - A. They
were walking past me from the right.   I think they came
out of the gate after me because I think I was...
                                     s. L. JONES


Hi'gh up, and they were coming past you going to the south
stand side, would that be right? - A. Well, I am not sure
of the layout of the ground, but the corner.
Can we put the plan of the ground up for a moment.
is not that important but I am just interested. (^.274)
Mr. Griffiths could you just point to enclosure 3?   That
is gate 3?    That is the one where you... - A. Came out,
yes.
Then point to pen 4.   That is pen 4. Are you saying
they came from that part and were walking past you
down... Is that right? - A. I don't think they were
coming out of pen 4.
No, but there were people who were walking past you in
that direction? - A. They were coming out justbehind me,
out of the gate I came out of.
Oh, I see.    I understand you now.  You are saying there
were people coming out... - A. Yes, because I think I was
the first or second person out of the gate and then a few
more followed and then the police were taking them across
to. the corner.
I just want to go back one moment.   You know the big
gates that opened when you came outside the ground, the
concertina gates.   Can you recollect whether you were
one of the first people to come through on that occasion?
- A. Through the gates?
Yes, through that big gate. - A. No, not the first
person.
No, I didn't mean the first.   What I meant was were you
in what I would call the first group of people who came
through do you think? - A. Yes, possibly.
You then waited for a little while because Tracey had to
join you, is that right? - A. Yes.
You don't know how long you waited? - A. It was only a
few seconds really. She just didn't get in with our
surge, sort of thing.
There wasn't any delay.   You didn't go to the loo or
anything like that? - A. No.
As far as you were concerned, we know what time that gate
opened, the big concertina gate, you had a fairly rapid
passage right through that? - A. Yes.
4                                                                   24


                                                   S. L. JONES

    Q. In'fact there was a very nice man who came up to you at
       some point and comforted you and tried to help and look
       after you? - A. Yes.
B   Q» Are you still in touch with him? - A. Sometimes, yes.
    Q. He was a supporter? - A. Yes, a Liverpool supporter.
    Q. Shall we give his name, do you think? - A. If you want.
    Q. Was he Phil Bickley? - A. Yes.
    Q. We are not calling him as a witness but it is nice to
       acknowledge what he was doing.   Now what is the number
       of...
               MR. KING:      C.295, sir.
            THE CORONER:   Can we put C.295 up?   Now this is
       the photograph you are on and we will just show it to
       you.
D           MR. KING:   Sir, if it helps, the time of this
       photograph is 14.54.
               THE CORONER:      That does help:
    0. Are you able to see yourself on that projection? - A.
       Yes.
    Q. Go and show us where you are. - A. That's me, that's
       Tracey and that's Richard.
    Q. So you are in fact in line.     You have just heard - in
       fact you can read the time on   thebottom ofit, that is
       six minutes to three, or possibly five.
            THE CORONER:         Is it oneminute wrong?     Which way
       is the minute?
            MR. KING:   Sir, the actual time is 14.54.           Printed
       on the photograph is a minute too long, sir.
            THE CORONER:         So it is 14.54 - six minutes before
       the...:
    Q. At that point you were still outside, weren't you? - A.
       Yes.

    0. The gate I can tell you was opening because people were
       coming through and presumably this is when you were
       following them in, is that right? - A. It seems so.
                                                       25




                                                 S. L. JONES
   /
Q. If you look at that photograph you can see it. That
   is exactly the same photograph and it saves you
   turning round every few moments. That gate I will
   tell you had been opened at 14:48 for a moment or- two
   for just a short moment and then it had been
   closed? - A. Yes.
Q. Then it had been fully opened at 14:52. That is two
   minutes before this photograph is taken. The
   question 'I want to ask you is this; looking at that
   photograph and thinking about what you told me you
   said that you were pushed hard up against the gate
   when it was shut. You are sure about that, are
   you? - A. Yes, I was sure.
Q. There was another opening of this gate. This gate
   was shut at three minutes to three. Do you remember
   we had a schedule. 14:57:40. -At 14:57 this gate was
   shut again and then it was re-opened at about 14:59,
   in other words just a minute or so before kick-off.
   What I want to establish is which opening you went
   through? - A. Yes.
Q. Because if that is where you are on that photograph
   you could not have been right up against the gate at
   14:52 because you did not walk back, did you? - A.
   No. That is right, yes.
Q. So in fact your movement throughout was forward, is
   that right? - A. Yes.
Q. It was not that you got up against the gate, didn't
   like it, walked away and then re-approached it. I
   just want to be quite clear? - A. We carried on
   forward, yes.
Q. It was opened for the last time at 14:59:12
   approximately. Of course you did not look at your
   watch? - A. No.
Q. The reason I ask you this is that by the time you got
   out of the gate at the front the match was still in
   progress? - A. That is right.
Q. If you in fact came through   at 14:59, which you might
   have done because you might   have come through the
   last occasion from what you   tell me, your progress
   would have been even faster   than I would have
   expected? - A. I would have   thought, yes.
Q. .Did you get the impression you went through the
   ground, if I can put it like this, in minutes or did
                                                                                        26



                                                                              fi- I.- JONES

    you h ave th e im p r e ss io n t h a t       it   to °k                        s
    time? - A. It seemed like forever but I think it was
    fast.
       MR. MAXWELL:          I have not got any*questions,                          *?ut


express our sympathy.
        THE CORONER:           T h a n k y o u v e r y m u ch i n d e e d .   That i s
v e r y k in d o f y o u .
                        C r o s s - E x a m i n e d b v MR.   PAYNE:

Q. Stephanie, can I just follow up the questioiswhich
      th e c o r o n e r w as a sk in g you ab o u t                               ® e
      photograph to see if we can get any further? You see
      in the bottom right hand corner of the photograph in
      red there is the time printed at which it is said
      that photograph was taken which                54? -
      told that is one minute wrong and it should be
      A. R ig h t.

0 . We are also told that the gate which on the
      photograph is just off to the right where the P®°Ple
      Lem  to be heading as they go off the photograph do
      you see that? - A. Yes.
 0.    We aretold that gate was opened at 14:52:06 which is
      just two minutes before the time of the photograph,
      do you see that? — A. Yes.
 0. We aretold that that gate was then kept open until
    14:57, that is to say another three minutes after
    that photograph was taken? - A. Right.
 Q. So it appears those are the times. I am not
    criticising y o u a t a l l ? - A . I c a n o n l y Presume t h a t
    I went through when it was opened the next time at 59
    because I know I definitely went through and it was
    closed at first and I was pushed against it. So it.
    must have been the 59 time that I went through at.
    It is not a great deal of time in between, is 1 •
    is only four or five minutes?
  Q. Yes, but it would not take you three minutes to walk
     from where you are in the photograph to the gate? -
     A. I know, but there was a huge amount of supporters
     there and it took some time to get to the gate.
         MR. PAYNE:           S ir ,   I do n o t h o n e s tly     th in k   th a t can be
  ta k en any f u r t h e r .
                                                    S. L. JONES


     THE CORONER:    Perhaps Mr. King will be able to take
it further but I do not know whether he will or not.
     MR. PAYNE:      Mr. King may have some ingenious method
of doing it.
     MR. KING:   Sir, I have a theory which I will put to
the test in a moment.
      THE CORONER:     It is an interesting matter, is it not?
Q.        MR. PAYNE: While that photograph is on the
     screen, you have told the Coroner from what you saw
     you actually only saw a total of three mounted
     Policemen, did you? - A. Yes, that is correct.
Q. There is obviously a lot more to be seen on that
   photograph? - A. That is right.
Q. But you did not see them? - A. No.
Q. I want you to look at another document please, and
   that is the map, 284, and I think you will find it
   further on in your bundle. I appreciate you do not
   probably know the roads and so on yourself but I just
   want to see how far we can get. First of all, can
   you find Par Lane where you parked the car and if you
   can find No. 2 which is in the black circle? - A.
   Yes.
Q. You parked your car there and then you walked from
   there in the direction of the ground, did you? - A.
   Yes, that is correct.
Q. On the map that would take you down to the junction
   of what we can see is Wadsley Lane? - A. I have got
   it.

Q. That is going in the direction of the ground and so
   that is probably the way you walked, is it? - A. I
   cannot honestly say. I have got no idea.
Q. Whichever way you went it would then take you on to
   Middlewood Road, that is the big road with the black
   waiting, above the No. 2 1 have pointed out? - A.
   Yes.

Q. A little way down Middlewood Road you then cross over
   Catch Bar Lane? - A. Yes.
                                                                                     S. L. JONES
 ✓
T hen y o u a r e i n t o L e p p in g s L an e an d o v e r t h e b r i d g e .
Y ou c a n s e e t h e r i v e r j u s t p a s s i n g u n d e r t h e e o f
L e p p in g s L an e, do you s e e t h a t ? - A. Y e s .

A nd t u r n r i g h t i n t o t h e g r o u n d .        Do y o u t h i n k y o u
p r o b a b l y d i d g o d ow n M i d d l e w o o d R o a d a n d o v e r C a t c h
B ar L ane? - A. I r e a l l y w o u ld n 't l i k e t o s a y .               I am
a b s o l u t e l y h o p e le s s a t d i r e c t i o n s and I h a v e g o t no
id e a .

I am j u s t t r y i n g t o p u t y o u o n t h e map b e f o r e I a s k
you a b o u t th e crow ds b e c a u se you h ave s a id you
th o u g h t th e r e w ere   an a w fu l l o t o f    p e o p le ? - A.                      Y es.

W hat I w a n t y o u t o        h e lp    th e Jury about i s t h is ;
a b o u t how f a r b a c k      from      th e ground            w as i t w hen y o u
f i r s t s t a r te d t o n o tic e ?      I     am n o t        a sk in g you t o be
e x a c t b u t j u s t g i v e u s an      i d e a o f a b o u t how f a r aw ay
y o u w e r e fro m t h e g ro u n d ?      - A . M aybe tw o r o a d s a w a y ,
one road.

T h at w as      an a w fu l l o t o f p e o p le a l l     w a lk in g         in   th e
sam e d i r e c t i o n a s y o u ? - A . Y e s .

      THE        CORONER:        I am s o r r y , I m i s s e d t h e a n s w e r .
W hat d i d      y o u s a y ? - A. A bou t tw o r o a d s a w ay.

          MR. PAYNE:          F o r i n s t a n c e , w hen y o u c r o s s o v e r
C a tch Bar Lane t h a t i s q u i t e a b i g j u n c t i o n .            Y ou
m u st h a v e c r o s s e d o v e r som ew here a b o u t t h e r e from t h e
d i r e c t i o n you cam e.        S o w hen y o u c r o s s e d o v e r w h a t
was t h e s c e n e l i k e ?       Put th e Jury in th e p ic tu r e as
t o w h a t t h e s c e n e w as l i k e a s y o u c r o s s e d o v e r t h a t
b ig ro a d ? - A. T h ere w as j u s t a m ass o f p e o p le a t t h e
ground.          Y ou c o u l d n o t s e e t h e t u r n s t i l e s o r a n y t h i n g
lik e th a t.

I am t r y i n g t o g e t y o u a l i t t l e b i t f u r t h e r b a c k f r o m
th e ground.       W ere t h e r e p e o p l e w a l k i n g o n t h e
pavem ent a s you approached th e ground? - A. Y es.

W ere t h e y w a l k i n g   in   th e road s as w e ll?          -       A.    I c a n 't
r e c a ll.

That i s as fa r a s I can ta k e t h a t .               The n e x t t h i n g
w as t h a t w hen y o u g o t i n t o t h e g r o u n d a n d w e r e g o i n g
d ow n t h e t u n n e l t h e r e w e r e s o m e p e o p l e p a s s i n g w a t e r
on t h e s i d e s o f t h e tu n n e l? - A. Y e s.

You s a i d y o u w e r e n o t s u r p r i s e d    a t th a t?       -    A. No.
                                              S. L. JONES

Why is that? - A. Because I have been to Anfield
Football Ground before and it happens all the time.
There,was nothing special about the occasion? - A. Oh
no. tfou just don't look. You just look away.



            Cross-Examined bv MR. MANNING:
I have got a theory too. I wonder if we can look
back at the photograph we had up before, C295, and I
wonder whether the gates that you remember being
pressed up against were the blue gates? If you look
behind you there are two or three chaps have got red
sweaters or shirts on. You can see some blue gates
behind them. I wonder if those were the gates you
were pressed up against? - A. I don't think so.
You do not think so? - A. No.
Having got through there your way was free to come
through this gate when it was open? - A. No.
Theory exploded! Let me take you back to the
beginning. You say you have been to Anfield and
obviously you are used to large crowds at football
matches? - A. Fairly used to them, yes.
This was to be a very large crowd. I think you knew
it was an all-ticket match? - A. Yes.
I do not think there is any secret about the fact
that a lot more people would have liked to have gone
to the match than there were tickets available? - A.
Probably.
Were you not a little concerned about the time you
were actually going to be arriving at the ground? -
A. Richard didn't seemed concerned and so I wasn't.
Did it not seem to you to be cutting it fine to be
getting there at ten to three or five to three or
thereabouts? - A. I really don't know.
But you were surprised by the numbers of people who
were still outside the ground at that time? - A. Yes.
 Were you aware at all of a Police Land Rover parked
 outside the ground? - A. No.
                                             S. L. JONES

Did you hear any announcements on a PA system of
somebody saying not to push because everybody would
get in? - A. No, I didn’t.
Did any of the Police Officers that you saw try to
indicate either by what they were saying or by what
they were doing that they did not want people to
push? - A. Not really. The only thing was the one
Police Officer on horseback who was telling everyone
to get to the right and that was it.
That was some effort although you thought that was
doomed to failure because there was only one of them?
- A. Yes.
I do not imagine for a moment at all that you were
doing any pushing? - A. Probably the person in front
of me thought I was pushing but I wasn't. It was
just the sheer pressure.
Because you were being pressed from behind? - A. Yes.
When you came up on to the back of the queue there
was a moment when, if you like, you were the last
person in the queue? - A. I don't think so. There
was always someone behind me.
Was there a moment that you stopped and thought,
"That is as far as we can go at the moment" as the
shuffling forward continued? - A. Yes, sometimes you
were just in a bunch and it wasn't moving but there
was always people all around you, behind you, in
front of you.
The pressure at that time was coming from behind you?
- A. Yes.
 That was the pressure of people trying to get closer
 to the entrance points? - A. I presume so.
 After that when you got into the ground itself from
 thereon into the tunnel, through the tunnel and on to
 the terrace, all of that is something that you would
 put under the word "normal". What you saw in the
 tunnel, although it is pretty despicable, was
 something you had seen before at football matches? -
 A. I wouldn't call it despicable really.
I
    «                                                          31


    A
I                                       S. L. JONES


I       Q. ,You have seen it before and you werenotsurprised
            see it again? - A. No.
                                                                to

        Q.   When you got onto the terrace itself, it seemed to you
1   B        that that was anormal scene that you were seeing in
             front of you? - A. To begin with.

I       Q.   Until the pushing started? - A. Well, until the crowd
             came up.

I       Q.
                        Cross-Examined by MR. KING
             Miss Jones, I was interested in your answer that the
I            person in front of you might have thought you were
             pushing, but you weren't; it was because of the


f
             pressure behind you? - A. Yes.
        Q.   I want you, if you can, to give some idea to the Jury
             of what it is like being in a crowd. I am sure we
             have all had that experience, but you had that
1   D
             particular experience that day. Do you know what I
             mean by an involuntary movement? I will explain what
             I mean by that. That is a movement of somebody who

I            hasn't said to himself, 'I'm going to make a
             movement1, but somebody who is carried along by the
             momentum of everyone else around them. Do you
             understand? - A. Yes.
I       Q.   Is that what you were trying to explain to us of being
             in that crowd, that that crowd had a momentum and you
             were being carried along with it? - A. That is right.
1            You have got no choice of where you are going. It is
             just the way the movement carries you. If you want to
             go one way and the crowd is going the other way, you
             have got no chance of goingthat way.
        Q.   If somebody had put the finger on you and said, "Miss
             Jones, wait a minute, what do you think you are doing
1            pushing forward?" what would you have said to them? -
             A. "I'm not pushing".

1       Q.   What was happening to you? - A. It is just everyone
             behind me, and it is just the sheer pressure of the
             amount of people.
1       Q.   You described the police officer on the horseback, and
             you were asked very properly by the Coroner about
             obeying what he was trying to do, and.you gave this
I            answer, that you yourself tried to get over to the
             right, but couldn't. Why was it that you couldn't? -
             A. Because of all the people on the right and all the
I            people on the left, and just can't move like that.
             You would very much like to if it means getting out of
             the way, and also the horses coming near you. You
I
                                  W \
I
                            S. L. JONES

' don't want to be trampled on but you haven't got much
  choice.
 At that stage when the man on the horseback was there,
 what was the depth of the crowd around the horse?
 What was it like around the horse? - A. There was
 just no room at all. The horse was just enveloped.
 Have you been yourself to a football match, perhaps at
 Anfield, when you have seen a mounted police officer
 putting people into queues? - A. Yes, there are
 always mounted police at Anfield.
 On those occasions is there space for the people to
 move into? - A.    Yes, the  queues.
 So on this occasion - I am not criticising the
 officer, he was   doing his  best, I am sure - that
 officer on that   horse was  in the middle ofa mass of
 people? - A. Yes.
 Do you think that one police officer on that horse
 could really do anything about what was happening
 around him? - A. No, he couldn't have done anything,
 he couldn't.
 At that stage when you were there, you are in this
 crowd with its momentum. I just want to pursue the
 same theory as Mr. Manning about the gates. I just .
 want to show you, if I may, 258 which is in the
 bundle, C258.
       THE CORONER:   Can you find it? - A.   Yes, I have
 it.
                   i
      MR. KING: Do you see, Stephanie, that before you
 get into the area in front of the turnstiles you have
 to go through what we call blue perimeter gates, do
 you see that? - A. Yes.

 Do you see they have gateposts? - A. That is right.
 Do you see there is a sort of wall or fence on the
 left which seems to cut the turnstile area into two,
 do you see that? - A. Yes.
 When you were describing before - and I know you have
 described on another occasion what was happening to
 you at the time, and this is the statement which you
 gave to the Police not long afterwards and, in fact,
 you have been very good, you know, you have said
 almost word for word what was in your statement so it
 is not a question of anybody saying that you have not
 been getting it right, you have been doing very well
                                                       33




                               S. L. JONES

     indeed after this length of time. But I was
     interested in something you said you could see.
          MR. KING: Can I just remind you, sir, it is on
     page 3 of her statement.
Q.   This is before you had got through the blue gates, and
     you say this:

          ” 1 could see some fans sitting on top of the wall
          behind the gates inside the ground."
     Do you remember seeing fans sitting on the wall inside
     the ground? - A. Yes.
Q.   Which wall do you think you were referring to? - A. I
     really don't know.
Q.   If you go back to the photograph which is up and have
     a look at that, and then let us go back to the one
     which has you on it, C.295, do you see that behind you
     are those blue gates I have been pointing out to you?
     - A. Yes.

Q.   People are coming through, and do you see to the
     right, as you look at the photograph, a lot of people
     sitting on that dividing wall or fence which is
     between the two halves of the turnstile area, the one
     I pointed out to you when we were outside the
     perimeter gates on that first photograph? Do you
     think those are the fans you could see inside the
     ground sitting on the wall? - A. Possibly.
Q.   To help you, there is no mystery, so that the Coroner
     knows, there was a time on the evidence when those
     perimeter gates were also closed for a short time.
          THE CORONER:   Yes, we know that.

          MR. KING: Then they were opened and people came
     through.
Q.   I wondered whether you were one of those who was in
     that group immediately pressed against the perimeter
     gates which had been closed at a certain stage and
     then you had got through? - A. But the tunnel is not
     right in front of those perimeter gates, is it?
Q.   No. - A. That is why I am sure it must be the other
     gate, because when we came out of the other gates the
     tunnel was right in front. That is the only way I can
     think of it because I am not sure of the layout.
          THE CORONER: So be it, that is right. It is very
     firm in her recollection.
                          S. L. JONES

     MR. KING: Indeed.
Let me just go back slightly in time, so again we can
get the picture when you arrive, because you are
talking about choices the whole time, about the choice
of someone arriving at the ground. In your original
description, again I say it is so very close to what
you have told us today, you have said this on the .
second page:

      "We got to the ground together and I think the
      ground was on our right-hand side.”
That would be correct because you were coming from the
direction Mr. Payne was talking about. You said:
      "We turned into the entrance to the ground and I
      was quite surprised to see such a large crowd of
      people standing at the front of the ground".
A.   Yes.
Was that the impression you had, that you were coming
so that the ground was on your right and you turned
into* the entrance? - A. Yes.

Because if we look on our model, you would be coming,
with the help of our friend with the pointer, not from
Leppings Lane, but from the opposite direction. The
ground would be on your right and you would turn into
the entrance, would you not? - A. Yes.
You probably came over a bridge but you probably would
not remember that. - A. Right.
Because, as the Jury will know, you could come from
two directions. There were people coming down
Leppings Lane from one direction and people were
coming from your direction and everybody converging
from two directions to the entrance to the turnstiles,
do you see? - A. Yes.

When you arrived, was the picture of a great mass of
people? - A. Yes, just as we came down, yes.
The moment you joined it, from that moment onwards did
you really find that events had really taken over from
you after that? - A. Yes, because we didn't give our
tickets in, we didn't go through any turnstiles.
No, and you have already described the police officers
you had seen, which to you were few in number at that
stage? - A. Yes.
                           S. L. JONES

Now let me takeyou through onto the concourse, and
you got through the big gate and you are relieved and
you see the tunnel? - A. Yes.
Did you on thatconcourse area, that is the large area
behind the turnstiles when you got through, see
anybody, be it a policeman or a steward, directing you
in any way? - A. No, I didn't see anyone of that
nature.
Did you see any signs indicating where you should go?
- A . No.
So you made for the tunnel as the natural way to go?    -
A. That was the only way Icould see.
I am just finally interested in this. When you got
through the tunnel, and you are someone who has been
to many crowds by the sound of it, were those terraces
to you empty-looking, the terraces you were going
into? - A. No, they weren't empty-looking. They just
looked as they normally do.
In a normal crowd we have heard that there is swaying.
You know what I mean by swaying, don't you? - A. Yes.
You go back and you go forward, back and forward? - A.
Yes.
You have described to us a number of what you have
described as surges? - A. Yes.
Am I right in saying that that is not a sway? A surge
is when the crowd goes forward and does not go back
again? - A. Just gradually forward all the time.
Because you talked about first it was a gradual
movement of people coming on from behind, and then
more and more surges? - A. Yes.
And the surges are the movement of people forward and
then stopping? - A. Yes.
And you were being propelled forward from the pressure
from behind, and that is what was happening more and
more to you as you were on the terraces? - A. That is
right, yes.

       MR. KING:   I have no further questions, thank
you.

          Cross-Examined by MR. CATCHPOLE
                          S. L. JONES

' Miss Jones, please understand I am not at all
  suggesting there is anything wrong with your evidence.
  I think I speak for all of us that we are
  exceptionally impressed with the way you have given
  your evidence today. I just want to focus on that
  photograph that is behind you.
      THE CORONER:   It is the one, I think, in front of
 you as well.
      MR. CATCHPOLE: Do you remember that there was a
 Preliminary Inquest into Richard and Tracy's death,
 and I believe the family may have viewed some video
 evidence and some photographic evidence, and you
 identified yourself on that photograph, and then
 Richard was identified inside the ground on a video?
 Do you have any recollection of that? - A. No. I am
 not quite sure which one you are talking about. We
 saw that many photographs and videos looking for them.
 If I could just read you a passage from the evidence
 that was given by Inspector Layton at Richard's
 Inquest. For your note, sir, it is page 1,150, and it
 just says:

      "On a BBC video tape, reference MAPI, timed at
      14.56, 3104, Richard was shown alive in Enclosure
      No.3", that is inside the ground at 4 minutes to

 Do you have any recollection of that? - A.   Not
 really, no.

 It does not matter, but if that is right, you would
 agree with me, I presume that whatever gate you were
 up against, it looks likely that you were in the
 ground along with Richard at 4 minutes to3, if that
 video reference is right, do you agree? -A.    I don't
 think it can be, because we were seen outside at 4
 minutes to 3, weren't we?

 No, that is 6 minutes to 3.   So it looks as if it took
 2 minutes from when we see you on that photograph for
 you to get down into the tunnel onto the terraces, or
 at least it took Richard that long, and we presume
 that you were with him throughout that time? - A.
 Well, I would presume so.

                          Q.   Please understand
                                                                 37


                                                     S. L. JOtiES



    Q. Please understand, everyone here has seen enough
       witnesses to know that things get very confused,
       particularly when you go through something like that.’
B      There is absolutely no criticise at all - we all know
       you are trying to help us as best you can, but it does
       seesn tnat Richard was inside the ground, and I am right
       in understanding that as far as you remember you were
       with him right the way into the terraces? - A. Yes.
     . Thank you. Just one other small point that I should
       raise with you. Can I remind you of the evidence you
       gave in answer to the Coroner on the question of once
       you were inside the ground? You actually said you
       could only see the tunnel, and that Richard said, "Just
       go down^ the tunnel", and you went down and it was
       reasonably clear. Is that, in fact, what happened? -
       A. Yes.
    Q. Thank you very much.

D                 Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN
    0. Stephanie, I am trying to unravel this mystery about
       when you actually went in there, and this is how I see
       it. You say when you were in the crowd, when there
       were a lot of people around you, that you did see a
       large metal gate, a concertina gate? - A. Yes.
    Q. So there is no confusion about the perimeter gates and
       that gate, that does seem to be the concertina gate,
       iow, when you weretnere you saw it opening once, you
       said, and you were   too far away at the time to go
       tnrougn it, but you did mention that it wasn't opened
       very wide at the time? - A. Ho, it wasn't.
    Q. Just a few feet? - A. Just a few inches really.
            HRS. McBSIEU:   From evidence tnat we have it
                           Was th€ 2 * 48 0 Pening» tnat, because
       I don t think tne other openings, it was opened wide
       the next time, wasn't it, sir?

            THc. CORONER:  You are quite right. 2.43 was a
       partial opening, more than a few inches but it wasn't
       opened very wide, and then at 2.52 it was opened
       widely. You are quite correct in your recollection.

        .   ‘1RS* HcBRIEN:    So it seems  to rae thattnat was
        ne rirst opening that you saw. Now, when you saw that
       you said^tnat Richard said, "If it opens again we'ra
       going m , that is correct, isn't it? - A. Yes.

               cour?e it was opened like you said, and you do
       reme.aber going through it with the crowd. From what I
                                                    S. L. JONES




     can work out it seems that you went through on the
     second opening, and M a y b e the photograph has got the .
     wrong time on it.
          MRS. McBRIEN:   That is the only thing I can think
     of, if you don't mind my saying so. I think Stephanie
     has given very good evidence, absolutely -- it is so
     clear, and yet we have got this mystery here. That is
     the only way I can work it out.
          THE COROUER:  Well, Stephanie can't answer that
     question. In fact, I can't answer it either.
          MRS. McBRIEN:   It is just a real puzzle.
     Everything seemed so clear, sir, apart from that.
          THE CORONER:   It is highly unlikely actually that
     the times are wrong except for this minute, because
     there is a photograph, and that is why one knows the
     time, where the time is printed on it and the clock is
     on it as well, so you can time it twice by the number
     printed and by the clock face, and it is a minute out,
     that is where this minute is coming from. It is an
     interesting thought, I agree, but I don't think it
     works.
          MRS. McBRIEN:   I think it is a mystery because
     Stephanie did say that when she went down the tunnel
     and got to the terrace end of the tunnel it wasn't
     crowded. If she had gone in the final ti.ne it would
     have been. It is not really adding up properly.
       THE CORONER:  I think that we can't take it any
 -further. I can see tnat there is a problem here.
Q.         MRS. McBRIEU:    Thank you very much, Stephanie.
           THE CORONER: Yes, Mr.     Hale.
           MR. HALE:   I am sorry,a crucial  point, which
      this witness has to bear because it has been put to
      her, and I would like to ask her about the crowd
      pressure.
               Further Cross-Examined by MR. HALE
0 . It has been put to you that with crowd pressure you had
      no choice, that is right, isn't it? - A. That is right.
Q. But is it right that a crowd like tnat is not like a
   river, is it? A river only goes one way, doesn't it?
   If you were in a river in those circumstances, a strong
   current, you could only go the way the river takes you,
   that is right, isn't it? -     Yes.
But that crowd was made up of individuals like
yourself, that is right? - A. Yes.
.All "having a thinking brain, is that right? - A. Yes.
Suppose fire had suddenly broken out in front of you,
which way do you think the crowd would have gone then?
- A. It is difficult to say, because the people at the
front who are by the fire are going to- want to go back,
but the people at the back who maybe can't see the fire

No, the people at the back can see the fire, see the
danger. - A. Hell, you are all going to go the other
way if everyone can see the fire.
You are all going to go the other way, that's right.
So the way in which a crowd moves depends upon the
individual will of the people who niakeit up? - A. It
depends on everyone if it is a large crowd.
That's right, but if everybody in the crowd .... - A.
You can't have half and half though.
Well if you had half and half you might have a
stalemate, neither going forward nor going backward? -
A. Exactly.

That is right. - A. And with the large amount of people
you find you are having problems.
In the circumstances there were more people wanting to
continue pressing forward than there were who were
afraid for their lives like you, and would have liked
to stand still or hold back a bit, is that right? - A.
Everyone was there for the one reason, to go and see a
match, so everyone wants to go forward.
Yes, but some of you were getting rather concerned ....
“ A« At tnat time I was slightly worried but I didn't
think that anyone was going to get killed.
 Yes. We have heard from other witnesses who would have
 liked to have stopped and to have got out but they
 couldn't. - A. Yes.

That is because there were more wanting to go forward
tnan were wanting to stop and come back? - A. Yes.
                Further by THE COROUER
 The problem it is not that anybody is disbelieving you
 - on the contrary everybody is believing you. - A. It's
 okay.
                                             S, L. JOUES



But everybody is fitting the account to the tines.   You
can see wnat I am saying? - A. Yes.
Because if it is right that Richard was seen on the
terrace at 14.5u then it is impossible for you to have
entered at 14.59, isn't it, because that is three
minutes earlier? - A. I think that must be wrong, the
picture, to be honest with you. I think the picture
must be wrong.
Uhic'n picture? - A. Of Richard on the terraces.
     THE CORONER:   That is something that I think --
we will have to get the family to review that bit of
evidence because it would obviously be helpful. Ladies
and gentlemen, Mr. Catchpole knows this because he was
there, and indeed Mrs. McBrien was - the problem of
identification is a very major problem. It isn't half
as easy as we think and I know that many families spent
hours and hours and hours trying to     doit, and
sometimes they succeeded, sometimes     they have done an
identification and then sometimes they have reviewed it
at a later date. In fact, I think Hr. Traynor was
mentioned on the first day - we haven't yet corrected
that - so it is a difficult problem.
Don t worry. The fact that one has to look at it again
is neither here nor there, all I ara concerned about and
interested in, if you like, is to try and get the facts
as near as we can. What you are saying is you are sure
that you were pressed against the concertina gate,
right? - A. Well, yes.

And you based it, because you know that once you got
through that gate you were in the concourse area? - A.
Yes, the tunnel was in front.

The tunnel was in front of you, and not 20 or 30 yards
away and negotiate another huge crowd, that is rignt,
isn t it? - A. Yes. I agree about the fans on the
wall, it may have been by the perimeter gate, but I can
only assume that 1 meant that before, about seeing the
fans on the wall.

That was, in fact, how I read your stata-aent, that
there was pressure before, tnat you saw the fans, that
you then moved in ~ and in fact, I asked you this, "Did
you see the gate open", and Richard then said, "i!ext
time it opens we are going in"? - A. Yes.
And you gradually got nearer to the gate and then it
opened and you went through, that is rignt, isn't it? -
A. Yes.
*                                                                  41


                                                     S. L. JONES



 <!• Sorry, I haven't quite finished. There is something
     else I wanted to ask. tlr. Hale to a certain extent has
     dealt with the point, but it is right, isn't it,
B Stephanie, you have explained to me that you couldn't
     do anything about it because people were pressing
     behind? - A. No, you couldn't.
    • That is right, but you would accept, wouldn't you, that
      a crowd is made up of individuals, isn't it? - A. Yes.
      And if each individual person had stood still - if, I
      an not saying that they did - if they had stood still
      outside the gates, you too would not have been pushed
      forward, that is right, isn't it? - A. Yes, but that is
      just not going to happen, is it?
      Okay, that is fair enough, but I ara just asking you
      whether that is correct? - A. Yes.
    Q* This is a question which we haven't broached yet and I
       just want to ask you this, did you know, and would it
D      have made any difference to you if you had known, that
       the ground had a licence to hold football matches? - A.
       Had a ...?

      A licence, that it had been licensed for football
      matches. - A. It wouldn't have made any difference.
    0. You didn't know it? - A. What do you mean?
     . That is all right, you have answered my question. I am
       trying to find out - this ground was licensed, there is
       a procedure for licensing football grounds, and what I
       am trying to find out from a few of the fans is whether
       the fans knew this, and I haven't found one yet who
       did, and you didn't know it either? - A. Mo.
            THE CORONER:     Hr. King, yes.

            MR. KING:      Might I ask a question arising out of
       your question?

            THE CORONER:   Which one, the inomen turn one? Yes.
       I an not trying to undermine you, Mr. King, at all;
            MR. KING:    No, no. It is an important, not only
       interesting but an important point on crowd behaviour
       and expectations.
                Further Cross-Examined by HR. XING
    0. Stephanie, you were asked "If everybody had stood
              clearly the crowd would have stopped", and the
       answer to that has to be yes, but then you gave this
                                                S. L. JONES



answer, ' It is just not going to happen". Could you
explain why you say that? - A. When you want to go
somewhere you are not going to get anywhere if you
stand still, are you?

^es*. ^?u      been to many football matches. How
realistic is it, from your experience, to put forward
the proposition that a football crowd going into a
game, shortly before kick-off, it is all suddenly going
to stop still? How realistic does that seem to you? -
A. It is stupid. It is not going to happen.
     THE CORONER;   Mr. King, I will just follow it up
with another one and I will give you an opportunity
because it is actually very convenient because
Stephanie is (a) a good witness, if I may say so, (b) a
relative.

                Further bv THE CORONER
I think as you are so helpful and kind we are taking
advantage. Have you been to the theatre? Do you ever
go to the theatre? - A. Yes.

Or the cinema? - A. I go to the cinema all the time.
You do? - A. Yes.

And do crowds go into those areas as well? - A. Yes.
Do you find that the behaviour of those crowds is any
different to the behaviour of a football crowd? - A. I
wouldn t say the behaviour. I go to the match more for
the atmosphere, because of the great atmosphere in the
.Cop, and that is why I go to the natch, so it is
different in that way, I would say.
But for example, you would be surprised if you went
down the corridor in the cinema complex and people were
urinating against trie walls there? You would think
tnat that was a little unusual? - A. There is plenty of
toilets there.

Yes. Have you found that people when they want to go
xn and see a film are also pressing forward in the sane
sort of way as you have described tne pressure which
you were experiencing? - A. Not really. You don’t get
that sort of people, amount of people going to tne
theatre.                                  *

You don't get as many, of course, I agree, I accept
tnf£» but    course you have got a smaller space as
well because the stadium seats 5 5 , 0 0 0 and the cinecna
mignt seat 500, I don't know, so obviously you are
                                                       43

                                             S. L. JONES




going to have different proportions, I agree. - A. They
have a queuing system at the cine:na so it is different
totally.




             Further Cross-Examined ......
                                                             44


                                          S. L. JONES



            Further Cross-Examined by MR. KING:
Q. This is probably unfair, but if you had been in charge
   yourself, given the task of preparing for a big football
   match and you were having to say to yourself, What can I
   expect?" - you haven't been yet and you have got to try
   and think what it is going to be like.   Do you think it
   would be sensible to go to the cinema and say to
   yourself, "Well, I will go to the local cinema.   If I
   was in London I would go to Covent Garden, because we are
   going to find a situation which is roughly the same as a
   football match."   In other words, from your experience
   is it a fair comparison - a football crowd and a football
   match on the one hand and a queue of people waiting to go
   into the cinema - is it the same thing? - A. No, it
   isn't.   It's not a comparison at all, I don't think,
   sorry.
Q. Let me explore this slightly. At a cinema, is it right
   you have a queue, often just one queue coming out of the
   cinema going along the pavement? - A. Yes, normally.
Q. Have you ever known in a cinema 4,000 or 5,000 people all
   being asked to go through the same small number of
   entrances? - A. No.
        MR. KING:      I could develop it, but I won't:
Q. The point being made - and I am not being rude to the
   learned Coroner, it is an important point - is is it
   sensible to view matters by reference to a cinema crowd
   or a football crowd? - A. No, it isn't.
        THE CORONER:      I think we will leave this point
            Further Cross-Examined by MR. HALE:
Q. What if the Rolling Stones were performing at the
   Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground? - A. I really don't
   know.   I wouldn't go and see them anyway!
Q. But that would be a more apt comparison, wouldn't it? -
   A. Perhaps.   I don't know how many fans they have.   Not
   as many as Liverpool Football Club have.
        THE CORONER:   This is a very difficult problem, Mr.
   King, because the problem is sorting out whether football
   crowds are intrinsically different.   You know, are they
   made up of a different category of person from other
   humans beings and, of course, there are implications
   whichever way you answer that.
        MR. KING:      It is very important when one
                                     S. L. JONES


      THE CORONER:   This is what I was trying...   I took
thfe opportunity because we had a charming witness and I
thought we would just explore it a little bit.
     MR. KING:   I agree, sir, because it goes very
importantly to matters as to what one should expect, what
one should anticipate.
     MR. PAYNE:   I am not going to intervene in this
discussion, but if that kind of illustration is going to
be put to witnesses, then it ought not to be confined to
cinemas, but it could be applied, for example, to rugby
league matches or to rugby union matches.
     THE CORONER:   Indeed, we could go on, and I suppose
you could criticise me for having put it to the witness
and it may not have been entirely fair, but she has given
quite a good account of herself on it.
       Further Cross-Examined by MRS. McBRIEN:
Mr. Hale mentioned that if you had known there was a fire
in front of you, or the crowd with you that day had seen
a fire, they would have done something about it.   Now,
Stephanie, you would not think there was danger ahead,
would you, that day? - A. Well, if you could not have
seen it.   He said I could though.
There was only a hidden danger ahead, wasn't there?     A
hidden one? - A. I suppose so.
There has been a lot said about the behaviour of the fans
waiting to go into the football ground.   Now it was
close to kick-off time, wasn't it? - A. Yes.
And it was a semi-final match? - A. Yes.
It could not be compared with a queue at a cinema, could
it?    It was a different thing altogether?   A big
occasion? - A. Yes.
Now the crowd as far as I can make out were not doing
anything unusual really, they just wanted to get in to
see the match.   Would it have made a difference to the
crowd if someone had announced that ,the game was going to
be delayed? - A. I don't think so.    I mean, it wouldn't
have mattered really.    It would have given everyone a
lot more time to get in.
You still think they would have pushed forward even
though they had half an hour, for instance, to wait? - A.
Well, no.
                                       S. L. JONES


If you had more time - I was thinking maybe the fans were
artxious to get in because they were running out of time.
That was the reason for their behaviour, not just because
they wanted to push each other?     Do you agree? - A.
Well, yes.    It s a difficult question to answer.   .1
mean, if the match had been put back a bit more it would
have given more time to filter people off to different
sections perhaps. As it was the bulk of the crowd went
in all at once and that just was no good, was it?
So all they needed was time really? - A. Well, more time
would have helped a great deal I should imagine.
                  Further by THE CORONER:
Stephanie, I need to ask you this.   You have already
told me but I need to be absolutely sure about this.
You did not hear any announcements made? - A. No.
You didn't see a loud speaker van or anything like, or a
Land Rover? - A. No.
You heard nothing? - A. Definitely not.
Definitely not.     You are absolutely sure? - A. Yes.
     THE CORONER:   Thank you very much.    Now then,
Stephanie, you have already been complimented up and down
dale, and I am very very grateful to you for coming and
for being here and for yesterday as well.    I am sorry
about that. I think you have quitted yourself well.
You are a credit to your mum and dad.    I am sure they
were proud of you this afternoon.
     I think we will arrange for this video to be re­
viewed, if you and the family are happy, to see whether
the identification on the terrace is confirmed. We will
just have a think about it.   OK?
     THE WITNESS:     OK.
     THE CORONER:   It is up to you, of course, and your
mum and dad.   It is not for me to say that they must.
It is just a matter of trying to sort it out:
Oh, Stephanie, we want you to put a cross on the little
plan.    Show Stephanie which is enclosure 3.   I want you
to put a cross where you first exited on to the terrace
where in fact you were, and you were in.fact aiming to go
forward?    In other words, before you felt the - I think
we have used the word "shove" - from behind.    Can you
put a cross there? - A. I can't honestly say.
                                       s. L. JONES


Can you remember where you finished up after the first
big shove? - A. No.   The only time I can remember,^lt
was just a constant shove right the way down. I didn t
really stop.
-You really only remember yourself at the gate, is that
 right?   I'm sorry, what were you going to say? - A. The
 only time I really know is when I was at the bottom by
 the gate before I got out.
Put your cross down there.   So just inside by tne gate,
is that right? - A. Yes, when I came out of the gate I
came out to the right of the goal post.
Yes, that is right, I remember that.     Thank you.   We
will give it a C” number.    (C.302)
     THE CORONER:   Stephanie, thank you very much.        We
have finished.
     Ladies and gentlemen, we have finished today.
Before I let you go we have been thinking about the times
for starting and stopping on Monday and Fridays, not the
other days.    If I were   to say to you that we would start
on Monday at 10.30 instead of 10.00 and on Friday we will
start at 9.30 and aim to finish at 3.30 - you will
realise that "aim” is not quite the same thing as
achievement - but aim to finish at 3.30, would that sound
acceptable to you?    If   it sounds acceptable to you, then
I will sort out whether it sounds acceptable to the
lawyers.    We think it might be easier because a lot of
people have to travel, including me as well.      You
wouldn't mind if I made those changes.
              (In the absence of the jury)
      THE CORONER:   You heard what I said to the jury.
 We thought that might be a bit easier if we start on
 Monday at 10.30.
      MR. KING:   I have not canvassed it yet with my
 colleagues, but certainly I would have thought that was a
 sensible idea.
      THE CORONER:   Is there anybody who feels very
 strongly that would be jolly inconvenient?   If we start
 at 10.00 on Friday and finish at 3.30 we have actually
 lost a whole hour and I thought if we started at 9.30 on
 Friday we are only sacrificing half an hour, and aim to
 finish at 3.30 rather than 4.00.   Whether we make it is
 another matter.    Are you happy with that as well?
      MR. KING:   Sir, I haven't consulted any of my
 friends on this idea which I am merely floating, sir.
         IHAEL DAVID KELLY



    1.     Michael        David   Kelly    the     brother     of    the     Applicant          Joan
           Sinclair       was     born    on   1st March 1951, and was 38 years old
           when he died at Hillsborough football ground                      on    15th        April
           1989.


    2.     At the mini inquest the jury heard from Dr John Clark that in
           his view the cause of death was                crush     asphyxia.        This        was
           based     on     finding signs of asphyxia in Mr Kelly's face which
           was rather congested and            had    a   bluish      discoloration.              Dr
           Clark     stated        that    these     changes      were      fairly       mild     in
           comparison to a lot of the other victims.                     He further           stated
           that    one of the other features of asphyxia is to find little
           haemorrhages on the skin.             He remarked        that    these        in     fact
           were not present.         Mr Kelly had not inhaled vomit and had not
           suffered any internal or severe injuries                   and    there       was     no
           natural disease to account for his death.                  Dr Clark said that
           he still thought Mr Kelly died of crush asphyxia and for some
           reason the signs of this were rather mild.                    He suggested that
           it may have been the case that Mr Kelly's heart                        stopped       for
           some particular reason very very quickly and he died but that
           this is something which is impossible to prove.


    3.     Dr Clark's evidence was followed by the                  evidence        of    Police
           Inspector Matthew Robert Sawers who stated that at about 3.35
           pm Police Constable Willmott made his way on to the Spion Kop



I
 *
     end    of the ground.            There he saw Mr Kelly lying on the pitch
     on his back.           Michael appeared to be                  unconscious.     Together
     with    Police         Constable               Lallyhe checked for vital signs of
     life but could not find any.                      Mr Kelly      was   carried     to    the
     temporary       mortuary.             At       about    3.59    pm    Dr   Andrew      Byrne
     certified Michael David Kelly dead.


4.   At the mini-inquest visual evidence was produced by Detective
     Inspector       Michael      Layton,             of    the West Midland Police          who
     showed a photograph timed at 3.08 pm which appeared                               to    show
     Mr     Kelly    alive       in        Enclosure 3.        When asked by the Coroner
     whether he could say at that point if Mr Kelly was conscious,
     unconscious,           alive          or   dead,       Detective      Inspector      Layton
     replied thatMr Kelly was probably still alive butcertainly
     in distress.           The Applicant isconcerned that such a question
     was     directed       at   a         police      officer      and    feels   that       the
     information sought by the Coroner ought to have been obtained
     from a medical expert.


5.   Inspector Layton also stated that a P C Maughan had attempted
                                      i-

     to     resuscitate      a    man at the Leppings Lane end of the pitch
     but without success.              P        C    Maughan     assisted       spectators     to
     carry     the    man    to the Spion Kop end of the ground, where he
     left him with a St John's Ambulance officer who has not                                 been
     identified.        He further stated that P C Maughan had met with
     the Applicant and both are satisfied that it was actually                                 Mr
     Kelly that P C Maughan had‘attempted to assist.
6.   At    the     main inquest the jury heard from Police Officer John
     Raymond Maughan that on the day he got                           on   to    the     Leppings
     Lane     end     of     the      pitch       at    about       3.04 pm.     Three or four
     minutes later he approached a man who was laid on his side by
     the     goalposts           on   the grassed area behind the bye line.                         He
     identified the man asMr Kelly.                       The man did not appear to be
     breathing        and with            the help of some civilians he turned Mr
     Kelly over and worked                   on        him for        a few minutes. He             appeared
     to     start     to     breathe. Police              Officer Maughan continued to
     breathe for the man for a while.                         Mr Kelly then        appeared         to
     slip     unconscious             but    he    was    breathing.            Police     Officer
     Maughan was clearly confident in                         his     recollection       that       he
     appeared         to    have      won     through and used the expression, "We
     have won that one".                  With the help of supporters               he     carried
     Mr     Kelly     towards         a     grassed area on the pitch near to the
     gymnasium where the first aid people had set up                               a     reception
     area     in      the    corner.          They       left    Mr     Kelly in the care of
     ambulancemen and went back to help at the                             other    end.        P    C
     Maughan        was confident that Mr Kelly was still breathing when
     he put him into the care of the St John's Ambulanceman.


7.   In a meeting with the applicant P C Maughan stated that after
     he     had left        Mr    Kelly      with        the    ambulancemen he ran back
     towards the Leppings Lane end                       to    assist      other    spectators.
     Before      he    reached Leppings Lane he received a radio message
     to     formpart of a cordon on the half way line which                              he   duly
did.         The    Applicant      asked him why he did this when he knew
people were dying.              He replied that he had to as            it    was     an
instruction, things were utterly chaotic and nobody knew what
they were doing.             This evidence was not put before the               jury.
Such     evidence       was      highly    relevant to the issue of whether
death was due to or              aggravated by    lack of care,          an     issue
which was not left to the jury.


The Applicant is concerned that Mr Kelly was eventually found
lying on his back            without      apparently    having     received         any
treatment           from the     emergency services. She contends that he
ought to have been laid in the recovery                  position.           Further,
because       of     the absence of any obvious signs of crush injury
on Mr Kelly's body she feels that he would have survived                            had
he     received       prompt     medical    treatment       once   he    had        been
resuscitated by P C Maugham, and thereafter left in the                             care
of     the     St John Ambulance Service.          Finally the applicant is
concerned that the evidence shows that                 Mr     Kelly     was     alive
beyond        the     3.15     pm cut off time imposed by the Coroner and
that the facts of the case present sufficient material for                             a
jury     to    consider whether to return a verdict that the death
of Michael David Kelly was due to or aggravated                    by        lack    of
care.
(4FP MATFSTV’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
              (WEST DISTRICT)



      INQUESTS INTO -THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

             STADIUM .DISASTER

          ON THE 15TH APRIL,   1989



         INQUEST 'INTO THE DEATH OF

            MICHAEL DAVID KELLY




                   Before

. S.L. POPPER.':LL.E. "B.MED.Sci. B M . SS. MR

          (Her Maiestv’s Coroner)




                     At

         The Medico-Legal Centre.

                 Sheffieid.

                     On

               1st May. 1990




         TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




   From the Notes of J.L. Harpham. Ltd. ,
        Official Shorthand Writers.
    55. Queen Street. Sheffield Si 2DX
                                       INDEX


DR. JOHN CLARK - Called

  By THE COR ONE R    -•   •-   _- -   --   -•                         ''   °


POLICE INSPECTOR ROBERT MATTHEW SAWERS - Called




                                                                            i
                                                                            n
  3y THE COR ONE R • -       ...............        ....................




                                                                            n
  C r os s- Ex am i ne d by MR- F R A S E R ............................




                                                                            co
  C r os s- Ex am i ne d by HR. L I N E ..........       -•


DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called

  By THE C O R O N E R ............................. -                      9




                                  - -o o--oo--
         IN Q U E S T   IN T O   TH£    DEATH OF M IC H A E L   D A V ID   KELLY

      MR. FRASER:       Sir, the next e vi de nc e you will hear
relat es to Michael D av id Kelly.        M i ch ae l' s b r o t h e r and
sist er and t he ir s p o u s e s are present in Court this mo rning
with the h e l p of social workers.         I a p p e a r in a personal
ca pacity for the family but ob vi ous ly for toda y I ap pe ar as
a mem be r of the St ee r i n g Committee, in fact, as agent for           ^
myself I suppose-

        THE CORONER:              Yes.     Is it b r o th er and sister,           did you
say?
  1                                                                           ■      V   :\
       MR. FRASER:               Yes,    sir-

      THE CORONER:           Whi’ch are the b r o t h e r and s i s t e r ?   Yes,
thank you.       Good afternoon.        Let me b r i e f l y d es c r i b e to -you
the general format of the Inquest so that you can follow
what is go i ng to happen.           I am going to r e a d to you in a
moment the e vi den ce I took on -18th April 1989.                  Th er e are
one or two m in or er ror s which I will co rre ct when I have
read it.     Th e n I am going to tell you what Dr. Forrest said
with regard to the bl oo d alcohol and th en Dr. Clar k is going
to come, that is the Pathologist, and he will tell us the                           *
relevant p a r t s of the pathological findings.                When he has
completed his ev id e nc e the West M id l a n d s P o l i c e O f f i c e r will
present the sum ma ry and Inspector L a y t o n will deal with the,,.:
visual side of the evidence.             As I said, tine Jury must be
getting ti red of this because I say this in n e ar ly every
case.   The visual evidence when it is first p r e s e n t e d is
very co nf u si ng b e c a u s e it refers to pl a ns and n u m b e r s and
things, but h old on because he is c o m i n g r o u n d here in a
moment and he will demonstrate to you on the big plans what
he is t a l ki ng about and then the whole t h i n g b e c o m e s very
very much clearer.           So don't des pa ir wh e n y o u h ea r all the
numbers.     We need th em for the record so that we can find
our way a ro und the paperwork later on if we s h ou ld have to
do it-    Is that c le a r?       Then when I hav e don e that we will
take no fu rt he r evid enc e at this point.

     This then is the resumed Inquest wh i c h wa s opene d on
the 18th April 1989 and on that oc ca si on Neil Ant ho n y
Parkin, Acti ng C o r on er 's Officer said:

       "The body wh ic h is the subject of th is Inquest has been
       ide ntified to DI Timms of the S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e Police as
       that of Michael David Kelly by S t e p h e n Paul Kelly, his
       brother.        He was 38 years of age h a v i n g bee n born on
       1st March 1951 at Liverpool-             He w a s a d iv o r c e d man and
       he lived at 39 Elmhouse Road, Old Swan, Liverpool.                     He
       was a w a r e h o u s e m a n by occupation.    He di e d at
       H i ll sb or ou gh Football Ground f o l l o w i n g an incident
      there on'Saturday, 15th April 1v8v.           PC 1/91 Mi mott
      caused the body to be r e m o ve d to the M e d i c o Legal
      Centre and there he identified it to Detectl                 ...           .
      Constable Simon Weigold who s u b s e q u e n t l y identified
      same body to Prof. Usher and D I T i m m s .       It i s t h e
      family wish that the body s h o u l d be cremated.

Just bear with me for one moment. ■S i m o n                       ”
such identify the body to DI Timrns.       I th in .    y       ictl
probably to ge t h e r at the same t ime but that is n            ,                        '■ if

rieht as I have read it out to you.         In tact  :
                                                     D r . Clark    who
is the Pathologist, was present when Prot - Usher
                                                     ident i f icat ion
and Dr- Clark, per ha ps you will deal with the
                          detail on this occasion.
in a little bit more
                                                                             V
         I wrote to St ep hen Paul Kelly-          I» that you.           w hicl
                  agreement)   On 13th M a y _ y o u s i g n e d a torn, whic
I sent to you and, in fact, you c o n f i r m e d that the
Information that we had was correct wi t h re gar d «
ad d ’-ess a»®      date of birth, o c c u p a t i o n and that is. ft
       t ; ^ t ?t’i Dr. Forrest did the bl oo d ^ ^ ^ ^ J i J s t
the case of Michael and gave u& the e v i d e n c e                  Mi chael >
day, on the Wednesday, and in fact in che ea.e ot                     Mic a               ■.W:
none was detected.         It was negative-         Dr- Clark.

     MR. FRASER:    Just before you call Dr- C l a r k ther e i»                     a
question which may not matter for yo ur r e c o r c s out the                         ^
family are keen 1 0 clarify it and that is the ques tio n ot
the legal next of kin.

     THE CORONER:       Yes, we sent you a co py of                    me
but we aren't using it.      It is r ea ll y a . u i - a r y sheet tor
but I unde rs tan d te chnically the next ot kin ia Joanne
Kelly, isn't it, the daughter?

     MR. FRASER:    Michael's daughter- S t r i c t l y ^ s p e a k i n g ,
yes-  She is a mi nor but she is the legal next ot kin.

     THE CORONER:        I quite accept that.      It isn't relevant
to my pr oce ed in g s but I do know if t h e r e was a ^ n ± d
would take or ec ede nc e over the mother-

       MR. FRAStR:          Thank you -

         THE CORONER:        You are happy for me to recor d that,
a r e n ‘t you?

       MR - F R A S E R :   Yes-
                             I believe you re pr e s e n t    that firm on an
     THE CORONER:
agency basis?
       MR.   FRASER:        It is a bit c o m p l i c a t e d but,   yes-
                                                         DR.   JOHN CLARK




     THE CORONER:           Right.     Are you ha p p y now    if we go on to
Dr. Clar k?

      MR.   FRASER:      Yes, sir.

                      DR.    JOHN CLARK - C a l l e d

                             By THE C O R O N E R :

Yes. - A. Dr.     John Clark,        Fo re ns ic Pathologist,    University
of Glasgow.

Dr. Clark, can you just tell me how t h i s lad was i de nt if ie d?
Well, he isn't a lad he was 39.      We will call him gen tl em a n
I think? - A. As I recall he was id en ti fie d to me by Police
Officers of Sou th Yorkshire Po li c e wh os e name s I don't know
at the moment but also with c e r ta in inform ati on wh ich was .
with the body, a name with the bo dy and a number. „

In fact,    the serial      num b er was 72 I b e l i e v e ? - A.   Yes., t <-•

You are qui te s a ti sf ie d you are t e l l i n g me about Michael
David Kelly, aren't you? - A. Yes.

On that ba sis can you tell me what y o u r findings wer e?
Cause of death was crush asphyxia.         Th is was ba sed on
finding signs of asphyxia in his face.          His face was r a t h e r
congest ed and had a bluish d isc ol ora ti on.     These changes^ I
have to say, were fairly mild in c o m p a r i s o n to a lot of the
other people and one of the ot he r f ea tur es of a sp hyx ia is to
find little h a e mo rr ha ge s on the skin.   These weren't in fact
present.

Were not pr es en t? - A. Were not pr es ent on the skin.             They
were present internally.        So r e a l l y what I am s a y i n g is <.ha>.
there were signs of asphyxia but it was re all y r el at iv ely
mild in c o m p ar is on to other peopl e but it would n e ve rt h el es s
be consistent with pressure on his chest p r e v e n t i n g him
breathing and t h e re by being able to get air into the body.
There was no .other obvious cause of death.            He hadn't
inhaled vomit and he had not s uf fe r e d any internal or ^s e ve re
injuries and there was no natural d i s e as e to account for his
death and so I still think he died of c r u s h _a sp hy xi a and for
some reason the signs of that were r a t h e r mild-

       It may be with some people who die an asphyxial death
there is an additional element in that there can be pres sur e
on nerves, p ar ti cul ar ly in the neck, which can st op the
heart very qui c kl y and it may be an element.            It is
something which is impossible to prov e but it may be his
heart st o pp ed for some p ar ti cul ar r e a s o n very very qui ck ly
and he died.       In any event there was n o t h i n g to indicate he
suffered for any great length of time-              He pr ob a b l y lost
co n sci ou sne ss withi n a short p e ri od of time, ten or fifteen
                                                                     DR.    JOHN CLARK




     seconds or so, and then knew n o t h in g about                  U a*'®* *hat *
     As I said, there wasn't any maj or injuries                      internal y.

            He did have a num b er of g r a ze s and b rui ses on hi*. body,
     h i s f«c.. his arms *nd his W g « ,                   “ “^            “L b l y Sluied
     people gr ip pi ng his arms, and the ot he r i*                  p r o o a b  y cau-ea -
     by p r e s s u r e agai n s t ot h er p e o p l e or some s u    r   f a c e like the
     g r o u n d . AgaiS these may veil                  occur,           at er h e ^ l o - t ^
     c o n s c i o u s n e s s . wo •.ne         w*.       *
     asphyxia-

            The only other finding was e v id e n c e of a pa»t
     operation, probably an ulcer o p e r a t i o n on his           1
     don't knoi but I suspect that is what it was.          That had no
     b ear ing at all on his death.

                  FRASER:       The family have no questions.                       T ha nk you.
          MR.
     Doctor.
                                                           the last
Q-        THE CORONER:      I* believe this is, in f act ,
                                                     it? - A- That is
     Inquest you are g i v i n g .evidence at, isn't
     right.
Q.   It is right you have given ev id en ce at 20 Inquests ana have
     done 20 post morterns? - A- Yes, that is right.

Q    I know and we all know that you come from Glasgow.     P e ° P X®
     might w o nd er why you were here but, in fact, you were on a
     private visit last April ? - A- That weekend, yes.

     You very kindly agree d to help and, in fact, you did a grea
Q
     deal of work and if I may say so you have given                      , .
     evidence in a most          a   d   m m a nn er
                                             i   r   c l e ar ly
                                                     a   b   l   ®
                                                                 e


     the Jury and also by the families and also I                        ^
     have done it in a co mp as si on a te and helpful w a Y-          - „ ance
     like to thank you very much indeed both tor you               T _ - u a -r s
     at the time and since, and in p a r t i c u l a r at these I n q u ^ t s .
     Thank you very much indeed. " A. Can I say in turn                ~          _
     Jomloni d eal in g with this sort of w o r k a n d inves ti gat io n ot
     death very regularly how impressed I nave oeen              *        ^
     pro fe ss i on al is m and sensi tiv it y with wh ich the                  *d
     have been carried out here, in p a r t i c u l a r your ha no ii ng *na
     ex p la na ti on s to the relatives of the b e r e a v e d              ‘r
     think it has given comfort to e ve ry on e who ha= w or ke d here
     and I felt it a very ap propriate atmosphere.

           MR. FRASER:    Cou ld I add my t ha nk s on b e h a 1f                       **
      Committee and my c lie nts for those woras you have
      to Dr. Clark.   I have certainly spo ke n to many
      have spoken to Dr. Clark and they have very much
      the time he has spent with th em per sonally-                                     Y
      appreciated.

             THE WITNESS:                Thank you very much.
                                                    MATTHEW ROBERT SAUERS
                                             p. I


%
         THE CORONER:     Hr. Fraser,        is it likely the family will
    want to speak to D r . Clark ?

          MR. FRASER:       They may do,     sir.

         THE CORONER:    Dr. Clark, will you stay?   Once   you have
    spoken to the family, should they wish to do so, t en o
    course feel en tirely free to leave us-   Th ank you agdin.
    take it none of you have questio ns of Dr. Clark.

          MR. CATCHPOLE:        No, sir.

          M R . LIMB:     N o , sir.

          POLICE   INSPECTOR MATTHEW RO BE RT S AU ERS ~ Ca l l e d.

                               Bv':THE CORONER.:                                   _ .

Q. Yes, Mr. Savers.       - A. Matthew Robert -Savers,       Inspectpr,      West
   Midl an ds Police.      I am already sworn, sir.

Q   Woul d you take me th rough the sum mar y please when you are
    r<=ady? - A. On Saturday, 15th April 1989, Michael David
          /                     *   * _ _   .   _______              T t ? a A n
    Ke l ly travel led to Sheffie ld o n the Avon, South West ana
    South Wales Liverpool Supporters Club coach.                   He m<=t uean
    Wi ll ia m Ma cey and a n um ber of ot he r s u p p o r t e r s on the coac
    It was their intention to watch the FA Cup Semi Final
    football match at the Hil ls bor ou gh Stadium.                  ’

           The coach party ar r iv ed in S h ef fi el d at about 1400
    hours.     Michael made his way towards the gr oun d t og eth er
    with Alan Warden, Karl Thomas and Dean Wacey-            With the
    e xce pti on of Michael the others s top ped at a shop and
    Michael co nt i nu ed to the ground alone.

            Paul Kelly, a Liverpool supporter, e n t e r e d the   _
    H il ls bor oug h football ground through Gate C._ He st oo d^ in
    the concourse w a i ti ng to meet friends and whilst sta nu^ ng
    there saw Michael, wh om he knew, and he saw him en t er t »= ^
    ground through a turnstile.       The two men spoke bri etl y ana
    Michael state d he was going to the terracing.

          At about 1535 h o u r s Police C ons tab le Wilmott maae his
    way on to the Spion Kop end of the ground.           There he saw a
    man whom he now kn o ws to be Michael _lying_on the pitci on
    his back.   Michael a pp ear ed to be unconscious.         Tog et h er
    with Police Consta ble Lal ly the Of fi ce r c h e ck ed for vital
    signs of life but c ou ld not find any.        Michael w a s p l a c e a <
    to a temporary s tr e tc he r and ca rr i ed to the g y m na s iu m where
    a temporary mort uar y h ad been set up.       Police Co n^t a
    Wilmott: remai ne d wi th Michael.

         At about 1559 hours, Dr- Andrew Byr ne e x a m i n e d Michael
    in the tempor ary mo rt u a r y and c e rt i fi ed life extinct.
       At about 0530 ho ur s on Sunday, 16th April, P o i ^ce
Co ns ta bl e Wilmott e sc o rt ed H i c h a e l •s body h er e to the Meoi co
Legal Centre where he confirm ed the identitica 10                   y
reference to D e te ct iv e Co ns tab le Weigold.          At this time
Michael had not bee n identified by name.

     At about 2110 ho urs on Sunday, 16th April, St eph en Paul
Kelly at te nd ed at the Medico Legal Centr e whe re he                  ••
identified the body of his bro th er to D e te c ti ve I n s p e c t o r ^
Timms.
     On Monday, 17th April 1989, following ide nt ifi cat io n
DC Weigold, Dr- John Clark car ried out an au topsy
submit ted a report giving cause of death.

     No mat ch ticket was found in M ich ae l's personal ef.
but Paul Kelly saw him enter via a turnstile.                ^
I would add that M i c h a e l ’s jacket has nev er oeen       .
despite ex ha ust iv e enquiries to trace it ana            !    ■
is possible that the match ticket cou ld have be en contained
in that   jacket.
As we have al ready said on many o cc as ion s in cir cum s ta nc es
like this the pr es en ce or ab sence oi the ticket it^e t
doesn't prove - well, it may help in cer ta !n caste but }ou
can't draw too many conclu si ons from it, p a r t icu      y      _
case like this.   Now, Paul Kelly whom we are t a k i n g about,
that is no relation, is it? - A. None whatsoever, sir.

lz is just co in ci d e n c e he ha ppens to have the same name?
A complete coincidence, sir, y e * •

Paul had an u n f o r t u n a t e encoun ter with a h o r s e , is that
right? - A. C er t a i n l y he had an injury to his right toot
toe which he at t ri bu t es to the actions of a horse-

From our point of view we are not too c o n ce rn ed           h °”
got the injury but it meant he wanted to get into                g-^
rather mo r e q u i e t l y and r at her .ore comfortab! y hen g o m g
through the t u r n s t i l e ? - A- That is so, sir, yes.

That is page 15, i s n ’t it? Paul Kelly isn t here, is                   •
He refers to it first on page 13 and d e s c r i D e s the s*me
injury on page 15 with the horse.

In effect, what he says is that he was told the
so in ® to be ooened which Me take it to be the c onc ar tin
f«ti° or one if the big S ates, and he wo u ld be aole to « «
in? - A- He does r e f e r specifically, sir, to oa^e <-.
Yes, that is right, he does. - A- It was ce rt ai nl y brought
to his att e nt io n he may be admitted thr ou g h tnat ga e
                                                                P.I.      MATTHEW   ROBERT SAWERS




a.   I think ha says, "I w al ked in the gate",                              doesn't he,     o n page
     15? - A- Yes, sir, he does-

Q. He says, "I w al ke d in the gate and I                                        J^hrough       the
   turnstiles ana I saw Michael D av ia t^eny
   turnstile? - A- He does, sir, yes-
                         ir .•n front of you but we have-       Up to now
Q. You have not £<_m. it in front o        y        .           earliest
   we have o nl y r e f e r r e d to three jate openin g- , thu u*rl Li.
   being the 1443 op en i n g ? - A- Yes.

q    You can r em em ber t h a t , can t you.                         A
                               .. ,.   r>iar chesp gat es were o p en ed on
Q. Would I be right m thinki g -                  p e r i od s of time? - A- ,,
    earlier oc ca s i o n s as well foi s n o i t p -
    That is true, sir, yes-

Q. We d o n ’t know whi ch opening Paul r er er s                           uO,    ao we.
   have no pr ec is e infozrnat ion .

Q. He gives no time ? -= A. He gives no time that                                   we ca
   attribute to the op en in g of the gate.

             THE CORONER:   Can you deal with the o p e n i n g s of the
     gate,    Inspector Layton, or not?

              INSPECTOR LAYTON:                 Only in general              terms-

             THE CORONER:              Yes,     Mr.      Fraser.

             MR.    FRASER:          Would you               give me a mom en t      pl eas e?

             THE CORONER:              Yes.

                            C r o s s - E x a m i n ed   by MR.— F R A b E R ;

      Just to deal very quickly with the q u e s t i o n of the fact .t-hat
      there w a s n ’t a ticket with Michael, you s a y ^ rhe fact
      going through the turnst H e which                          1                    ~
                                                                                       i f 1 am wrong,
      he almost c e r t a i n l y had a -                     ^               D ar ti cul ar coach
      but I be lieve it is the practice of this •                                   . ,      n th<a
      operator, you may not know                                         o w^ a           mo ci ves
      coach who h a s n ’t got a ticket O l                            ^      -omethin^ whic h has
      behind that are fairly obvious. ^                              t h a t _s                  w ic hi n
      come up i n your i n v e s t i g a t i o n s -                            O D <=>rare on b e h a l f
      my knowle dge that the c o a c h                                          ^     “ utte strictly
      of the Liverpool Supporte rs                                     ch.cfe.d on b o a r d i n g the
      a d m i n i s t e r e d ana a ^ e t ^ are u^ua               /          r r w a l on a
      coach.          P e op le a r e n ’t usually a                       ?f"i may use that
      L i v e r p o o l S u p p o r t e r s ’ s p o n s o r e d ooach,
      term        without a ticket.

              NR.    FRASER:          I am grateful              for that



                                                         7
                                             P.I.   MATTHEW         ROBERT SAUERS




      tup     r n b o n e r - Can I just ex pl ai n this       to you because
      THE     cORONtR. can j            _0 ‘ce-r n s y o u?   Th ese Off ice rs
it is ob v i o u s l y a matter whi-h c o n c e r n s y           ^
can only      say what is in          the sta|                 cZ an Officer to
all of us can but it »ouI^ b J eu " “ X                say     what is in the
hazard a guess on Oath.            bo    . x h e r e who saw him hold a
s tatement ana it chere is nob            y           z i c ^&Z" and if we'have
ticket and can say, "I saw him                             .      that we found
not found it, he can't say somebody . « w i : o r ^ a t ^ w , ^
it be ca us e both ot those things w              concerned.                I am not
doesn't me an to say you need to be t_                                     regard to
p a r t ic ul ar ly co nc e rn ed about this point,
Michael-         All ri g h t .

         THE WITNESS:         It might be helpful           \         siln
comment.        There are statement. JJ ^         £ame coach and
from three su pp or t er s who traveliea ° n      - -n p o s s e ssion of
each s up p o r t e r re te r . specitically      «                applies
. h e i r o w n tick et .   It is an                                ?h.
in Michael Kel ly 's case but that           talc *      leaves us no
evidence of Paul Kelly through the t ur n s t i l e ,
reason to su pp os e he didn't have a t i c k e c

                      Cr oss -Examined by MR-— L I •

Paul Ke l l y states he    went t h r o u g h Gate C but he>is|
as to time.     D o e s he give any e v i a e n c e a s to wh^t c.r
part of a. cr ow d or a party of peop le go in g through
he found him se lf on his own In the ena.-’

       THE CORONER:        I think you will         find        it on pag'-

       THE WITNESS:        Yes-    Would     it assist          you,    ^.ir,       if
 this in context?’
 yes, go ahead. - A- Briefly, P a u l _K e :1!y _has ma<ae two                           ^
 st a te men ts ana re fe r s to this inciaent in      ^
 refers to ha vin g acquired an injury to his toot in
 vicinity of the enclosu re between the ouwsi-da g a , . ^                               ZQ
 Le ppings Lane and t h e J - ^ n s t l                   bel ieve the gates
 speak ing to a P o l i c e m a n _and bei   *       r e ^ He r e fers to a
 may be op en ed at some time in                                     Officer
 :idn ;ifd“" t r ? h r i " 4 i c ? “ h:                           *. 0 ^        ,        ^    ^

 £ ^ n «  r i J e ^ ^ ”         ho w^ many " ot he r people en tered
 through the gate at the time he e n t er ed tnrough    -

        MR.   LIMB:     Tha nk you.

        THE CORONER:       You will see i n a.                             evid^Jce-
 st re ss in g this b eca us e it cornes up in             >-      *»
 We can come back to it if necessary -
                                                       0.1.   M IC H A E L LAYTON




     MR. CATCHPOLE:            Sir, I onl y rise as a matter of
clarification.           Idon't think we hav e got the
impression but          itwo ul d be right to say I think; t a        _ber
only two o p e n i n g s of the gate, in w h i c h a suo stantial number
of people went through, were those you ha v e referr-
previously-       If there were any e a r l i e r o pe ni ng s
short p e r i o d of time, if there is a n y e v i d e n c e o people
going through,          it is only one or may be two peop e.

        THE CORONER:             Yes, that is a ve r y good point-       We  ^
haven't m en t i o n e d any of the e a r l i e r part oecause what
hap pe nin g was that the gate, I w as g o i n g to say
c o nt in u o u s l y being opened.       That is not true                     and
being o p e n e d intermittently, u s u a l l y to throw p<_ p "
nor f o all ow them in.              For example, one is timed at 1438          an
opening, a n d there is another one ti me d at 1439
fact      s o m e b o d y was actually taken in on that one,              <-
on the picture.             Th ere were othe r o p e n i n g s but they         "
been t e r r i b l y relevant until this p a r t i c u l a r       nquest ano you
will see in a minute why it is relevant.                      Sha*    "       in a
arthis st a g e with the gates and we can com e back to u
minute w h e n we have            heard Inspector       Layton?      Any moLe
ques tio ns?

       MR.   LIMB:       No    thank you,     sir.

     THE CORONER:       In fact, it is onl y      fair to say that
Paul Kelly does men tio n a tirne, I hav e just noti^ua         dli .
first tirne he ment ion s is that he sa y s it is after l. ree
o'clock and then he gives a sup pl em en ta l s t a t e m e n ^
says that can't possibly right or wo r d s to that etiect.
That is true, sir, yes.

His t i m i ng s can't be relied on? - A- His t i m i n g s can't be
relied on.       I am satisf ie d the w i t n e s s is doing hi
recollect but certa inl y his in fo rm at io n ab o u t timing
be relie d on, sir.

There is an interesting sentence here.             Tu r n to page
because t hi s may actually help-     The lasv. paragrapi,         «
Kelly says, "Once I was inside the g r o u n d I saw the g~te
open again.       This was about five m i n u t e s al t er   e <-
ground.     Th i s was the last time the gate o p e ne d and
ev ery bod y came in and went down the tunnel •
gate was o p en ed at this time about 1450.' - A. \e=>.

As I say, I wouldn't be too reliant on his tim ings but that
is what he say s? - A. He does say that, sir, yes.

             D E T EC TI VE   INSPECTOR M I C H AE L L A Y T O N - Called

                                P.v THE COR ON ER :

Hr.   L a yt on - - A. Sir,      Michael Layton,      Detective     Inspector,
                                                    D. I .   fTICHAEL LAYTON




Best Mi dl and s Police-      Sir, an e x a m i n a t ion has been made of
video film and photographic e vi d e n c e a n d Michael has been
identified alive in Enclo sur e No. 3-              S t e p h e n Kelly,
M i c h a e l ’s brother, as you have h e a r d is in C o u r t , has. v i ew ed
visual evidence and identified his b r o t he r alive in
Enclosure No. 3 on a number of ph otographs.

     Pho tog rap h referenced DB'l6/~iO is tim ed at 1445 and
that  sir, is in Enclos ure No- 3.       I wonder,        sir, at that
point whe the r you wish me to el ab o r a t e s li g h t l y in re at ion
to Paul Kel ly' s evidence.

Yes   please. - A. As I have said, that pho to gr ap h is timed
at 1445.   Paul Kelly is seen in a E3C vi d eo tape o u t si de the
ground which was taken between 1437 a nd 1450-           As you have
al ready heard, he cannot be s pe c i f i c a nd his d e sc ri pt io n is
he is ente ri ng via Gate C and from my k n o wl ed ge o f^ th e ga te s
doesn't accord with the two o p e n i n g s at 2.43 and 2.52,         So
we can be sure he wa s-outside the g r ou na be twe en those two^
times but we can't be sure at what time he a ct ual ly entered.

This is? - A. Paul Kelly, sir.       Sir, on a photography ^         =
re f er en ced PR2/21 which is timed at 1508 that shows M ich ae l
in Enclos ure No. 3 and whilst the detail ag ai n is not great
it ap pears to show him ce rt a in ly alive at that time but
can't say at what stage of the p r o c e s s mea i ca it y he is at.
I -hink it is fair to say at that point as w e l l that               •:
Michael's sister has also vi ewe d that visual evid enc e and
so, in fact, both brother and siste r agree that the
p ho tog ra phs show Michael-

He looked a bit distressed you think             in that? - A- That        is
my impression.

You can't say whe th er he is c on s c i o u s or unconscious, al iv e
or dead, at that par ticular p o i nt ? - A. It i s •d i t t i c u l t - I
would say he is probably still a J i v e L s ir » but ce rt ai n ly in
distress.  In respect of tne p n o t og ra pn at I445_he is
certainly alive and there are no j p r o b 1ems at ti.dt stage.
The later photograph does show him.

That is the one, yes. - A- Yes-          P C :W i 1mott jnas viewed
visual evidence and he was u n ab le to identify himseli
de al in g with I'lichael but the Of fi ce r has signed a plan ot
the pitch indicating the a p p r o x i m a t e location at which he ^
first came into contact with I'lichael at the .i^pion Kop ena Ox
the ground.     That plan, sir, is r e f e r e n c e d CRfcil-

      PC Maughan attempted to r e s u s c i t a t e a man ar the.
Lepp ing s Lane ena of the pitch bur withour s u c c e s s .       I
assi ste u spectators'to' carry the man to the Spion K op e n d ot
the ground where he states that he left him with a _>t                  o ns
Ambula nce Officer who has not be en identified-           T h e O f f ic er
has viewe d visual evidence and feels Mr. Kel ly may             e the


                                    10


                                /CD
                                                                   n.T.      MICHAEL      LAYTON




ma n h e a s s i s t e d .   S ir      if I can ju s t say                               ' £ Jhe
s a w PC M a u g h a n .    At C h e t i m e o f                       H IcM el but I
b e s t o f h i s b a l l e f h e b e l l ® " 1-         ^ ,   s i s c e r h a s s i n c e met
t h i n k i t is fair to say that                             I t h i n k t h e y are b o t h
PC H a u g h a n a n d f o l l o w i n g char, me          J             h   a t t e m p t e d to
s a t i s f i e d that i t w a s a c t u a l l y M i c h a e l that
assist.

But in t h e s ta t e m e n t he gave £ « • » « , ; « " ^ ^ i L i n g
■might have be en? - A- To the Des                   ..    n l r e fer you
 in mind the time and the des c rl P ^ ° e f e r e n « n u m be r MWJL93?
 to a plan which has been given the re te r e n c
                          .  _       pr H a u e ha n ‘s plan next, J R K 1 , n
C1S5-         - A. And perhaps, sir   Pt «* J       b ack in the file,
which         I think is a little bit turther ba ck in

C186.         - A.    And do you want PC B i l m o t t ’ s               plan, s i r ?

Y es,    I th in k      we w i l l    -have t h a t   one    as     well?      - A.   CR!»1.

 C187.    -    A.    ( moved t o      p l y )                        ^ o to 'g r a p ^ a t'1             .
 S ^ i e f ^ ^ n              In     this   p o sitio n     h e re jn      Ena lo s u r e ^ N o . „3 .
In r e s p e c t of the later photogr p s   &            respect of the
Enclos ur e No- 3 at this point      e  • -j     •        h  first
plan by PC Haughan, JR«1 ,                            i ng> on the pitch
po s iti on that is indicated                 d po si ti o n ne reiei'S
J u the LeDOings L^ne end ana          » £ ? - « ! £ > ind
 to [» at the spion Kop ena here U n ^ ^ > ^ ? ja
 respect of PC Wilmott on the plan, okw                              ,
 indicates a p os i t i o n here (in d i c a t i n g.

 That ag ain          is a recollection,              is it not           - A- Yes,        so
  I S I I f t i h t V a r i a t i o n b e t w e e n h i s r e = o U . = t ion.

          THE CORONER:               Hr- Fraser.

          HR.       FRASER:          No questions,          sir-

          HR.       LIHB:      No questions,           sir-

          HR. CATCHPOLE:                No questions-,            sir-

           HR. FRASER:             Again, sir       b e f h e r ^ w h o ^ ^ i t w e r e is
  evidence in t h i s case,                                    b e ’w i t h us t o d a y -      She
  t h e hea d of the family, is                  •                   daughter they
  is in L i v e r p o o l but                                            eve r yb od y £ho
  s p e c i f i c a l l y w a n t me to t h a n k _t h r o 0     L e r y b o d y ‘s e f f o r t s
  he lp ed Michael on the day °                            want to off er their
  are ve r y mu c h a              p     p         U e s J M i d l a n d s P o l i c e as well-
  t h a n k s to the O i f i c e r b ot tn<_

       THE CORONER:    Thank you very m u ^        co your mum
  Would, you make sure that
                       that you
                            you pass
                                pas  my than ks on to yo
     Befo re I just: finish, the re aso n why we were talki:
about the oth er t i m e s with the gates is that this Y ° “ n S
has been id en tif ie d visually at 1445.   Just remin d me of
position.
       INSPECTOR LAYTON:        In this p o s i t i o n here   (indicating)
sir.
        THE CORONER:         If he came in at 1448 that is difficul-
as you can see.        Th er e are several explanations-          One i.
that Mr- Kelly may have made a mistake, Paul that
d o l i sly  qui t e c l L r l y that he came th rou gh                    ,
gives a re as o n why he came through.            bo alth oug h w e can   ,
l a y with a bs olu te certainty the only way to make it make
sense is to ass u me that he must have come in                  through    aot
the ear li er openings.          Mr. Limb, is that re a so na bl y clear
and sa ti sf ac to ry to you?       I re al is e we are dr awi ng a re’w ^ :
con clusions here but I can't see any o th er way of doing, it.

       MR-   LIMB:     Most definitely,       sir,   ye.

                         I suppose a n o t he r p o s s i b i li ty   is that {we
     THE CORONER:                                                            a   itA W B

can't e x p la i n it. If  we have the time and visual
in a sense that is     a  fixed point, isn't it?

      I am very so r ry that we have spent so much time tal king
about ti m es and so on but in a way that is what Inquests are
about.    We are here to try and sort out, you know          who ■
people are, where they are id en tif ie d and where uhey died,..*,
and ob vi o us ly if we get what looks like a d is cre pa ncy we
need to try and think about it but it does get a bit               •
confusing and also you may think u n n e c e s s a r y bearing
we are t a l k i n g about your brother, you r mu m 's son, and
course Joan ne' s dad.

     I try to be conscious, at least for a moment, in each
Inquest of the fact that we have s p o k e n not a D O u t some
number, anybody, but somebody very very special l ° z h e
family who you represent and who you are and I would 1 ike
you to k n o w so far as I am able I am co ns c i o u s «
which you s u f f e r e d when you lost Michael.  Thank you
being here this morning.
       L a d i e s and gentlemen,    we now rise and have         lunch ana we
resume at two o'clock.

    (Tha    Inquest into the death of M i c hael David Kell.v
           was a d f o u r n e d to a date to— be— fiA.ed)
                                                                  69
                                                           S. HARRATT


Q. It was definitely the radial fence, was it? - A. Yes.
Q. Hasit got spikes     or not? - A. I don't know.

        THE CORONER:  I do not think it has got spikes in
   the conventional sense.
        MR. CATCHPOLE:   It is the sort of fence which has
   a number of metal railings going up which is spiked at
   the top and a metalbar runs about two or three inches
   across from the? topand so there are straights rails
   going up to the topbut they are not the angled ones
   that we see in the picture.
        MRS. McBRIEN: I am very sorry about that but I
   had to come in on this.
        THE CORONER: I was puzzled as well which is why I
   got him to show us which fence it w a s . W e wanted to be
   sure we were talking about the right one.

        MRS. McBRIEN: I just thought I would be helpful.
   I did not want to interfere in any way at all.
        THE CORONER: No, Mrs. McBrien, it was a helpful
   intervention I am quite sure.
       MR. GRIFFITHS:     I think C.521 might help, sir.
        THE CORONER: Just stick it up on the screen and
   let us have a look. This is dealing with the railings.

Q. Just turn round, Officer. That is the top end of one
   of those radial fences. Is that what you mean? - A.
   Yes, that is what I am referring to, sir.
        THE CORONER:     There is nothing else, Mr. King?
        MR. KING:    No, sir.
        THE CORONER: I wish we could do better but we
   cannot. Thank you.
                    JOHN RAYMOND MAUGHAN Sworn

                          Bv THE CORONER
Q. You are John Raymond Maugham I think? - A. Yes, that is
   correct.
Q. You are a PC and what is your number? - A. 2105.
                                                                  70
                                                      I . R . MAUGHAM


 Q. Mr. Maughan, I have asked you to come because I want
    you to deal with a specific matter? - A. Yes, sir.
 Q . I think you had some dealings with a gentleman on the
     pitch, is that right? - A. That is correct, sir.
 Q . Am I right in thinking you eventually identified this
     gentleman as being Michael David Kelly? - A. That is
     correct, sir.

Q. That was from photographs? - A; Yes, sir, that was from
   photographs.

Q. How confident are you about your identification? - A. I
   am pretty sure it was the same man.
Q. You are pretty sure about that? - A. Yes,   sir.

Q. Is it right that your duty was off the field initially.
   You had to go somewhere else? - A. That is correct.
Q. You got on to the field just after three, about four
   minutes past three, is that right? - A. Yes, tte
   players *exe stxu. on the pitch.

Q. Pardon? - A. The football players were still   on the
   pitch when I came on.

Q. We are not too concerned about what you thought was
   going on but eventually you came upon a man on the
   pitch, is that right? — A. That is correct.

Q. He did not appear to you to be breathing at that stage?
   - A. That is right.

Q. He also looked blue, is that correct? - A. That is
   right.

Q. I think you then positioned him and started
   resuscitation, is that right? - A. That is correct,
   sir.

Q. In fact, you thought you were successful, is that
   right? — A. I did think I was successful.

Q. What actually happened? - A. When I approached the man
   he was laid on his side by the side of the goalposts.
Q. Just speak up and lean forward. - A. He was laid on his
   side by the goalposts on the grass part of the area
   behind the bye line and he did not appear to be
   krea"thing and with the help of some civilians we turned
   the man over, worked on him for a few minutes. He
                                               J . R . MMJGHAN


appeared to start to breathe again and then we got a
hoarding and carried him to the ambulance area at the
other end of the pitch.

Before you tell me about that you came on to the pitch
about three or four minutes past three. How long was
the time interval before you got to this chap? Have
you any idea? - A. Probably three or four minutes.




                                /Q. Not very long.
                                          J. R. MAUGHAN

It was not very long, in other words? - A. No.
Then you worked on him with the help of some
supporters? - A. That is correct.
Did he, as far as you remember, actually breathe
spontaneously on his own, or did you have to continue
breathing for him? - A. We continued breathing for him
for a whiJL&*_ then he appeared to slip unconscious but
he was breathing, this was just before we took him away
to the other end of the pitch.

So then you picked him up on a stretcher or hoarding? -
A. On a hoarding.
And carried him across the field? - A. That is correct.
Towards the gymnasium, is that right? - A. That is
right, where the Ambulance Service, or there were some
Ambulancemen there who had sort of set an ambulance
station up, just on the pitch itself, on the corner.
What did you do with him when you got to that position?
- A. We handed him to the ambulancemen and he was left
in their care, and we came back down the pitch for a
second time.

That was the last you saw of him? - A. That is correct,
sir.

Of course, you can't help me as to what happened to him
subsequent to that? - A. I can't sir, no.
             Cross-Examined by MR. KING
Officer, I on behalf of the family of Michael Kelly am
seeking to investigate as much detail as the family can
obtain about the last moments of his life, and you will
bear with me on that? - A. Yes.

I want to see if I can pinpoint the time slightly more
as to when you went to Michael at a time when he was
not at first breathing, then you worked on him and he
appeared to be breathing. You say the players were
still on the pitch when you got onto the field? - A.
That is correct, sir.

Were they actually playing, do you remember, or just
standing around? - A. Nottingham Forest was attacking
the Liverpool end.

Can I show you a photograph - I don't want to deal with
anything as regards wordings ....
                                                             73
                                                J. R. MAOGHAN

        MR. KING:   Sir, so you know, it is from the
   Sunday Mirror newspaper of April 23rd, 1989. It shows
   a photograph, and I am going to try and ask the Officer
   if it was the sort of area where he found Michael
   Kelly. I am going to point out someone on the ground
   who it is believed by Mrs. Kelly ....
        THE CORONER:      To be him.
        MR. KING:      Yes.
Q. Officer, do you see that newspaper, and it shows a
   photograph which we are led to believe is of the scene
   on 15th April,' 1989? (Passes newspaper to Witness) - A.
   That is correct, sir.
Q. It shows the Leppings Lane goal and it shows, I think,
   a well known goalkeeper, Bruce Grobbelaar, clearly in
   the picture, doesn't it? - A. That is correct.
Q. He is clearly still on the pitchthere.      Do you see
   somebody on his back in white? - A. That    is correct,
   sir.

Q. Is that the sort of position you found Michael Kelly
   in? - A. Looking at the photograph I would say the
   position was probably two or three more to the right of
   the gentleman lying on the ground.
Q. As you look at the picture? - A. Yes.
Q. Does the gentleman on the ground you see, I know it is
   very difficult, does it jog any memories, such as you
   can see on that photograph, as to whether it looks very
   similar to the person you were dealing with? - A. The
   chap who I found and approached on the ground had a
   blue jacket with him. If I could be certain he had the
   jacket with him I could say that was the man.
Q. When you say he had the jacket with him, do you mean he
   was wearing it or it was simply on the ground? - A. It
   was beside him on the ground.
Q. So he was not wearing a jacket. I think the photograph
   shows that gentleman has a white shirt on of some sort,
   doesn't he? Does that tie in with your recollection? -
   A. I would not possibly say that.
Q. Certainly, give or take a few feet, the sort of
   position and the sort of timing looks about right? - A.
   It is about right, sir.
        MR. KING:      I don't know whether you want to see
   that, sir?
                                               *        74
                                             J. R. MAUGHAN


       THE CORONER:   Yes, could I just glance at it? If
  it is shown to Sergeant Killoch the chances are we will
  be able to find this photograph and then if need be we
  can exhibit it.
       MR. KING:    That is helpful.   I am obliged, sir.
Q. I know it is difficult, but you say you worked on the
   man Michael Kelly for a few minutes, I think you put
   it, didn't you? - A. That is correct.
Q. You are clearly confident in your recollection that you
   appeared to have won through, if I can put it that way?
   - A. Yes, sir,-' I was.
Q. That was an expression which you used when you were
   describing it - I think you have spoken to Mrs. Kelly
   about it, haven't you? - A. Yes.
Q. And you used the expression, "We have won that one", or
   something like that? - A. That is right, I did.
Q. So it does sound as if you were quite confident in your
   own mind when you took the man over to where you put
   him into the care of the St. John's Ambulance, that he
   at that stage was still breathing? - A. I was quite
   confident he was, sir.                     ?

Q. How did you actually deliver him to the St. John's
   Ambulance? Did you lay him on the ground, did you
   actually hand him to somebody or what? - A. No, we
   carried him on a hoarding across the pitch to, as I
   have described, as you come out of the gymnasium onto
   the pitch itself, the first aid people had set a sort
   of reception area up in the corner, and we put the
   hoarding down on the floor and what they were doing,
   they were moving them off the hoardings so that we
   could have them to carry back to the other end of the
   Ground.
Q. Did you actually receive back the hoarding on which you
   had carried Michael? - A. Not the same one.
Q. Did you actually yourself see him being taken off the
   hoarding? - A. No.
Q. So the last you saw of him was when he was laid down on
   the ground in the way you have described? - A. Yes.
Q. It looks then, it is fairly obvious from your evidence
   but I will put it to you and ask you so the family can
   hear me, there is from the summary of evidence which
   they have been provided with, evidence that at 15.35
   (sir, this is paragraph 4 of the summary), at 15.35 an
                                             J. R. HAOGHAN

Officer, Police Constable Wilmot, made his way into the
Spion Kop end of the Ground, and he says apparently
that at 3.35 he saw a man who he believes to be Michael
David Kelly lying on the pitch on his back, who
appeared unconscious, and IT Is said tftaf with another
Officer, that is Police Constable Lalley, the original
Officer, Wilmot, checked for vital signs of life but
could not find any, and Mr. Kelly was placed onto a
temporary stretcher and taken into the gymnasium, and
at about just before 4 o'clock, 15.59, Dr. Byrne
certified life extinct. You have no knowledge at all,
do you, as to what happened to Mr. Kelly, what
attention he received or otherwise, from the moment you
laid him downy and you presumably went back to help at
the other end? - A. That is correct, sir.

     MR. KING:   Sir, I always regret mistakes on
sensitive matters. I have referred throughout to Mrs.
Kelly - it is his sister, and I am sorry. I hope the
family will forgive me for that:

It was Mr. Kelly's sister you had been speaking to in
the way you have described to me? It is Mrs. Sinclair,
the lady we see there who you were speaking to, wasn't
it? - A. That is right.

     MR. KING:   I am sure she will forgive me if I
have mis-described her.

     THE CORONER:   Yes, I knew about that and I
overlooked it too, I am sorry.

     MR. KING:   You have beenvery helpful, Officer,
because you can obviously see the concern of the
family.

     Sir, subject to the photograph being found I don't
think I can take that any further.

     THE CORONER:   We have not got the photograph
here. It is either in Birmingham or it may be in our
office. What I propose to do is to try and retrieve it
and make an acetate of it in the usual way.
You did not actually identify Mr. Kelly on that
photograph, did you? - A. No.

       THE CORONER:   Do we needit?   Is itgoing to   help
us?    I don't mind doing it.

       MR. KING:   Sir, I think the witness could go this
far:
                                                          76
                                                J. R. MAUGHAN


Q. I think you could say that it could be Mr. Kelly? - A.
   Yes.
Q. There is nothing in it which makes you say that it
   definitely isn't? - A. That is correct.
Q. I think you can say that subject to moving a few feet
   to the right in your recollection, it is the sort of
   area of the goal where you saw him? - A. That is where
   he was found, yes.
Q. Given that we see Bruce Grobbelaar on the pitch it is
   the sort of timing you would be expecting from your
   evidence? - A.fThat would be about right.
        MR. KING:      Sir, it may be helpful for the family.
        THE CORONER:   I am very happy to do it, it just
   may take a little while.
        I think that is the sum total of the cases where
   we needed to do urgent things, so to speak. We will
   pause for a little while and have a cup of coffee. Did
   you want to say anything to me, Mr. King?
        MR. KING:   Sir, there are one or two matters I
   would like to mention to you.
        THE CORONER:   Yes. Leave us and you will have a
   slightly longer coffee break.
               (In the absence of the Jury)
        MR. KING:   Sir, in relation to the witnesses
   Bichard and Goddard, are they in Court now?
        THE CORONER:      They may well be, so if they could
   just leave us?
       (Mr. Bichard and Mr. Goddard left the Court)
        MR. KING:   Sir, I have taken the opportunity
   during the lunch adjournment to read through as best I
   can the evidence they gave, certainly to Lord Justice
   Taylor, and certainly two matters, sir: I would invite
   you to call them but I would invite you to call them to
   give a full witness account of the events in the
   Control Room during the relevant period, that is to say
   on the day of the match.
        Sir, having read through what they have said in
   those accounts they clearly have eye witness evidence
   as to the circumstances leading up to the request for
   the closure of the gates. Their evidence is not on all
                                          J. R. MAUGHAN


fours with the evidence which we have heard at all from
Mr. Duckenfield as to what was said in the Control
Room, what was believed in the Control Room as to the
gates which were to be opened, the circumstances in
which Gate A came to be opened are dealt with, the
circumstances in which kick-off was or was not to be
delayed are dealt with and the decision to refuse the
request of P.C. Buxton to delay kick-off is dealt with,
the decision   to send serials round   to Gate A or onto
the North Stand is dealt with, and     sir, Mr. Bichard,
and I say it   so you can hear me so   I do not in any way
take anybody   by surprise, actually   gives evidence asto
what Mr. Duckenfield said in his presence as to how it
had come about that the problems had arisen on the
Leppings Lane end, and you know, sir, to what I am
referring in that respect.




   /All those are matters
                                                      73



     All those are matters which I iave to say to you,
sir, on behalf of those I reoras^nt, I would wait to
and would submit I should be entitled to investigate
if you call then. I would be failing in my duty if I
acquiesced in a ruling whisch you have indicated you
would oe minded to give, that if you did call them,
sir, you would restrict them in the way you have
described, because they are giving factual evidence on
matters which the Jury have to determine and, indeed,
leal with quite vital matters relating to the
behaviour df Hr. Duckenfield.

     In those circumstances, sir, I in fact have two
applications. One is to invite you to call them, in
your discretion, and to invite you, sir, to take this
stance, that if you do call then you should allow
questioning on all the matters to which I have
referred.

     Sir, if your ruling is that in your discretion
you will call then but restrict them to only the
matters you have referred to, in my submission thit
would be the worst of both worlds and, in fact, one
would be giving a false picture to the Jury rather
than no picture at all, and a false picture and a
misleading picture can be worse than no picture.
     THE CORONER: Tnat, of course, is the last thing I
want to do.

     HR. KING: Of course, sir. But my strong
submission to you is notwithstanding the time problem
we have, these are witnesses of substance on the vital
events which this Jury are particularly concerned
with, which are the events leading to and then
immediately following the decision to open the gates
at the Leppings Lane end, and it is hard to see a
rationale for having included so many other witnesses
who do not go to such vital events in the overall
picture and not to call these witnesses.
     If it be, sir, a matter of convenience because of
time, and I am not so insensitive as not to appreciate
that problem, all I can say on behalf of those I
represent is - this is not meant facetiously at all,
sir - 'rather like the argument that kick-off should
not be delayed merely because of a reason, if, in
fact, they are witnesses of substance then they ought
to be called as full witnesses, even if we have to
recognise, and I am sure I play a role in the blame
for this as much as anybody else, that our time­
tabling ha3 gone awry in this Inquest. I say that
without meaning any disrespect to you, sir, at all
because I mean what I say about my role at all tines.
     THE COROHZR: Did you want to .say something, Hr.
Payne?
     HR. PAYNE: Sir, a lot of n i t Hr. King his said,
I think I would agree with, that once the witness has
bean called then he is at large, and it is difficult
really to see any legitimat- basis on vhich
examination can he restricted, but I think our
position would be _o invite you to adhere to the
original approach tnat you intended to follow, namely/
tnat on balance, having heard the evidence of the     j
principal occupants of the Control Box, you will      |
probably not need to recall the other people.         |)
      I am only going to adi this because I did not
mention it before the adjournment, but I am slightly
concerned about the sequence of witnesses. Hr. ICin^
has very fairly indicated the lines of cross-
examination which he would intend to open up with
these witnesses and, of course, one cannot pre-jud^e
what they would say or how it would come out, but one
cannot help feeling that these could be points which,
in fairness, ought to have been put, or at least they
ought to have had the 0 DD0 rtunity to deal with it when
the other occuoants, Messrs. Duckenfield and Hurray,
were giving their evidence.     It would be very
unfortunate if the Inquest got into the stage of
leaving matters in the air which could perhaps be
dealt with by those other witnesses who might then
have to be recalled. This is a ghastly prospect which
certainly I think we would wish to avoid, but in tne
interests of fairness one can see that if particular
points were to be made, or evidence were to be given,
tnen this is the kind of thing which Messrs.
Duckenfield and Liurray ought to have a chance to deal
with.
     THE COROHER: I think that that goes without
saying, but if matters were to be raised where Mr.
Isaacs and Mr. Hanning were to say to me, "Hang on, we
want Hr. Duckenfield and Mr. Murray to have an
opportunity to answer", I would certainly not raise
any objection if I were to call these witnesses. I
think that point goes without S3ying, whatever the
effect on timing, I am not really interested.    It
does not matter to me. I want to finish this month if
I can, but if we do not, we do not, we adjourn it to a
convenient time.
     MR. PAYNE: I think we would be at one with Mr.
Xing on this, that one recognises that time pressures
do not really have any input into this decision at
all, it has to be taken on its merits. That is why I
think our oosition would be that we would invite you
                                                         30



to adhere to theoriginal approach that you had,
namely that having heard the evidence of the principal
people, and their evidence having bean thoroughly 3nd
lengthily gone into by all interested parties, it
would not be necessary to ta':ce the matter further.

     TMZ COROiCE” : 'Je are ,ioin^ to have a coffe-a brea’c
in a minute.   Yes, I'.r. Bussell?

      ’I*v. R'JSSZLL:  Sir, I have not risen to say
anythin® in this particular debate.      I am almost
exclusively on the sidelines in resnect of these
vitnessas who are to be called, save for one very
minor matter.      But perhaps I could coae to your
is.Tistance to this extent.     ”e anpear here with your
laave, w* as!c questions of witnesses with your leave.
They are your witnesses and you call them for the
purposes tnat you sea fit for the purposes of these
Ini jests.

      You indicated at one stage that it was your
purpose to call the Officer who was responsible for
operating the video camera, or the console of video
cameras, to be in a position to explain to the Jury
tne technical capabilities of those cameras.   That, it
seeas to me, is a wholly different area of evidence
from tne factual recollection of those Officers,
•aitner the person operating the camera or the person
operating      radio on that day.  Inasmuch as with
so.ne of the witnesses we have had today you have said,
"Thase witnesses are going to deal with a very limited
aran of evidence and nothing else", and we have
riiarsd to that, I do not see why there is a problem
in you dealing with these witnesses, these two Police
Officers, in that same restricted manner.

      Certainly Inspector Jlemmingway, as you will
np.iraciate, could have dealt with all sorts of matters
relating to the conduct offthe afternoon in question,
not least the rescue and the role of my client in it.
I did not see!< to as!c him those questions because I
unlerstood the very limited ambit and the very limited
purposes for which you wanted those witnesses called.

     But, sir, if you see'.c to elicit matters of fact
and matters of recollection of these witnesses as to
what they saw on the day, then of course I can
understand the position that my learned friend Mr.
&ing is in and, no doubt, my learned friend Mr.
Isaacs, and Hr. Manning as well, as to what evidence
they might wish to elicit once you go down that road.
But it does appear that there i3 a very clear and
obvious cut-off point in their evidence whereby you
can limit the evidence of these witnesses to the
                                                          31



  technical capabilities of the paraphernalia that they
  nad at their disposal, that they vere operating, and
  limit it to that.    Once you open up the factual
  account of tns day in question, then you have embarked
 down the road, and certainly within the areas that vou
 have explored so far in these Inquests it would :>e *
 very difficult to stop either :ny learned friend Mr.
 :;in.5, °~.:n7 laarned friend Mr. Isaacs, or Mr. Manning,
  £ron asking questions about those subjects as well.

        JR. CAICIIPOLE: If it is of any assistance, it
does appear that all the legal representatives are of
Cr~-,3 3 ''1^.iTlind, at least in relation to the second limb
of Mr. king’s application before you.         I make no
com.ne.nt as to whether you ought to call these
witnesses or not, it is a matter for you, sir.          But I
Jo believe, as my learned friend Mr. Hussell has said,
tnat if you e.nbark on any attempt to elicit factual
evidence, it would be inappropriate to prevent any of
iy learned friends from exploring those matters and
putting it into its proper context.

       THE COROITER: I accept that point. If we 30 into
 t.ne facts, then it is only right that they should be
 explored, but it is the extent and the method of
exploration which I an concerned about.    I have no
objection if, for instance, I were to ask the Officers
to recount in examination-in-chief what their
recollection is with regard to the events, to that
point being examined but purely factually.    What I am
not going to have is what we have done in the past and
wnici we did at great length with Hr. Murray and Hr.
Duckanfield and which, in fact, I knew we ware doing
an; I thought in the circunsta.nces was right, but I^an
quite entitled to say, "You have asked enougn
questions on this, next subject", a 3 I do quite often
vitn Mrs. HcBrien, and that is all I am saying, and
tnat is    the way I am    going to doit. So I    am going
call Mr. Goddard and when I have heard him I will
projably call Hr. Bichard and we will obviously be
sitting tomorrow and if need be we will sit on Monday
if we have not finished, and that is it.

     MR. CATCIiPOLE: You mooted the possibility that
tomorrow night be put into a full day.

     T*iE COROITER: Yes, we will sit t as a full day.

     MR.   CATCUPOLE:   That is very   helpful, thank you.

     THb CQ-IOmER: The way I put the order was not 3 n
accident, that was after some considerable thought.    I
could have got it wrong.    Be that as it nay, certainly
i*        6:13 of the evidence it would aopear that it
is eight to ask 'Ir. Du elsa iffield and Mr. Murray to coae
back to daal with any outstanding points, I will do
so.

      ’IR. PAY1TE: Kill you tallow :na to 30 last if this
happens'? These are Police Officers.

     THE COROl-rSR: Yes. Sd we will have a quick break.
I an afraid you will have to be back in Court as fast
as you can.

                (Short Ad journTient)
 *

PETER TOOTLE



1.   Peter Tootle, the son of the Applicants Peter and Joan
     Tootle,     attended    the   match    with     a    friend,     Colin
     Frodsham.     They were both in enclosure 3.


2.   At the mini     inquest Dr. David Slater            put forward his
     view that the     cause of death was          traumatic asphyxia.
     The rest of the     evidence was given by Police Sergeant
     John Killock     and Detective        Inspector Michael        Layton
     which,    when taken    together,      produced the       following
     chronological account.        Colin Frodsham         was separated
     from Mr. Tootle jghen-the crowd in the_enclosure surged
     forward, after    which he      fell unconscious.          When    he
     came round he     saw Mr. Tootle lying on the            ground.    A
     police officer     then attempted to resuscitate               him for
     about 10 - 20 seconds
     3.40 p.m.     Police Constable        Friend saw Mr.      Tootle at
     the end     of the ground     opposite to the         Leppings Lane
     end where he examined him and then with P.C. Griffith,
     carried him into the temporary mortuary.              At 3.54 p.m.
     Peter Tootle was       certified dead by Dr.          Matthew Bull,
     who   certified dead      a   total     of thirty      Hillsborough
     victims in a period of twenty minutes.


3.   At the main inquest no evidence whatsoever was adduced
     which related to Peter Tootle.           His name was mentioned




ANNAAD
 *                                  - 2 -




     only when the verdicts were returned.                  Yet the purpose
     of the main        inquest was to deal with            the question of
     how Mr. Tootle met his death.


4.   The complaint of the          Applicants therefore extends far
     beyond one levelled at          the decision of the coroner to
     disallow      evidence relating        to   events that          occurred
     after 3.15 p.m.          More fundamentally it concerns their
     belief that there has been no inquest at all, into the
     most important          question concerning their            sons death,
     namely how he came to die.


5.   This is so        not merely because no      evidence concerning
     this     issue was       heard at    the main        inquest but       also
     because the issue          of lack of care was not           put to the
     jury     as   a    possible     inference       to    draw      from   the
     evidence.         The   Applicants     submit        that the     minimum
     requirements for a fair and proper hearing at the main
     inquest required         the following      to be put        before the
     jury:    a    summary of the evidence that              had been heard
     at     the mini     inquest and      the evidence        of Dr.     Glynn
     Phillips, Dr. John         Ashton and Mr. F.           Eccleston.      The
     jury should        then have    been informed          that a     finding
     that death was aggravated by            lack of care was open to
     them.




ANNAAD
     INQ UE ST S INTO THE D E A TH S OF THE

V I C T I M S OF THE H I L L S B O R O U G H .F O O T B A L L

                 S TAD IU M DI SASTER

            ON THE 15TH APRIL,              1989




             PETER FRANCIS TOOTLE




               2nd May 19S0



             T RA NS C RI PT OF P R O C E E D I N G S
I


    #                           AP P EAR ANCES :



                                     H i l l sb or o ug h S o l i c i t o r s ’ Group
MR . D     ?r’
             uA—1 ri
                                     Steering C o m m i t t e e

                                     Medical and Den ta l U ni on or
MR.     S. SMITH
                                     Scotland ( R e p r e se n ti n g Dr. A.
                                     Forrest)

                                      Trent Regi on al H e a l t h Author it y =nd
MR.       C AL L A G H A N
                                      South Y o r k s h i r e M et r op o l i t a n
                                      Ambulance S e r v i c e

                                      Snef f ield            C o u n ci l
MR.       GR EG OR Y

MISS        THORPE                    fc.aszwood &■ P a rtn er s

                                      PollCS « 6 Q S r £ wluH       j       insiand and
MIS S A . A D D L E M A N


MR          j.bAA-'-i                 Chief buper inter.dent D. Duckenfield

                                      Chief C o n s t a b l e . South        ior:<sm*-s
            NORCLI;
Mt          METCALF                   C on st a ou is r /

            CAT CH PO L E anc         Sheffield W e a n e s c a y ?oot^ci-
 MR.       JA CK SO N *
              X




                                                         INDEX


              DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER - Called

         Jg       By TH E C O R O NE R


              POLICE SERGEANT JOHN KILLQCK - Call ed

                  Bv TH E C O R O N E R ...............        ...........
                  C r o s s - e x a m i n e d by MR. LIMB --


              DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called

                  Bv T H E C O R O N E R




         D

                                                      — OO     oo-




          F




          G




          H

Harpham Ltd
         A
                 ?nd Ma v   I990
                            t MDCIr.fiT   INTO T H E DEATH OF PETER F R A N C I S T O O T L n

                           MR. FRASER:        Sir, the first e v i n c e you
                    today r e l a te s to P e te r Francis Tootle. • - “?*£_ ?-*■ *n a
                    in Court with m e m b e rs of his family and i                          “   a- a
                    oe rsona 1 c a oa ci ty for the family but ^ a U o ,        j. <-Z h e ’usual
                    m em be r of the Hillsb or ou gh Stee ri ng c o m m i t t e e .»
                    wav •
         B
                             THE CORONER:     G ood morning, Mr. and Mrs. loot e             .
                    o ve ry bo dv else.    Which is mum and dad?       Yes.      Bef°^e
                    the e v id en c e I am just going to d es cri be to you the
                    p roc ed ur e so^that y o u can follow and J ° a^ ^ rY ° ^ r ‘Vyou ro
                    comes next        so to speak, D e c a u s e    &
                    follow if I do that, I think.              What we ara go in g to_do in
                    the first instance is I          am going to r ead -.o you w
                    hapoened on 19th April          1989 which is when I was " ^ 2 c o u l d
                    Court and I dealt w it h        the initial e v i d e n c e &°
                    allow the b ody to c om e       home for the funeral ana «hen I have
                    done that, if there are any e rr or s in t h a t , w e will           Jnd
                    correct them.        I don't think there are in ,ni s particula
                    case and th en I will tell you about th e olooa
                    When I have c o m pl et e d that, Dr. Slater, who issi tt i n        up
          D         there and who is a Pathologist, will give n o eviu. .
                    r e g a rd in g the pathological investigation-

                           On co mp le t io n of that the West M i d l a n d s P o l i ce O f f i c e r
                     who has p r ep ar ed a summary for me will p re sent            ne ^umm
                     and when he has c omp le te d it, Inspector L a y t o n will
                     with the visual evidence.        We start o ve r chere, in^..
                     Layton r e co un t s it verbally and tells me all a D O u t it.                e
                                            references,  the plan  n u m b e r s  and   one   thing
                     gives us all the
                     and a no th er so the shorthand writ er can set it all down so
                     that we all know what we a r e tal ki ng about.             It is a l ^ t l e
                     confus in g at that point but then he walks r ou nd here an                    o
                     his bie o l an s he will show us what he has been t al k in g
                     about.    So it does become cl ea r as you will find out in a
                     moment.     W hen that is finished that is all the .evidence we
                     are dealing with at that stage.         Is that r e a s o n a o 1y c ear so
                     that you know what the format is going to o e . u                   will make
                     sense as we are goi ng along, p a rt i c u l a r l y it you h av e this
                      in the back of y our minds.       If you forget it, it aoesn t
                     matter.
                            This t hen is the resumed Inquest which was o p e n e d _on
                     19th April 1989 and on that o ccasion Neil A n t h o ny Parkin, my
                     Act in g C o r on e r' s Officer, said:

                             "The body which is the subject of th is Inquest has beer,
                             id en tified to PC 192? Friend of the S ou th Y or ks hi re
                             Poli ce as that of Peter F ra ncis T o ot l e by Paul Raymond
                             Frodsham    his friend.  He was 21 years of age having



             H

Harpham Ltd
      bean b o m on 2nd F s b r a a r y 1 « a         «     LWe^ool          .
      single man an d »v . d an 3b                                      H. died
      Liverpool.           Ha was a                   1o» ing an incident
      at H i l l s D o r o u g h t-oo,ball oio n ,            F r ia n d caused
      there on Saturday, 15th ^ P 1-’-                    L'psal Centre and
      the b ody to b a .r e m o v e d „             ^ C o o f S i m o n
      there he identified it to^ "                      r h e s a m e  body to
      W e i g ol d who s “b s ?'3U ® ^ 1J ^ ® l
                                              y ^ iSh that the body should
      Dr- Slater.             It is the family
      be bur ie d ."

       I then wrote to you,           I do not icnow^i ^              u f™       ^        ,
Mr. Tootle,                             ii° informat ion was correct ana
:“ r L Y:“ ii r ^ ; ^ n a“

       Or. Forrest di d the blood ^ o ^ h ^ r s ^ d ! ^ ^ ^
Peter and he gave us the eviaenct <                -          r esult in the
resumed, in fact, a r o r t m g h t         a n'-W i shou ld mention that
case of Pe ter was negative-        P e l h *P- *         al ready taken the
e ver y bo dy who is giving e vidence today ha. air.              /
Oath so that has al ready been done.

                 ■ np.   HAVTD NEIL SLATF.R - C a l l e d

                               By THF CORONER:
                                                                                     Ny
Dr. Slater, if you w o u l d start in '                                      ^
name is Dr. David Neil S l a t e i - I ~n Roval                      college O:
                                                                             of
H ist o p a th o lo g ist and a Fellow or the Royal                  Coil a
Pathology, sir-

Now this y ou ng man we are t a ^ i n g ^  “^ ^ " m i d d l ^ n a m e                      at
as Peter Tootle b ec a us e you aid n o ^.*\       numb er 39, is
that time, you also knew by icenti^i
that right? -* A. That is correct, sir-

 Alt ho ug h we have said Simon We ig ol a d ia ^th e
 in fact, one of the I n s p e c t o r s w i o w ^ s                             ^   ^    wa£_
 p e r c e i v e d it w a s him who w a s i d e n t i t i e      y
 the i n i t i a l i d e n t i f y i n g O f f i c e r , y e s -

 vou are q uite - P P Y             ^            ^         ™     ^      ^            ^
 to this you ng man Peter T o o t l e -

 Dr. Slater, perhaps you would be kind ®n °                       c     a    u    s   e
 what your findings were -                                             *hat the
 of death? - A. My ex amination o* P et e r                                w£re
 general findings were those                                       e x t e nd i ng to the
 i n d i c a t e d b y ^ t e n s i v e o l u e n e ^ o r -the^ accom?anied by
 u p p e r p a r t ot t h e c h e s t . -                 face   called      petechial
 n umerous small haemorrhages^on                the       tace   c a i ^     P  en_
 haemorrhages.  S imilar ha emurr g &                                h^a^t and also the
 internally including in the brain, lungs,                           h-a-t a
         VO LC5         OCX.
                                  m\,
                                 1 : »’= U
                                                        ; ’r-»f (*■ ; t-\ ■?
                                                  ^ i. wU‘. L*wU J i
                                                                               f h 15
                                                                               ».
                                                                                        D LLit= P.<r lS>3w.3.3
                                                                                            Wi.---
                                                                                                                 SLiCn
                                                                                                                     ^
                                                                                                                            •-*w

         indicate -.rautnac ic compression, of tne cr.est =.nt. <-ip~'=i.
         of nh.s rummy -and -his was s u p p o r t e d by a rs 4 Sonab 1 v*^i*r g*
         scratch to the right lower side of tr.s cr.est anc »l«o ■-wo
          1 3,27 £ <2   3C   3. Z <Z ‘SS   COo ~ ft 0   D3.C c£ -


                   My e x a m i n at i on of Peter s ho we d that he was r . o m u /
         d<5V (5 1 op’=c , fit and nealtny, w i n wo <~v ^■—*      — p.o>. ■—.-y *-^-
         disea.se which could have c o n t r i b u t e d towards oeat :i.           i“ is
B        my o p i n i o n that Peter would have ha d a normal ii:e
         e x p e c t a n c y and I submitted my cause of death, sir, a^
         trau ma ti c asphyxia.

    Q.    I know the Jury have heard this but, or course, tne * »*n * . v
          haven 't . Can you just gs a 1 » n n w h a       /<—■ur v *. -» -» .
          resard to loss of conscio usn es s and the pain anc su::ar:^»
          which pecoie suff er because o b v i o u s i y the ramiiy natural.?•  /
          are w o r r i e d about that I would imagine? - A. This n a t u r e /
          death, sir, unconsciousness occu rs very rapiciy, normaliy
          wit hi n three to five seconds, and af t er that tnere :a no
          awareness of any pain or discomfort anc ceatn supervenes
          af Tier anoti'isr thr&e "to five m i n u t e s .

    q   . in other words, we have had v a r i a t i o n s on the ioss or
_         c o ns c i o u s n e s s of what you say up to r : r -       ~.»enur
^         seconds.           Anyway, it is a very short period or time
           w hic h ev e r way you iooi -c at it.? ~ A. - *aa r a s e .    a
           last night, sir, which was quite interesting-                -t cescric-
           a case where somebody had a ct ual ly r ec ov er ed aiter it ou_
           u nc on s ci o us ne s s occurred v irt ua ll y instantaneously-

    Q . Re ally? - A - Yes,                   tnat was tne : i n c ’
                                                                   . n 2 , — ±■                          vas -

    Q.    I am oleased to hear that b ecause alt ho ugh it coe^n                                                            Ci.-..£
          the people oacSc it does uia.<e it mors     -r                                                                 ^.i—
          thought, doesn't it? - A. Yes.

                    THE CORONER:                  Thank you for m en t io ni ng t h a t .
          Mr.      Fraser.

               MR. FRASER:   The family have no questions, sir, out -
          have taken the liberty of aski ng Mrs- Tootle whetner^she
          would like to spend a few m in u te s with Dr. Slater anc i: ne
          would be so kind I am sure she w ou ld be most graterui.

    Q.            THE CORONER:     Dr. Slater,                                 you do not have any
          ob je c ti on ? - A. No.

    Q.    You are here                  in other cases? - A-                       ies.

    Q.    All today, in fact.     I will ex pl ai n to Mrs. Tootie our
          normal proc ed ur e but that will oe z m e . - A.




H
                                                           v\ 71
                               POLICE      S E R G E A N T JOHN K I L L O C K - Ca llejj

                                                 3v   THE C O P O N E R :

                                                                             t he VIest Midi ana s
          Q-   Yes- - A- P o l i c e S e rg e a n t J o h n K i l l o c k of
               Pol i c e , sir.  I h a v e p r e v i o u s l y t a k e n the Oath-

               W o u l d y o u please, w h e n yo u a r e r e a a y , t ak e me t h r o u g         *-
          Q
               s u m m a r y ? - A - At 0 9 0 0 h o u r s o n S a t ur d ay , 15th A pr ii^l/S9,
      B        Mr. P e t e r F r a n c i s T o o t l e s e n i o r w ok e h i s son, a lso ^namea
               P e t e r F r a n c i s T oo tle , who wa s t o . a t t e n d to the a n e t z i e x Q
               f oo tb al l m a t c h to be p l a y e d at H i l l s b o r o u g h .

                         P e t e r left L i v e r p o o l at 1030 h o u r s a n d t r a v e l l e d to
               S h e f f i e l d w i t h h i s uncle, S t e p h e n T oo tle, a n d a ...Lena,
               Col in F r o d s h a m .      T h e y t r a v e l l e d in S t e p h e n T o o t l e ' s ca r
               a r r i v i n g in S h e f f i e l d at 1230 hours-              A f t e r p a r k i n g the
               v e h i c l e t h e y m ade t h e i r w a y to the g r p u n d a n d t=too<a on t v_
               L e p p i n g s L a n e b r i d g e from 1300 h o u r s un t il 1440 hours.                   At
               t h i s poi nt S t e p h e n T o o t l e left to take h i s seat in the
               st -anas.
                         At 1445 hours, C o l i n F r o d s h a m a nd P e t e r j o i n e a ^ t h e c r o w a
               at the t u r n s t i l e s .          G at e C w a s o p e n e d an d b ot h Nr. F r o a s h a m
               and P e t e r e n t e r e d t h e s t a d i u m vi a that gate.                    T h e y went
      D        a l o n g the tunn el into E n c l o s u r e No. 3-                    W ith the p r e s s u r e ^ o r
               t h e c r o w d f ro m b e h i n d they e n a e a up a p p r o x i m a t e l y eLg.it te-w
               f r o m th e p e r i m e t e r fence.          Mr. F r o d s h a m b e c a m e u n c o n s c i o u s
               for* a s ho r t time.               W h e n he r e g a i n c o n s c i o u s n e s s he r ou nd
               h i m s e l f f u r t h e r u p t h e terrace.            He c o u l d see P e t e r ly in g on
               his b ac k ab o ut f iv e y a r d s aw ay from him- ^ T h e r e ^ w a s a . o . ^ c e
               Offi’c s r        who h a s not u n f o r t u n a t e l y b e e n i dent i j.ls g , ~no w&s
               a t t e m p t i n g to r e s u s c i t a t e Peter,        T he O f f i c e r ' s a t t e m p t s
               w ere u n s u c c e s s f u l a n d he left P e t e r to a t t e n d to O u i e r                    ^
               casualties.             Mr. F r o d s h a m was a s s i s t e d f rom the t e r r a c e anu
               s u b s e q u e n t l y a t t e n d e d h ospital.

                         S h o r t l y a f t e r 1505 h ou rs f o l l o w i n g t h e s e v e r e c r u s n i n g
               in the West S t a n d t e r r a c i n g P o l i c e C o n s t a b l e F r i e n d              on
               to the p i t c h and a s s i s t e d with s eve ra l c o & u a U i e s ^             Av- so me
               t i m e b e t w e e n 1520 a n d 1540 h o u r s he saw a m a n he k n o w s to oe
               P e t e r lyi ng on the p i t c h to th e c o r n e r of th e North S t a n a
               a n d t he S p i o n Kop.          He e x a m i n e d P e t e r and then, w it h the
               a s s i s t a n c e of a n o t h e r Officer, PC G r i f f i t h s , he c a r r i e a ^
               P e t e r into t h e g y m n a s i u m w h er e a t e m p o r a r y m o r t u a r y naa o e e n
               set up-

                      At 1554 h o u r s Dr. M a t t h e w J am e s Bull e x a m i n e d Pete:                  in
                the t e m p o r a r y m o r t u a r y and c e r t i f i e d life extinct.

                        At 2 2 3 0 h o u r s Mr. Paul R a y m o n d F r o d s h a m i d e n t i f i e d h i s
                f ri en d P e t e r to P o l i c e C o n s t a b l e F r i e n d in the t e m p o r a r y
                mort u a r y .



      H


ham Ltd
                                                                                                                                  P.S.          JOHN   KILLOCK




                 Q.        Y e s , it is only a trivial                                        ?o int b.ut                     sa ia   1
                          .-ip   — *-1 ,2 .   »
                                              r \ r •i d £ ‘2   a u u   /-*tr\
                                                                        G    l   -ji
                                                                                 Zj        uTt "n
                                                                                               i - - - t-* •^V* 2-   lo o. 1       :       ^^            _
         A                missed anot her^ r ef a rs ac *?                                     - A. Are you referr in g to n u .
                          :sta".ement a sir?

                 q   . I am sorry, I am r e f er r in g to p aragraph two ana ?=ge
                       of his statement.    I arn sorry, I beg your ^a.a.n.      ..us
                       Colin Frodsharn's statement-

          B                    Police C o n s t a b l e Friend later e s co rte d ^t-eter^o ^.he
                          Medico Legal Cen tr e and c on fi rm ed the 1 cent 1 £ ic ac Aon
                          Detect ive c on s t a b l e kj«igoId-

                                  At 0810 ho ur s on Sunday, 16th April ^ W 3 9
                           "-anc is Toot le s e n i o r attended at the Mecico Legal o.                                                                      -
                           where he c o n f i r m e d that identification to Detective
                           Lonstci'o 1 '2 hi n»el I«..
          C
                                    Later that day, following ex am in at i on by Detective
                           Constable Weigoid, Dr. David Slater e a r n - o u t an =uc^ps.
                           and submitted a report giving the cause or a e a . h .
                           been established that Pater entered via ua.e i an^=u<-.                  =*
                           no t-'eket was found in his personal err sets Mr. r.-oos.i®.
                           d o e s ’co nfirm that Peter was in p o ss es si on or a_cicice.
                           tnev entered the ground-       That c on cl ud es ii>/ b\< iuv-iics( =>-
          D                There is visual evidence.

                 Q.         Can you just b ear     with me      for a moment? This is only a
                           trivial point but we said 1*40 that they st.yeu -,. ^        ^
                           bT"'d-e and I think on oag^= tnr^e ne
                           rs-szrr'ins to clis stscsmsnt t =*1 x*.

                     0   . Sorrv   I am r e f e rr i ng to paragraph two, page three or^ i s ^
           E               statement.   This is Colin F r o d s h a m 1s statement-        ies».       wo..
                                                                r — 2s o n - a g e r o u r a u ^ u a i   *
                           see where vou get 2-40 from-
                                from the s t a t e m e n t .

                     Q.     It is halfway down the page actual ly •                                                             i•
                                                                                                                                 . ■
                                                                                                                                   He d o e s , in
                            fact, give two times.
                                                     — - i:   T’u-i — w jz. r~ — h ^n £ irom
                                                              ’                                    whs
             F       Q. That is not s ur p ri s in g   «. * .       D"‘        _ *_              _,
                        visual evidence we icnow - tnis as -iJ ?«- c-= “®                 ^     c t-
                        mention 1520-    You say some time between lo'^O and                 ■-.**
                        hours. _ A. That is right, sir-

                     Q.     He is identified at 1520 in that area-         Iwhere do « ge^«-ye
                            1540 from, can you remember? - A. The two times,                  1
                            a mixture of two times.         One is a video sour ce crv-^'-iie
             G              is from one of the statements.         1540 hours, pages .o ana
                            of vour a o c u m e n t t six'-

                             T'-,ank you verv much. I t was j u s t that * -_ouxdn <- - *e c ^
                             that- * One other point I think you said Fr ancis uritrit.is
                             with an ‘s ’ but I think it is without an ' s ' . - ---•
                             aooiosies, sir, it is Grifrith.

             H

Haronam Itfl
                                                                                  1    a   5           >
                                                                                                              ? -5 ■ J O H N    killqc        .^




                                  THE CORONER:            Hr. Fraser,        a n yt h in g e.se:

                                  KR.    "p A S E R :    P e t e r ’s family have no questions,                                     thank
                        y O U *




                                                   Cross - Exam i nea o v           ~—          11,
                                                                                                  :—

                        -= it •cnLw., by w h i c h o p e n i n g of Gate C Hr.                                  F r o d s h a m and
              b    "           ;„«r.df - a . could                   »*v. *                                             *«. -••—
                        Mr- F r o d s h a m 's statement, sir?

                              THE CORONER:   Certainly-                        Page 5, t m r c p a ^ * 3 - aph ->y
                        r his time it was about 2 . 5 0 ” .                  Then he goes on t ai k. na aoouv.
                        •che Gate-
                                  MR.     LIMB:         The greater        1xice 1 inooc , ^^r,                     1■
                                                                                                                     =>     -l*ac    -t -^>
                        the 2.52.

                                  THE CORONER:             Sorry?

                              MR. LIMB:                  -     *V| ^ \i=^ t*.h t — n t r*v ^ a ^
                                           The greater 'ikeiihooc                                                                              ^y
                         the 2-52 entrance-

                              t h e CORONER: You must b ea r                        in mine wnen peopxS =
              D          time vou have to treat it with a                       c   e   r  amount^
                                                                                            t   a   i   n


                              hi « y , . _ » Sy                                                                                               th.
                         /nyseir were in ouou<- «./>» .=>cirn- r     ^ ^                                            e   10’nt -          He
                         crowd"-    So he obviously had not got in «•-                                                  ^  ^^
                                                •        ,    u»., < .^1 crTl • T                                 7 n<Sii    aciV    ^ iT0 v D U -
                         couldn't have got in at i.43 ^u<- .i- ^o«»n
                         it was the 2-52 or the 2.oV open.iig-

                              THE WITNESS:     He does say further on,                                            si- , -ho-. .ic
                         recalls be in g ushered through the gate-
                                               __   rr “ — •"1  *               ,3 C        2,V ~l   _lX*^1*5 X* on       S
                   Q.          THE
                               T     CORONER:
                                rie. L O K U 1NSK : Paraon? - .....
                                                    re-uwu.            a* --               , T ' * A t C u u i_- _        -he
                   ^                                 - .  _ ._ *. t-.—  ---------- r-. -n ~                      - TT»i=»
                         recalls
                         -ecal is being
                                    being us hered through the gate ana tno.
                         second opening.

                   Q. Where
                      where is tha t?
                               tr.atr         remind me? - A- r_u r *__n ~r _
                                      Can you ^                               ~  h~
                      paragraph we have just quoted, about naiiw*> -own ,ne      ^
                      statement, sir, "Everybody was b ei ng us herec tnrougn...
                                                                                                            2-52 ent r y , v o u 1 d n ‘r
                   Q.     “A large gate" which would co nf i rm tn<
                          it? - A. Yes.

                                   MR-     LIMB:        Thank you-

                                   THE CORONER:             Is that s a t i s fa c to ry ?                        is ti;a_ ^lea.
                          Mr - Li mb?

                                   MR.     LIMB:        Yes,   thank you,           sir.




               H


H a ro iia m Ltd
                                 THE CO fiONER :             Mir* Can ciipo l’i ■
                  A
                                 MS.- CATCHPOLE:               Ho thank you,        sir.

                                   D E T EC TI V E     INSPECTOR M I C H A EL LAYTON       - Called:

                                                              Bv THE C O R O N E R :

                      Q                 A.       M ichae1     -ton, D ete ct iv e Inspector,
                  B       M i d l a n d s Police.    Sir, a.n e x a m i n a t i o n has been mace ot viceo
                          film and p ho to gr aph ic e v id e nc e and Peter has oeen identified
                          in E n c l o s u r e No* 3-

                                    B rian Peter Tootle, P et er 's uncle, who in fact is m
                          Court, today has viewed visual evid en ce and has identitiaa
                          his nephew alive in E nclosure No- 5 .on a phonograph
                          r e f e r e n c e d F r T/IOA-  That p h o t og r ap h is t i m e d at 1503^and my
                          p e r c e p t i o n of the p h o t o g r a p h , sir, is that Peter is ai. that
                          time still alive although it is not possible to say at what
                          s tag e ox the rneaicai process ne has reached ■

                                 PC Friend has viewe d’ visual evidence but was unable to
                          identify himself actually d e a l in g with P ete r on the pitch
                          but the O ff i ce r has signed a plan of the pitch area
              D           ind ic at in g the approximate location in which he found Peter-
                          That plan is referen ce d JEF 1 *

                          Befo re you move on to the plans, I have already referred to
                          his comment.        He identified h im s el f I think on MAP 7 at 1320
                          page 22.        Can you just double check that?       He has identified
                          h i m s el f in other places but the one he has menti on ed is
                          that? - A. That is r i g h t , sir.      He refers to MAP 7 timed at
                          15 2 Li: 13 i 13*  He says, "I can say t n at I w a £? w o r r.in g in vn e
                          area to the left or the Gate in the pen it s e 1r !‘-                  can I
                          refer you to two plans?

                          Let me get this right.    He goes on to say he hasn't actual
                          id en tified himself on that film? - A. That is right, sir.

                          At that time had chosen a location where he remembers he w<
                          w or d in g ? - A- That is exactly righ sir, yes:

                      Q   Yes, be ca us e I had misread that slightly.  Thank you.                        -
                      A   If I can refer you to a plan .'I'JJLoo, the plan of the
                          c.03rr'etC8s   •   -   •




                      Q   That will              be C196.   - A- And the plan by PC Friend,            sir,
                          JEF 1 - . .

                          Th<  will be Cl 97. - A- Which is the oian of the pitch
                          (moved to p l a n ) if we can re fe r to MWJL63 first of all the
                          plan of the terraces and the ph ot og ra ph we have referred to
                          the timed photograph at 1503, this is Enclosure No-         300
                          the point at which we believe Peter is s ho wn is

              H


Harpham l:d
                                                                \*n
                                                           D. I . M I C H A E L   LAYTON




. p p r . x l ~ i . i y « h l . locat ion ».r. < i n d i S * i ^ , > n ‘^         e£ £ t on
No     3.     T hi s here (indicating.; is               -> =o .n                  P
here-
      In r . * p.ct o f the plan of the pitch by PC Fri.end.^JEF1.
the p o s i t i o n he has i n d i c a t e d i » h ere -d  f che
at the Spion Kop e n d of the pitch, the opposite.
pitch.
In fact, it is right a lot o f _peo pl e w ere taken to that part
of the g ro u nd ? - A- That is right , si , Y

That    is w he r e    it r e f e r s to t his rfAP 7,      15^0?        A-
is right -
        THE CORONER:             Mr- Fraser,     any q u e s t i o n s on '-ha*..

        HR.    FRASER:        No, thank you,        sir-

         MR.   LIKE:       No,    thank you, sir-

         MR-   CATCHPOLE:          No, thank you,        sir-

      THE CORONER:        Hr- and Mrs- Tootle, this, is T h ^ J u - y
 where w e h a v e n s got very _- = h v i 3 u a 1 evi d e n c e .. Th. J u * : /

 ranird.'Tu?           rr.i\r^
 because first we are dealing with t his p art ic u
                                                                        rr  ar     q        ^
 t he r e is a great variation in the amount o* v
 and I think one can only say it is a m at te r °                                      or
 w h e t he r a c a m e r a was pointing in the *                                   scanes
 wh et he r it has Deen possible oecause tnere
 where we just can't make out who was who.

         I do want to draw your at te n ti on to s o m e t h i n g which
 Hr. F r o d s h a m s a y s and which was r e c o u n t e d in         le *      ,s
 He says w h e n he saw Peter in the t er ra ce he cou o =ee .here
 „ L s o m e b o d y t r y i n g to give r e s u s c i t a t i o n an d         *
 successful.         That was Mr- F ro dsham's a s s e ^ m e n . or tl
 situat ion but it might help you a little bit                                    of
 alr ho ug h the only visual evidence is s o r t o                      ^
 the pitch, the verbal or oral evidence whic                            & ually
 su mm a ri se d for you indicates that people were ^ t u a U y
 a t te mp ti ng to do something ac tu al ly very much n ea re r .he
 scene of the incident itself-

       The sad t hi ng is that it was unsucce ss fu l                1
  can say ca n pos si bl y diminish the pain and the l o «
  you have suffered and no doubt still are sur £e n n S              q
  loss of t hi s boy-    Please accept my very s in cere sym pa thy to
  all of you at this loss.
       As I have indicated to you, that is all the evidence
  are goi ng to take- We are not go in g any rurthei now. rf-


                                             8
I                                                                                        D . I . MICHAEL     LAYTON


I
                             will rise for a moment or two wh i ch is o ur normal
I                            £r   F r a s e r will e x p l a in to you the a r r a n g e m e n t * ^ ! , : > w e | a r d
                             to y o u s p e a k i n g no t h e P a t h o l o g i s t . T h a n k y
                             here.
I                                 MR- FRASER:
                                                           Mr. and Mrs-       T o o tl e w o u l d just    like to
                             say something.
I                 B
                                     TH E CORONER:
                                                            Can you just        find out      for me what        it is?         r

                                       md      FRASER-       Sir  Mr. and Mrs- To ot l e simply want to
I                            e x p r e s s ’t h e i r grat it ude to e v e r y b o d y -Jo Jj.1^
                             day-
                                                                                                   P.* -  °n the
                                         T h e y r ec og ni se that e v e r yb o dy aid eve ry th in * tn y
                             c ou l d and t hey      fre     only sorry t h e i r e        f     f     ^
I                            u n f o r t u n a t e l y successful.
                             t r i e d t h e i r very best.
                                                                      They r ec o g n i s e that everyb     y



I                             much.
                                        THE CORONER:       Hr. and Hrs^
                                           On b eh al f ot these p eo ple i _hear tna^
                              p l ea s ur e bec a u s e although I r e c o g n i s e and y
                                                                                                      iz
                                                                                                   h fact
                              t ur ne d out to be unsuccessful, it doesn't                       ^
1                             that p e o p l e did try.      Thank you-        It is Oo       *
                              m e n t i o n it and it is much a p p r e c i a t e d by me certain y-


I                  D                                        (Short- Ad iour nm gn t ?

                                   UHE CORONER:     Can we deal w it h just one                                            °n
                              the case of P et er Francis T oo tl e w he r e I m i^L-ad In-pec
I                             Layton.
                                       DETECTIVE       INSPECTOR M IC HA E L L AY TO N - Recalled
I                                                        Further bv THE CORONER:


I                       Q.     I n s p e c t o r Layton, t hi s is to do w i t h that v i d e o
                               I d e n t i f i c a t i o n at 1522 on MA P 7? - A. That i s , u g h t ,

                                              ic to you it was at the S pi on Kop end of th«
I                       Q . I chi nk I put
                            g rou nd ? - A • That is right, sir  yes

                        Q. W h e r e a s t h e e v i d e n c e is that h e is s e e n h im se lf
I                          w i t h i n the terraces? - A. That is a o s o l u t e l y light,

                               .Just show us, so that            the Jury aren'■t m i , s l e d ^ n j h a t      point?
I                       Q.
                        A (moved to p l a n )             It I can ju»t- j a Y * -      <
                               p ho t og r a o h i c e vidence rel at in g to E nc lo s ur e       -
                                                                                                       which was
                                                                                                         o ffi cer
                               a b s o l u t e l y right and we r e f erred to the plan ot the O tt ic er
                               in this p o s i t i o n h ere (indicating) which was a plan ana                  -
I                              L c h we indicated the right.              tilth r e f e r e n c e to the v iduo
                               i d e nt i fi c at io n he is a ctually r ef e r r e d to                 D itch
                               E n c l o s u r e Mo. 3 and not a ct u a l l y at this en d         t
I                              al th ou g h he d o e s n ’t actually see himself.
                                                                                       he just l o o k e d at the
                        Q- He d o e s n ’t see himself or Pe t er but
I                   H
                           video an d said, "That is whe re 1 wa.
                           it? - A. Yes.
                                                                                           T h a t is right, i s n ’t




1
JJ.. IL. H arpham Ltd


I                                                            r   \ n
4 Y'         ■
.               T he CORONER:     Is that satisfactory,     Mr-   F ras er ?   We
        wa nt e d to make s u r e we got it right-

             MR.   FRASER:    Yes, sir.

             THE CORONER:      Thank you,   Mr.   Fraser.

           ff h a Tnnnpst into the death o f Peter F r a n c i s Tootj i
D                  was a d i o u r n e d until a date to— be— f ix e—j




c



D




E




    F




G




H
KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS


1.   Kevin Daniel Williams the son         of the Applicants James

     Stephen and Anne Williams was born on 27th May, 1973,

     and was 15 years old when he died at Hillsborough

     football ground on 15th April,        1989.



2.   He went to the stadium with friends but became

     separated from a l l but one, Andrew Duncan.          Together

     they took up positions in enclosure 4 at 1.30 p.m.,

     but some time before 2.45 p.m. they moved into

     enclosure 3.



3.   During the course of Kevin's mini inquest on 2nd May, 1990,

     the following evidence was put before the jury through

     the witnesses Detective Sergeant John Killoch,

     Dr. David Slater,     Detective Inspector Michael Layton,

     and Andrew Duncan:-      Andrew Duncan lo s t sight of Kevin

     Williams immediately a f t e r the f i r s t   surge in

     enclosure 3.     At about 3.28 p.m.,      P.C. Michael Craighill

     went into enclosure 3 and ca rried Kevin onto the pitch

     where he attempted unsuccessfully to re su sc ita te him.

     Derek Bruder,    an off duty Police Constable saw Kevin

     lying on the pitch near the Spion Kop, North stand of the

     ground.    He stated tha t Kevin was having convulsions.

     Mr. Bruder, on seeing Kevin went on to the pitch

     where he gave mouth to mouth re su sc itatio n and an

     ambulanceman carried out cardiac massage.            They were

     l a t e r joined by an ambulance woman who took over from

     Mr. Bruder.     After a short time the St. Johns Ambulanceman
♦
                                              2



    4.   Some time l a t e r special Constable Debra Martin assisted

         in carrying Kevin from the pitch to the temporary

         mortuary.       She claimed tha t when they reached the

         mortuary he stopped breathing.                 She then gave him

         mouth to mouth re su sc itatio n and did some heart massage,

         a f te r which he opened his eyes,             said the word "mum" and

         then died.       At 4.06 p.m. Dr. Curpen examined Kevin and

         c e r t i f i e d him dead.



    5.   Dr. David Slater,           stated in evidence tha t Kevin died of

         traumatic asphyxia.             His case was one of the               of

         those he dealt with from the Hillsborough incident.                        In

         his opinion Kevin would have fa llen unconscious within

         3 to 5 secondsL-Q£ boing—
                                 crushed.                 He stated th a t persons

         suffering from asphyxia can have f i t s .             He was not of

         the view, however, as SC Martin had suggested,                 that

         Kevin could have spoken.                 The autopsy showed tha t Kevin

         had ^o^ f r a c t u r e s     of his voice box and irre v e rs ib le

         brain damage, both of which he believed, would on th e i r

         own have prohibited communication.                 Any sound tha t might

         have emerged he put down to the expulsion of a i r from
                                          I ----- --
         Kevin's stomach but stated tha t t h is would not explain

         the opening of Kevin's eyes.                 He believed tha t because

         of the seriousness of Kevin's case,                he would have suffered

         irrecoverable brain damage and brain death within 3 to 6

         minutes.
The mini inquest into Kevin was then adjourned u n t il

a date to be fixed.



On 3rd May, 1990, an o ff ic e r from the West Midlands

Police Force, v is i t e d the Applicants at t h e i r home.

The o ff ic e r stated th a t Mr. Bruder had now changed his

statement as he re a lise d he must have been mistaken.

Mr. Bruder was now saying tha t there was no vomit near

to Kevin that i t could have been mucous.        Mr. Bruder

was also saying tha t Kevin wasn't convulsing when he

attended him, tha t i t must have been body twitches.

The police o ffice r to ld Kevin's parents tha t i t would

be b e t te r i f the family did not speak to Mr. Bruder.

He said th a t Special Constable Martin was s t i l l

sticking to hgr original statement but that she was

young and inexperienced and tha t she had undergone a

traumatic experience.      In the circumstances,     he said

her statement would be discounted.        He then stated

th a t there would be another inquest into Kevin the

following day but tha t the Applicants need not attend,

as the purpose of the inquest was to prove to the jury

tha t Kevin could not have been alive.



On 4th May, 1990, the coroner returned to Kevin's mini

inquest and further evidence was put to the jury by

Sergeant John Killoch,     Inspector Matthew Robert Sawers,

Dr. David Slater and Doctor Ernest John Wallace Gumpert,
                              - 4 -



     which, when taken together produced the following account

     of events:    When Mr. bruder made his f i r s t statement he

     stated tha t he came across Kevin a t the Spion Kop end

     having convulsions.      This happened a f t e r 3.32.     He also

     said he could feel a pulse.        He referred to Kevin vomiting

     and being sick.     Mr. Bruder gave mouth to mouth resu sc itatio n

     and an ambulanceman carried out cardiac massage.                After 7

     minutes they swapped ro les.       About 6 minutes l a t e r an

     ambulancewoman took over from Mr. Bruder.            Whilst

     Mr. Bruder was attempting to r e su sc ita te Kevin he observed

     an ambulance entering the stadium.          He asked the St.         Johns

     Ambulance colleague who was a ss is tin g him to stop the

     ambulance as he was considering u t i l i s i n g i t .

     During resu scitatio n e f f o r t s he noticed Kevin's face

     going grey and withdrawn.



9.   In his evidence Inspector Matthew Robert Sawers of the

     West Midlands Police confirmed th a t he had v is it e d

     mr. Bruder the previous day.         He state d tha t Mr. Bruder

     on re fle c tio n thought th a t the word 1convulsions1 was

     not applicable,    tha t twitching was a more appropriate

     term to describe Kevin's condition and tha t i f he had

     seen any part of the body move,        i t was the head.        He

     reported that Mr. Bruder said th a t he may well have been

     mistaken about feeling a pulse.         He added th a t,   in

     contrast to his original statement,         he could no longer

     say tha t he d ef in itely saw Kevin's skin colour change




                              \ - T S
                                     - 5 -


      from norm al t o g r e y ;        n o r d i d h e now t h i n k K e v i n h a d

      v o m i t e d , b u t t h a t t h e f l u i d h e saw c o m i n g fr o m K e v i n ' s

      m outh m i g h t h a v e b e e n s p i t t l e    o r phleqir u     Mr. B r u d e r

      had c o n fir m e d t h a t he a t t e m p t e d t o r e s u s c i t a t e K evin

      f o r a p e r i o d o f t i m e o f b e t w e e n 10 a n d 15 m i n u t e s and

      t h a t t h e a m b u la n c e h e saw was d e f i n i t e l y     e n te r in g th e

      s ta d iu m and n o t e x i t i n g .



10.   In h i s   f u ^ n ^ r e v i d e n c e Dr.    S la ter   s t a t e d t h a t K evin

      w o u l d h a v e s u f f e r e d i r r e c o v e r a b l e b r a i n damage and

      death w ith in 3 to 6 m in u te s,               th at is ,   by t h e t i m e

      Mr. B r u d e r r e a c h e d h im ,    and t h a t a l t h o u g h h e was b r a i n

      d e a d h i s h e a r t may h a v e g o n e on b e a t i n g f o r a s h o r t

      w h ile lo n g er,     and h i s n e r v e s may h a v e l i v e d on t h u s

      ca u sin g th e tw itc h in g .         He b r a i n h a d d i e d n e a r t o t h e

      tim e o f th e c r u s h in g ,     b u t h i s w h ole body d ie d a t t h e

      tim e t h a t P .C .    B r u d e r w as w i t h him a n d saw him t u r n

      grey.



11.   D r . E r n e s t Gumpert w as o f t h e v i e w t h a t K e v i n was

      p r o b a b l y d e a d b e f o r e h e was e v e n r e m o v e d fr o m e n c l o s u r e 4 ,

      i n t h e s e n s e t h a t h e was b r a i n d e a d an d was g o i n g t o d i e .

      He a l s o t h o u g h t i t   c o n c e iv a b le th a t h is h eart co n tin u ed

      t o o p e r a te fo r a tim e as d id h i s p e r ip h e r a l nervous

      system .       B u t a f t e r K e v i n h ad s u f f e r e d b r a i n d e a t h t h e

      o n l y way t o k e e p him a l i v e w o u l d h a v e b e e n by a r t i f i c i a l

      m eans.
♦
                              - 6 -


12.   On 15th December, 1991, the Applicant Ann Williams met

      with mr. Bruder.      A note of th i s meeting is exhibited

      a t Page • ^ F . . /^^appended hereto.   From those notes

      i t would appear th a t Mr. Bruder refutes the in te rp re tatio n

      placed by D.I.:    Robert Sawers upon the       statement made by

      Mr. Bruder on 3rd May, 1990.



13.   From November 1991 the Applicants made          repeated requests

      to South Yorkshire Police to release copies of the statements

      made by Special Constable Martin and Mr. Bruder.

      The Applicants eventu a l ly received the said statements

      from the Coroner's office on 19th February,           1992.      In

      r e la tio n to Mr. Bruder' s i n i t i a l statement made on 27th

      April,   1989, the following matter caused grave concern

      to the Applicants

      (a)   Mr. Bruder describes seeing a police cordon in front

            of the North stand.       Kevin was lying on the ground

            behind the police cordon having convulsions.               None

            of the police o ffic e rs l e f t the cordon to a s s i s t

            people who were lying on the pitch.           (See Page . . . . ) .


      (b)   Shortly a f te r Mr. Bruder began resu scitatio n attempts

            on Kevin an ambulance entered the ground and drove

            towards the Lapping Lane end.         He told the St.       Johns

            man to try and stop i t .      He t r i e d to flage i t   down

            but i t continued on as i f i t had been ordered not

            to stop.     (See Page^^rT).
                                            - 7 -


      D eta ils     o f th e a fo r e m e n tio n e d m a t t e r s were n o t r e f e r r e d

      to   in th e p o li c e      summary o f e v i d e n c e p r e s e n t e d a t t h e

      in q u est.      The A p p l i c a n t s   f e e l t h a t such o m issio n s
                                                    of
      illu str a te      th e sh o rtco m in g s^ p resen tin g ev id en ce in

      summary f o r m .        A c o p y o f Mr. B r u d e r ' s f i r s t        statem ent

      an d t h e W est M i d l a n d ' s P o l i c e Summary o f E v i d e n c e i s

      annexed h e r e t o .



14.   I n r e l a t i o n t o mr. B r u d e r ' s s e c o n d s t a t e m e n t made on

      3 r d May,     1990,      he s t a t e s   in th e f i r s t paragraph t h e r e o f

      t h a t h e h a d " b e e n a s k e d t o t h i n k a b o u t a number o f p o i n t s

      w h i c h a r e r a i s e d i n t h e s t a t e m e n t I made n e a r l y a

      f o r t n i g h t a f t e r t h e H i l l s b o r o u g h Stadium d i s a s t e r " .

      See Page      3SJ. h e r e o f ) .      In t h e A p p l i c a n t s '   v iew ,   th is

      rem ark,      tak en to g e t h e r w ith th e n o te s o f th e m eetin g h e ld

      w i t h Mr. B r u d e r on 1 5 t h D e c e m b e r ,       1991,     in d ica te th at

      i m p r o p e r p r e s s u r e was i n d e e d e x e r t e d u p on Mr. B r u d e r

      to r e t r a c t or q u a lify        in p a rt h is p rev io u s         statem ent.

      F urther,       s in c e r e c e i v i n g th e copy s ta te m e n ts th e

      A p p l i c a n t s h a v e v i e w e d a BBC v i d e o o f e v e n t s a s t h e y

      u n f o l d e d on t h e day o f t h e d i s a s t e r .          It is     e v i d e n t from

      t h e v i d e o t h a t a SYMAS A m b u la n c e e n t e r e d t h e S p i o n Kop

      end o f t h e p i t c h a t 3 .3 6 p.m .             a t w hich tim e i t          has been

      e s t a b l i s h e d t h a t Mr. B r u d e r w as a t t e m p t i n g t o r e s u s c i t a t e

      K evin.       The A p p l i c a n t s a r e c o n c e r n e d t h a t d e s p i t e   its

      a v a ila b ility      t h i s e v i d e n c e was n o t p u t b e f o r e t h e j u r y .

      R a t h e r , Mr. B r u d e r was a s k e d t o c o n s i d e r w h e t h e r t h e

       a m b u la n c e h e h a d o r i g i n a l l y   r e f e r r e d t o as e n t e r i n g t h e

       s t a d i u m was i n f a c t e x i t i n g .
♦
                                        8    -




15.   A t t h e same t i m e a s e f f o r t s         w e r e b e i n g made t o

      secure co p ie s        of w itn ess         statem ents      a t t e m p t s w e r e made t o

      c o n t a c t S p e c i a l C o n sta b le M a rtin .       On 2 0 t h F e b r u a r y 1 9 9 2

      t h e A p p l i c a n t Ann W i l l i a m s r e c e i v e d a p h o n e c a l l     fr o m

      t h e S p e c i a l C o n s t a b le w h ich c u lm in a te d i n a m e e tin g

      a t th e A p p lica n ts       home o n 2 2 n d F e b r u a r y 1 9 9 2 .       At t h a t

      m e e tin g S p e c i a l C o n s ta b le M artin c o n fir m e d t h e c o n t e n t s

      o f her f i r s t     s t a t e m e n t made on 8 t h May 1 9 8 9 w h e r e i n s h e

      d escrib ed th e e v en ts            s e t out in paragraph 4 h e r e o f .

      She s t a t e d t h a t t h i s       s t a t e m e n t was made up fr o m n o t e s w h i c h

      s h e h a d made i n h e r p o c k e t b o o k i m m e d i a t e l y a f t e r     th e d is a s t e r .

      She e x p l a i n e d t h a t h e r l a t e r      s t a t e m e n t d a t e d 1 7 t h March

      1 9 9 0 w as c o m p i l e d b y an o f f i c e r      fr o m t h e W e st M i d l a n d s

      P o l i c e F o r c e who v i s i t e d      h e r a t h e r hom e.      T h is o f f i c e r

      t r i e d t o c o n v in c e S p e c i a l C o n s ta b le M artin t h a t her

      o r i g i n a l s t a t e m e n t was u n t r u e .    The S p e c i a l C o n s t a b l e

      s i g n e d t h e s t a t e m e n t p r e p a r e d by t h i s    o ffice r   v£ithout

      read in g i t .       She was u n a b l e t o r e a d i t          due t o t h e s t a t e

      of d istr e ss      b r o u g h t on b y t h e o f f i c e r ' s    b eh a v io u r.      She

      s i g n e d t h e s t a t e m e n t b e c a u s e o f t h e p r e s s u r e e x e r t e d by t h e

      o ffice r    and b e c a u s e s h e w a n t e d t o p u t H i l l s b o r o u g h b e h i n d

      her.



      S p e c i a l C o n s t a b l e M a r t i n h a s now s i g n e d a s t a t e m e n t ,      in

      th e p resen ce o f a s o l i c i t o r ,          con firm in g th e tr u th o f her

      o r i g i n a l s t a t e m e n t d a t e d 8 t h May 1 9 8 9 ,    and e x p l a i n i n g t h e

      circu m sta n ces r e l a t i n g          to th e c o m p ila tio n o f th e la t e r

      s t a t e m e n t d a t e d 1 7 t h March 1 9 9 0 .
                                       9



      A copy o f t h i s        statem ent i s           appended h e r e t o a t Page               ................


16.   The A p p l i c a n t s   fir m ly b e lie v e th a t th e statem en t dated

      1 7 t h March 1 9 9 0 l e d t o t h e u n d e r m i n i n g o f S p e c i a l

      C on stab le M a rtin 's         s t a t e m e n t a t t h e m i n i i n q u e s t on 2nd

      May 1 9 9 0     ( s e e i n p a r t i c u l a r page 7, p a ra D. E.               of tra n scrip t

      p r o c e e d in g s).


17.   S u b seq u e n t t o t h e m e e tin g w ith S p e c i a l C o n s t a b le M artin

      th e A p p lica n ts      sought th e a d v ice o f t h e ir                general

      p r a c t i t i o n e r as to th e c o n te n ts o f K ev in 's autopsy r e p o r t.


      In h i s v ie w t h e i n j u r i e s        t o K e v i n s l a r y n x w o u l ^ n o t ^ & a v e^

      p r e v e n t e d him f r o m s p e a k i n g .         A copy o f t h i s       o p in io n

      is     appended h e r e t o a t page             ............... .


18.   Now i n r e c e i p t o f m o s t o f t h e e v i d e n c e r e l a t i n g            to

      K ev in 's d ea th ,      th e A p p lica n ts contend th a t th e in q u e st

      p r o c e e d i n g s i n t o K e v i n ' s d e a t h and t h e r e s u l t a n d v e r d i c t

      o f a c c i d e n t a l d e a t h a r e h i g h l y u n s a t i s f a c t o r y by r e a s o n

      o f th e fo llo w in g m atters

      (a)       The j u r y n e v e r h e a r d f r o m M r .B r u d e r h i m s e l f ,

                n o r d i d t h e y h e a r fr o m S p e c i a l C o n s t a b l e

                Debra M a r tin .           The j u r y w e r e m e r e l y p r e s e n t e d

                w ith e x c e r p ts       fr o m t h e i r r e s p e c t i v e s t a t e m e n t s .

                The A p p l i c a n t s     contend th a t th e ev id e n c e

                r ela tin g     t o K e v i n was p r e s e n t e d t o t h e          ju ry

                 i n a c o n f u s i n g and i n c o h e r e n t f a s h i o n .

      (b )      They a r e p a r t i c u l a r y c o n c e r n e d a t t h e i n a c t i v i t y

                o f th e p o lic e o f f ic e r s          in th e cordon w h ils t
                K e v i n was c o n v u l                   ^ th e u n s u c c e s s f u l attem p t
          to fla g        down an a m b u l a n c e .          In t h e i r v ie w b o th

          th e se m atters            in d ica te    a l a c k o f r e s p o n s e on t h e

          p a r t o f th e em ergency s e r v i c e s .

(c)       N o tw ith s ta n d in g th e e v id e n c e o f D r.D a vid S l a t e r

          and D r . E r n e s t Gumpert t h e y b e l i e v e             t h a t K evin

          was a l i v e      for      some t i m e a f t e r     3.32     and h e n c e

          for    some t i m e a f t e r t h e          3 . 1 5 p. m,    cut off      tim e.

          T h is b e l i e f     is    h e ig h t e n e d by a r e c e n t a r t i c l e     in

          th e B r i t i s h M ed ica l          J o u r n a l d a t e d 3 0 t h N ovember 1 9 9 1

          T h is a r t i c l e        states     t h a t t h e a c c i d e n t and e m erg en cy

          d e p a r t m e n t s o f t h e N o r t h e r n G e n e r a l and R o y a l

          H allam sh ire H o s p it a ls ,           S h effie ld ,     w ere n ev er

          fo rm a lly t o ld          t o im p lem ent t h e m ajor d i s a s t e r

          p la n .    Further,           th e a r t i c l e    states     t h a t m ost o f

          th e s e r io u s ly        in j u r e d a r r iv e d a t h o s p i t a l betw een

          3 . 3 0 p. m.     a nd 4 . 0 0 p . m .        N ine o f t h o s e     i n j u r e d were

          c o g v u l s i n g upon a d m i s s i o n .         A fu rther     6 were c o n fu se d

          upon a r r i v a l and t h e n b e g a n h a v i n g s e v e r e c o n v u l s i o n s

          It is      known t h a t some o f t h e s e p e o p l e s u r v i v e d w i t h

          no lo n g term p h y s i c a l e f f e c t s .

( d)      The f u r t h e r e v i d e n c e w h i c h h a s come t o l i g h t              sin ce

          th e in q u e st in d ic a t e s          in p a r tic u la r    a s u p p r e s s i on

          o f ev id en ce,         i r r e g u l a r i t y o f p r o c e e d i n g s and

          d i s c o v e r y o f new e v i d e n c e .



The A p p l i c a n t s    subm it t h a t in th e l i g h t o f t h e s e m a tte r s

and h a d M r .B r u d e r a nd D e b r a M a r t i n b e e n c a l l e d          as

w itn esses      t h e r e may h a v e b e e n s u f f i c i e n t e v i d e n c e         for
t h e j u r y t o c o n c l u d e t h a t K e v i n ' s d e a t h w as du e t o o r

a g g r a v a t e d by l a c k o f c a r e .                       "S
                                                              I 9 It
MEETING BETWEEN ANNS WILLIAMS AND P.C. BRUDER -

15TH DECEMBER, 1 9 9 1



P.C.       B ruder      made h i s o r i g i n a l s t a t e m e n t           a p p ro x im a te ly te n

days a ft e r th e d is a s t e r .



A t t h a t t i m e h e a s k e d t h e W e st M i d l a n d s P o l i c e             f o r t h e name

of     t h e boy        he had         a ttem p ted t o           r e su sc ita te     (i.e.       K ev in

W illia m s).          T h is was r e f u s e d .



A t t h e m eetin g w ith P.C.                  B r u d e r on 1 5 t h D e c e m b e r ,      1991,     he

sta te d th a t         h e cam e         a c r o s s K e v in      on t h e       p i t c h and     th a t

K e v in     was e i t h e r        c o n v u lsin g or          tw itc h in g .       K e v in had       a

p u l s e a n d t h e r e w a s v o m i t i n K e v i n ' s m o u th .              As he t r i e d     to

r e s u s c i t a t e K e v i n an a m b u la n c e a p p r o a c h e d g o i n g t o w a r d s t h e

L ep p in g s    L ane e n d         of      th e     ground.           He      sh ou ted fo r        th e

a m b u la n c e t o    sto p in order to put                     K e v in i n i t ,     but i t     w ent

s tr a ig h t p a st.



On 3 r d May,          1990,    P.C.       B ru d er was          v isite d     i n h i s home b y a

W est M id la n d s P o l i c s O f f i c e r          who a s k e d h im t o          'r e c o n sid e r '

h is   sta tem en t.           He     was a s k e d i f           he was m is t a k e n          w hen h e

sta ted th a t          K ev in w as         c o n v u l s i n g and had           a p u lse .       P.C.

B ru d er s t a t e d t h a t h e was n o t m is t a k e n .




ANNAAJ
 ♦
                                                          2




N.B.         It     w as o n l y a t t h i s          tim e      (i.e.      3 r d May,       1990)       th a t

P.C.         Bruder l e a r n t         fo r th e                f i r s t tim e th e        name o f t h e

p e r s o n h e had t r i a d t o h e l p .



At     th e       same      tim e         as       th e           W est M i d l a n d s      O f f i c e r was

i n t e r v i e w i n g h im i n h i s         h om e, t h e C o r o n e r r a n g P . C .          B ruder

an d t r i e d t o        p e r s u a d e h im t h a t t h e f a c t s            o f h is      sta tem en t

w ere in c o r r e c t in            p a r t i c u l a r t h a t t h e a m b u la n c e         c o u ld n ot

have         been      d r iv in g onto            th e        p i t c h b u t m ig h t      have        been

d r iv in g o f f i t .          A g a in , P.C.              B ruder r e f u s e d t o a d m it         th a t

h e h a d b e e n m i s t a k e n a n d w a s a dam ant                  th a t th e         a m b u la n c e h a d

been d r iv in g on to th e p it c h .



T he    W e st       M id la n d s      O ffic e r        w as      w ith     P.C.        B ruder        fr o m

a p p ro x im a te ly     1 0 . 0 0 a. m.      -    4 . 0 0 p . m.     on 3 r d May.



P.C.    Bruder           to ld th e        O f f i c e r t h a t he          d id n 't want         to    see

K e v in 's p a r e n ts but i f           t h e y w i s h e d t o m e e t w i t h h im t h e n h e

w o u ld b e        p rep ared t o m eet             th e m a n y w h e r e .       (N.B.        When t h e

W est M id la n d s         O ffic e r v is it e d            Mr. a n d       M rs. W i l l i a m s       th e

sam e d a y         h e i n f o r m e d th e m       t h a t P.C.        B r u d e r w o u ld     not see

th e m ) .



P.C.    Bruder           s ta te d th e        r e a s o n s b eh in d        t h e W e st       M id la n d s

O ffic e r v i s i t i n g     h im       w hen h e s t a t e d         "when h e         cam e down t o

s e e me i t        w as w i t h a b r i e f - t o g e t me t o c h a n g e my m in d ."




ANNAAJ
In r e s p o n se t o w h eth er or n o t               h e w o u l d b e p r e p a r e d t o make

an oth er sta tem en t,             P.C.    B ruder        r e p l i e d t h a t he w o u ld          be

prepared to            s t a n d up      i n C ourt       and s t a t e      t h a t K ev in        w as

c o n v u lsin g ,     th a t th ere        was      a p u lse      and      th a t th ere          w as

v o m it i n h i s m ou th .



A sked w h e th e r       o r n o t K e v i n w as        a l i v e w hen h e g o t          t o h im ,

P.C.      B ruder r e p l i e d     " t h e r e was a p u l s e and i f         t h a t m eans he

w as a l i v e t h e n h e      w a s a l i v e ."



When P . C .         Bruder     left       K ev in he        w as c e r t a i n t h a t h e         w as

d ead .      He h i m s e l f   v o m i t e d a n d t h e n w e n t hom e.          He d e s t r o y e d

a ll   th e c lo th e s    h e w as w e a r i n g on t h a t d a y .          He s t a t e d t h a t

he has        n e v e r r e c e i v e d any       c o u n s e l l i n g and h a s       d e a l t w ith

th e d is a s t e r    " in h i s     own w a y ."
                                           DECEASED REFERENCE NUMBER: £1


                     WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
                   A report into the death of:
NAME:                             WILLIAMS, Kevin Daniel

AGE: 15 years                     DATE OF BIRTH:     27 May 1973

ADDRESS:


OCCUPATION:                       Schoolboy

STATUS:                           Single

NEXT OF KIN:                      James Stephen WILLIAMS

RELATIONSHIP:                     Father

DATE O F ’BIRTH:                  18 November 1948

OCCUPATION:                       Civil Engineer

ADDRESS:


GENERAL PRACTITIONER:             Dr S J CROSBY, Duke Street Surgery, Formby

                                  Merseyside

DOCTOR PRONOUNCING LIFE EXTINCT: Dr CURPEN

DATE, TIME AND PLACE:             15 April 1989, 1606 hours at the Temporary

Mortuary in the gymnasium at Hillsborough Stadium.
PATHOLOGIST:                      Dr SLATER
STATED CAUSE OF DEATH:            Traumatic Asphyxia



BLOOD ALCOHOL ANALYSIS BY DR FORREST - RESULT:
                                   56 mg/100 ml

IDENTIFICATION EVIDENCE:          On the morning of Sunday 16 April 1989,

James Stephen WILLIAMS identified the body of his step son, Kevin Daniel
WILLIAMS, to PC 1269 GLAVE in the Temporary Mortuary at Hillsborough Stadium.
CIRCUMSTANCES

At about 0700 hours on Saturday, 15 April
1989, Mr James Stephen WILLIAMS saw his son,
Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS, d e ce as ed , leave the
family home with the intention of travelling
to Sheffield. He was to travel by train with
a number of his friends to watch the F.A. Cup
Semi Final football match at Hillsborough
Stadium. Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS had a ticket
for the match.

Andrew DUNCAN travelled to Sheffield with
Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS, Thomas James NICKSON
and Gregory FAGEN by train arriving at
Sheffield at about 1040 hours. Gregory FAGEN
left the others at the station. The other
three youths caught a bus from the station to
Hillsborough Stadium where Thomas NICKSON
left them.

Andrew DUNCAN entered the stadium with Kevin
Daniel WILLIAMS at about 1330 hours via the
Leppings Lane turnstiles. They initially
stood together in Pen 4 but after a short
time moved into Pen 3 . At about 1445 hours
Andrew DUNCAN saw other friends on the
terraces including Anthony Maxwell GRIER and
Stuart THOMPSON (Deceased Reference Number
53).
                    2.




 At about 1455 hours Andrew DUNCAN was still
 with Kevin WILLIAMS and although the crowd in
 the pen was tightly packed he was not too
 concerned at that time. As the match started
 he was pushed forwards down the terrace and
 did not see Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS again.

 Following the severe crushing in.the West
Stand terracing Police Constable 1790 Michael
John CRAIGHILL went into Pen 3 and assisted a
number of casualties. Police Constable
CRAIGHILL assisted to carry a youth, he now
believes to be Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS, from
     ____
the gate in the perimeter fencing of Pen 3
onto the pitch. The officer attempted
resuscitation but without success.

Derek William BRUDER is a Police Constable
with Merseyside Police and was at the match
as a spectator in the North Stand. He
recalls seeing a person lying on the pitch
near the Spion Kop/North Stand having
convulsions. Mr BRUDER went onto the pitch
and gave mouth to mouth resuscitation aided
by a St Johns Ambulanceman who carried out
cardiac massage. Mr BRUDER recalls that a
friend of the casualty w a s with him on the
pitch. Resuscitation was continued and they
 were joined by a St Johns AmDulance woman who
 took over from Mr BRUDER. After a short time
 the St Johns Ambulanceman said that the
 casualty was dead. Mr BRUDER then left the
 scene.


 Neither of the St Johns Ambulance personnel
 or the ‘f r i e n d 1 of the casualty have been
 identified. The person Mr BRUDER tried to
 resuscitate is now known to be Kevin Daniel
 WILLIAMS.

Special Constable 221 Debra Jane MARTTN went
onto the pitch to assist and helped to carry
several deceased and also many injured to the
gymnasium. She assisted to carry one young
boy, now known to be Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS,
into the gymnasium and remained with him.

At 1606 hours Doctor Naderassen Carpoosamv
CURPEN examined Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS in the
gymnasium which had been established as a
temporary mortuary and certified life
extinct.

Special Constable MARTIN later escorted the
body of Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS to the Medico
Legal Centre and confirmed the identification
by Reference Number to Detective Constable
638 Simon WEISOLD.
 On Sunday, 16 April 1989 Mr James Stephen
 WILLIAMS identified the body of his son to
 Police Constable 1269 Scott G L A V E .

 On Sunday, 16 April 1989 following
 identification by Detective Constable
 WEIGOLD, Doctor David SLATER carried out an
 autopsy and submitted a report giving cause
 of death.

 BLOOD ETHANOL ANALYSIS

 Evidence is included regarding the analysis
 of the blood sample from the deceased where
the presence of ethanol was detected. The
witnesses proving continuity of the blood
sample are Detective Constable 1076 David
Michael GREEN. Detective Sergeant 2616 John
Albert TURNER and Detective Sergeant 1098
James Norman FLETCHER. Doctor Alexander
Robert FORREST carried out the analysis.

Found in the personal effects of Kevin Daniel
WILLIAMS was a ticket counterfoil which
confirms his entry to the stadium via a
turnstile.

VISUAL EVIDENCE

An examination of video film and photographic
evidence has been made by Police Inspector
 LAYTON and Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS has been
 identified in Pen 3 . being carried across the
 pitch and at the Spion Kop end of the pitch.

 Photooraoh Reference DAC 3/1 shows Kevin
 Daniel WILLIAMS apparently unconscious near
 the perimeter fencing in Pen 3. Video
 Reference MAP 7. 1528:33:22 shows him being
 removed from the terraces via Gate 3.

 Police Constable CRAIGHILL has signed a Plan
 of the pitch showing where he first came into
 contact with Kevin WILLIAMS and whe re he laid
 him on the ground. The officer identified
'himself on Video Reference MAP 7. 1528:43:24
 carrying a youth now known to be Keith
 WILLIAMS from gate 3 and onto the pitch. The
officer did not know the identity of the
youth and first believed it to be another
deceased.

 Photographs Reference PR5/32 and PR5/33 timed
 at 1532 hours, show Kevin WILLIAMS being
 carried across the pitch on a temporary
stretcher by a number of spectators and two
police officers. Police Constable 437 Garry
HAYES has confirmed his identification on the
photographs. The officer assisted to carry
two deceased persons on temporary stretchers
but could not recall any further details. He
did not know the identity of the persons he
carried, he merely assisted to carry the
temporary stretcher.
A number of photographs including Photograph
Reference T T 1 / 3 0 . show Kevin WILLIAMS
being given mouth to mouth on the pitch by Mr
BRUDER who has confirmed this identification.

The parents of Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS have
viewed visual evidence and confirm the
identifications of their son.

CONTINUITY CHART

This has been prepared and is included with
this file to provide an overall picture of
the evidence.
HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
            ' I WEST DISTRICT) .



        INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

  VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL

                STADIUM DISASTER

           ON THE 15TH APRIL,               1989



           INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

             KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS




                         B efore

 S.L.    POPPER.    LL.B,      B.MED.Sci,         BM, B S , MRCGP

            ( H er M a j e s t y ’ s C o r o n e r )




                             At

           The Medico-Legal Centre,
                Watery Street,
                  Sheffield.

                              On

                      2nd May 1990



            TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




   From t h e N o t e s o f J . L . H arpham , L t d . ,
          O f f i c i a l Shorthand W r i t e r s .
    5 5 . Q u e e n S t r e e t . S h e f f i e l d S I 2DX
                                       INDEX


DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER - Called

  By THE CORONER      .............................


DETECTIVE SERGEANT JOHN KILLOCH                Called

  By THE CORONER      .............................


DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER - Recalled




                                                             CD CO
  By THE CORONER .............................
  C ross-examined by MR. F R A S E R .........


DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called

  Ey THE CORONER .............................
  Cross - E xa m i n ed by MR. LII'IB..........         ••
  C r os s - Examined by MR- C A T C H P O L E ..........




                                   —   oo — oo —




                                                             1008
    2 nd W a v   1990

                 INQUEST   INTO T H E D E A T H O F K E V I N D A N I E L W I L L I A M S

               MR. FRASER:   Sir, you will now hear evidence relating
          to Kevin Daniel Williams.  Kevin's mum and dad are in Court
          with the social worker from Merseyside who has been
          assisting them.  The solicitors for Kevin's mum and dad are
          members of my Group and I therefore appear in the usual
          guise as their agent to the Steering Committee.

               THE CORONER:    Good morning, Mr. and Mrs. Williams.
          Before we begin I am going to explain to you the general
          format of the Inquest because you weren't here a tortnig
          ago  were you, and even if you were you might have
          forgotten.   We will start in a moment or two by me reading
          to you what was said.on 18th April 1989 which i» when
          opened the Inquest in this very room.   Then if there are any
          amendments which need to be made, if we have got some o£    e
          facts wrong, we will sort that out.   I will then tell you
          what the blood alcohol levels were, as measured by
          Dr. Forrest, and then we will turn to Dr. Slater, who is .the
      f   Pathologist ’sitting up there behind you.  He will give us
'         the pathological evidence.   I think I can safely say t at
          if after this Inquest over, you feel you would like to talk
          to'Dr. Slater privately he is quite happy to do that if it
          would be-of any help to you.   When Dr. Slater has tinished
          the West Midlands Police Officers have prepared a summary
          for me and he will deal with that and tell me about it.

               Then we will hear from Inspector Layton, another West
          Midlands Police Officer, who will deal with the visual
          evidence.  He will first of all tell me all about the plans
          and so on and that is sometimes a bit confusing because
          there are a lot of refere nces given but when he has finished
          talking about it he comes over and shows us on these big
          plans so that all of us, that is me, you, the Jury and
          everybody else can follow it-   Then when that is done we
          conclude and take no further evidence at this stage.   Is
          that reasonably clear?   I like to tell you so that you know
          what to expect.  Otherwise you don't know what is coming.

               This then is the resumed Inquest which was opened on
          18th April 1989 and on that occasion Neil Anthony Parkin,
          Acting Coroner's Officer, said:

                 "The body which is the subject of this Inquest has been
                 i de n tifled.to PC 1269 Glave of the South Yorkshire
                 Police as that of Kevin Daniel Williams by James
                 Stephen Williams, his father.     He was 15 years of age
                 having been b o r n on 27th May 1973 at So ut hport-         He
                 lived at 4 Whitehouse Avenue, Formby, Merseyside.                He
                 was a schoolboy by occupation.     He d i e d at H i l l s b o r o u g h
                 Football Grou n d following an incident there on




                                                                                            1009
                                                           DR . D A V I D N E I L S L A T E R



            Saturday, 15th April 1989.  PC Glave c a u s e d the body to
            be removed to the Medico Legal Centre and there he       _
            identified it to Detective Constable Simon Weigold wno
            subsequently identified the same body to Dr- slater.
            It is the family wish that the body should be
            cremated."

          I a djourned the Inquest at that point.   I
     shortly afterwards and you, Mr. Williams, very *in Y      ^
     it on 1st May 1989 and I checked with you the details and
     you confirmed the name, that we had got it right    ate o
     birth 27.5.73, that is right, isn't it, and the        °
     birth which was Southport wasn't it?   We type   i in
     wrong spot in your case but you spotted that.

          Dr. Forrest did the alcohol levels for many of the
     people who died, including Kevin, and the level in respect
     of Kevin was 56 mil ligrammes per 100 mils.

                        DR. DAVID NEIL S L A T ER - Called

                                    Bv THE C O R O N E R ;

Q. Dr- Slater. - A- Sir, my n a m e is Dr- David Neil Slater.                                I
   am a C o n s u l t a n t H i s t o p a t h o l o g i s t a n d a F e l l o w of the R o y
   C o l l e g e of P a t h o l o g i s t s .

          THE CORONER:   Before I go o n , Mr.                  Williams,       you are
     true dad of this lad.

            MR. WILLIAMS:            Stepfather.

          THE CORONER:   Thank you very much.   You are mum, yes.
     Mr. Fraser, so that we get the re cord right.  Is this an
     informal or a proper adoption because obviously the lad
     carries the same surname?

          MR. FRASER:             There is no formal adoption but                   it is a
     twelve years plus-

            THE CORONER:           Pardon?

          MR. FRASER:   There has been no formal adoption by
     Mr. Williams as such but the relationship is more than
     twelve years old.

Q.        THE CORONER:   I am very sorry, Dr. Slater, to have
     interrupted you.  Just remind us of your name bec ause I
     forgotten where.we were up to?  Just start again. -              - Y
     name is Dr. David Neil Slater, Consultant H i s t o p a t h o l o g i s t ,
     sir.

 Q. Dr. Slater, in the usual way you are satisfied that the
    evidence you are going to give me in this case rela


                                                2

                                                                                            1010
                                                r>R. D A V I D N E I L S L A T E R




Kevin Daniel Williams who was also identified as N o / :i :TV)is
that right? - A. That is correct, sir.
Identification was done by Inspector Timms so far as you are
concerned? - A- That was the initial identification.

But there    is no doubt     in your mind about the identity.-
No.
There were various marks on the body itself to identify it?
Sir, Kevin was cle arly labelled both by number and by n a m e .

Dr. Slater, would you be kind enough then to take me through
the post mortem? - A. My ex amination of Kevin showed that
the main finding was that of asphyxia.        This opinion was
formed through the extensive b lueness on the f*ce and uPPe
part of t h e c h e s t . In addition there were small      " ' ^
haemorrhages T n both the face and internal organs including
the brain, heart and lungs.        This asphyxia had^ c l e a r l y
resulted from compression of the neck and chest and this
opinion was supportecTby the presence of three small
scratches over the left side of the neck and also over the
front of the voice box.        This had also resulted in four
frar|nroff 1~n the small bones in th e__actjjal_ voice box^.        In
addition there was evidence of bruising to the lu n g s , again
supporting com pression of the chest-

      My autopsy showed that Kevin was a normally developed,
fit, healthy, young male with no evidence of any natural
disease which could have contributed towards death and it
was my opinion that Kevin had a normal life expectancy-                       In
terms of the mode of death t he c o m p x e s s J ^ m _ ^ ^ l i e _ ^ ^    or
chest has occurred h ere and unconscLousn^sg oggJXCS-—very
rapidly, r a r t a inly within a i gw_ se c o n d s , and there is one
reported case of it occurring a p p a r en t l X -i J Q ^ anTia n e o u s 1y -
Follo wing unconsciousness then there is no discomfort an                      no
pain.   Death then occurs after approximately thrge_to five
minutes, sir.

So because when we say asphyxia people think of agony for
ages and ages.  What you are saying is that the person
himself would very rapidly not know anything at all about
what was happening? - A. I should say the word "asphyxia      is
unfortunate in that scientifically it partly includes simp y
that there is not enough oxygen in the b l o o d . It doesn't
imply actual suffocation and prolonged deatTi -

Did you say there were four fractures to the voice box? ~
Yes, there are two bones in the voice box, as you know, sir,
and both these showed two fractures each.

Now the reason why I asked you was this, and I want to put
this to you because I would like to get your view on it, one
Officer will be dealing with the value of this evidence in a

                                  3


                                                                               1011
                                                  DR.   DAVID NEIL SLATER




       moment but she says that at a point when this lad was in the
       gymnasium, in other words he had already been moved across
       the pitch, she says she helped him into the gym from the
       pitch, presumably she carried him-         He stopped breathing.
       She gave him the kiss of life, did some heart massage, he
       op ened his eyes said a word and died.        Now in the light of
       your pathological findings, is that in fact a possibility,
       do you think? - A- Well, sir, I was aware of this statement
       and therefore I h a ve clearly given this matter co nsiderable
       thought, sir.         I thTnk there are several c o m m e n t s t o make
       but the mocierately large number of autopsies I did from this
       incident, sir, this was,certainly the most severe case of
       traumat ic asphyxia that I actually dealt with.             This_was_^
       botif^Xn terms of blueness of the face^ and also' the area of
       pallor of whiteness around the m o u t h / STr^ it wa^5__a_ very.,
       veyy~~sevgr <5 form of~~asphyxia a nd~I do not think that
       unconsciousness would have been quicker thacL4jiSfi8Jl£ —£XMM
       seconds.    I have no reason to alter what I have already said
       bn that a s p e c t .

               The other very significant thing about this, and it alsc
       gjupports the severity of this c a s e , is that again of the
     — autopsies I did a p p r o x i m a t e ly 15 per cent had some sort of
rfs.   fracture to the voice box, the l a r y n x . ■fhi’g ^ s e was highly
       iirni-^TTaT Tri that ~TrTT5gt it hadT tour fractures to the l a r y n x .
       It was by far the most s e v ere case of voice box f r a c t u r e s .
       Not only does this indicate the s e v e r T t y o f the traumatic
       asphyxia at the time but it also in fact makes it v irtua11y
       impossible for the person to have spoken by virtue of t he
       fact T h a t there were fractures to the v o i ce box, sir^       So
       all I can say, sir, t hat sc ieritifically a n 3 mgdli: 1 1 y I f ind
       that^J^n^oncg_ivA a b ^ that the person could have spoken.

  Q. The other thing I notice is that you show in this particular
     case exte nsive congestion of the cerebral veins and
     cereballum and cortical con ing and if a person speaks his
     neurons are working, aren't they? - A. That is right.

  Q. That evidence would indicate th ere had been extensive brain
     da mage and he couldn't really c o m m u n i c a t e . Would that be
     right?       I don't want to put words in your mouth but I want
     to be sure about that? - A. The y > n i n ^ indicates the
     s e v e r ity of the asphyxia and aflain th at— would have resulted
     in irreversible brain- d amagfr which again w o u ld JLQtally
     prohibit: Slvy^form of communication.

  Q.   I have thought about this comment as well, of course, and
       there are several explanations (1) that it didn't occur and
       that the obser ver is mistaken but another possibility that
       has occurred to me and I want to put it to you and please
       disagree if it is not either right or you don't accept it;
       it is possible, is it not, that if a person haying died is
       moved a ir or stomach contents mi^ht be~expelled and might
       make a sound as it escapes, so to speak?   Is that a




                                                                       1012
                                                          P. S.    J OH N KILLOCH .




     p o ss i bility? - A. It is an interesting comment, sir, because
     it is a p o s s ib i l i ty I con s i de r e d also myself and that is
     certainly an e x planation to the noise which could have
     made which may have mimicked the wor^-^num''— but— it— woul
     explain the opening of the eyes, sir.

Q.   No.   - A • Bur. it wo u l d exp la i n the n o i s e .

          MR. FRASER:         No questions, sir, but thank you very
     much, Dr. Slater,       for that s y m p a th e t i c and detailed
     explanat i o n .

           THE CORONER:        Any ot he r ques t i on s for Dr. Slater?
     Thank you very much, Dr. Slater.           We spent a lot of time
     thinking about this sentence because it was difficult.               I
     didn't think it was possible from what I knew of the
     evid ence but, on the other hand, we didn't want you to feel
     that we w e r e r 1*• telling you what w ^ c in the statements. ^ We
     felt it was better for you to hear it and have it explained
     rather than for us to keep it under wraps, so to speak, and
     you might possibly find out some o t h e r time.           I hope T have
     taken the right decision.         I don't know.       The only person
     who knows that is you.        We did spend a lot of time thinking
     about it wond e r in g what to do for the best.

                   POLICE SERGEANT J O H N gILLOCli            •Cal 1ed

                                 Bv THE C O R O N E R :

Q. Yes. - A- Po lice Sergeant John Killoch\,r s ir .              t*1*2 West
   Midlands Police.   I have p re v i o u s T y " t a k e n the Oath.

Q. Could you then please, if you would, take me through the
   statement? - A. At 0700 hours on Saturday, 15th April 1939,
   Mr. James Stephen Will iams saw his son, Ke vi n Daniel^
   Williams, leave the family home with the intention of^
   travelling to Sheffield.   He was to travel by train with a
   number of friends to watch the Semi Final football match at
   Hillsborough Stadium.   Kevin had a ticket for the match.

          Andrew Duncan trave lled to Shef fi e l d with Kevin, Thomas
     James Ni ck s o n and Gregory Fagen.  T h e y t ravelled by train,
     arriving at Sheffield at 1040 hours.         G r e g o r y Fa g en left the
     others at the station.      The other three youths caught a bus
     from the station to Hillsborough S t a d i u m wh ere Thomas
     Nickson left them.

          Andrew Dunc a n entered the s t a d i um with Kevin at about
     1330 hours via the Leppings Lane turnstiles.         They initially
     stood together in Enclosure 4 but s h o r t l y after they moved
     to Enclo sure 3.   At about 1445 hours Andrew Duncan saw other
     friends on the terraces, including Anthony Maxwell Grier an
     Stuart Thompson.    Stuart, of course, also lost his life at
     Hillsborough.


                                           5
                                                                                1013
                                    <   30-1
                                                P. S.   JOHN   K I LL Q C H




     At about 1455 hours Andrew D u nc a n was still with Kevin
and al t hough the cr owd in the encl o s u re was tightly packed
he was not too concerned at that stage-         As the match
started he was pushed forward down the terrace and did not
see Kevin again*

         Foll o w in g the severe crushing in the West Stand
t err a ci n g P o lice C o n stable Michael John craighi^ll went into
E nclosure 3 and a s si s t e d a numbei ui’ ca ^u d ix.iesl     Police
Cons t a b le Craighill assisted to carry a youth, he now^
b e 1 ieves to be Kevin, from the gate in the perimeter fence
o ^ E n c l o s u r e 3 and on to the pitch.   The O f f i c er attempted
resusci t a t io n but without success.

        Derek Will i a m Bruder, an off-duty Police Constable from
the Merseyside Pol ice who was a s p e c t a t o r at the match,
recalls seeing a person lying on the pitch n e a r the Spion
Kop/North Stand of the ground.             The perso n as having
t-.finwn 1p;i o n s . Mr- Bruder went on to the pitch and gave mouth
to mouth r e suscitation aided by a St. Johns Arnbulancernan who
carried out cardiac massage. ■ Mr- B r uder rec a ll s that a
friend of the ca s ualty was with him on the pitchy
Resuscitat ion was continued and they were joined by a ist -
Johns A m b u l an c e w om a n who took over from Mr. Bruder.   After a
short time the St. Johns Am b u l anceman said that the ^ a & u a 11y
was d e a d . Mr. B r u de r then left the scene-

     Neither of the St- Johns A mbulance personnel or the
friend of the c a s ualty have been identified.   The person
Mr. Bruder tried to resuscitate is now k n o w n to be Kevin.

      S pecial Const a b l e Debra M a rtin went on to the pitch to
assist and she h e lped to carry several d e c e a s e d persons and
many injured persons to the gymnasium.          She a s s isted to
carry one youth who she now knows          to be Kev i n into the
g ymnasium where she remained with him.

     At 1606 hours Dr. Curpen examined Kevin in the
gymnasium which had been established as a temporary
mortuary.  Dr. C u r pe n certi fied life extinct.

     Special C o n st a b l e Martin later e s c o r t e d Kevin's body to
the Medico Legal Ce ntre and she c o n f i r m ed the identification
by reference n u m b e r to DC Wei gold.

     On Sunday, 16th April 1989, Mr- James Stephen Will iams
identified the bod y of his son to Police Constable Scott
Glave.

     On Sunday, 16th April, following identification by
Detective Co n s t a b l e Weigold, Dr. David S l ater carried out an
autopsy and s u b m i t t e d a report giving the cause of death.




                                                                              1014
                                                                            J O H N ^KILLQCH
r


                    E v idence is included regarding the analysis of a blood
             sample taken from Kevin where the presence or ethanol was,
             detected.      The witne s s e s pro ving co n ti n u i ty of the blood
             sample are Detective Const able Graen, Detective Sergeant
             Turn e r and Detective Sergeant Fletcher.               Dr- Alexander
                                                                         n1‘
             Robert Forrest carried out the analysis.

                   Fo u nd in K e v i n ’s personal effects was a ticket
             counterfoil which is consistent with his entry to the
             s tadium via a. turnstile-        That c o n c l u d e s my evidence, sir.
    B
             There is visual evidence-

        Q.   I think I am right in saying, am I not, that Mr- Bruder (I
             am looking at page 47) identifies Kevin from clothing           is
             that right? - A- He has been shown p h o to g r a p h s which show
             Kevin which Hr. La yton will deal wit h later and one of the
             p hotographs I believe do es show Mr. B ru d e r actually giving
             first aid.

        Q. So there     is no doubt about       it that Mr.       B ru d e r was involved?
        A - Ho.

        Q. His personal recollection isn't as s t r o n g ? A. No, ^but what
           he does recollect is corroborated by the visual evidence.
                                                    '    '                 '           '' “
    D   Q.   We have already mentioned the evidence of Special Con&table
             Martin who said about the lad speaking.           In no way do I want
             to run poor Special Constable Martin dow n because she had a
             very hard day but it is right she was obvi o us l y from her
             s tatements very d i s tr e s s ed? - A. I also woul dn't want to
             criticise WPC Martin in any way but I have interviewed her
             twice, sir, and she was particularly upset as indeed many
             people were but it affe cted her p ar t i c u l a r l y badly the
             ev ents of that day.

                  THE CORONER:   Well,         I won't ask you to draw a
             conclusion.  Mr. Fraser.

                  MR. FRASER:   There is a matter a r i si n g out of what the
             Officer says which may perhaps leave a doubt in Kevin s
             parents' minds.  Can I ask you to ask Dr. Slater to deal
             with the point that was made in para g ra p h six of the
             summary, sir?

                    THE CORONER:       About the c o n v u l si o n s ?

                    MR. FRASER:       Yes, sir.

                  THE CORONER:   Yes, I will do that.                     I will ask
             Dr. Slater to come down in a moment-

                    MR. FRASER:       Thank you, sir

                    THE CORONER:       Is there, anything else you want to ask?



    H
                                                                                         1015
                                               03
                                               PR. DAVID NEIL SLATER
                                               n.I. MICHAEL LAYTON



      MR. FRASER:       No,    thank you,   sir-

      THE CORONER:        I will recall Dr.        Slater.

               DR. DAVID NEIL SLATER - Recalled

                           Rv THE CORONER:

Dr. Slater, the point that is being made, of course, you
have got to remember that Mr- Br uder was at the Spion Kop
end   the bottom end and not the top, and he says, 'I saw
this man lying o n the floor h aving convulsions'1. Can you
help us about that?     What does that add or not to your
pathological opini o n ? - A. It is obviously very distressing.
Unfortunately whe n people have not got enough oxygen in t e
brain   as I said in my earlier evidence, which is really
what the word ‘‘aspbAexj-a'' means, individuals can in fa <-t have
fits.   This is cJTTeof the m e c h a ni s m s that leads towards
death and makes the asph yxia worse-           This does, however
only occur when the individual is tota lly unconscious^-           It
does not mean there will*be any pain or discomfort.            The
person will not know they are fitting and actually I have to
accept that some individuals do have co nvulsions and it is
one of the mechanisnys leading to death in traumatic
asphyxia, sir.

Does it make you feel the other evidence about the lad
breathing and s p e aking either more or less likely because
obviously this would be much closer in time to special
Constable Mart in's evidence than what had happened on the
terrace? - A. Yes-                For somebody to have convulsions, this
would imply that the amount of asphyxia is such t ha t the r e
must h o u i r m a l ly irreversible b r ajn_darriage p r e s e n t ^ a n d ^
aga ir T T h i s I w G u l S l i u I l J l S                                  e
of o p e n ing eyes and speaking is not really

      THE CORONER:        Does that help, Mr- Fraser-                        |

                  Cross-Examined by M R - FRASER;

     MR. FRASER:   I am sure it does, Dr. Slater.      It is
difficult to find the phrase to sum the situation up.          Kevin
at that stage was beyond help.  H q . was as good as d e a d ?    A.
Yes, that is right, absolutely.

And would feel nothing and know nothing? - A. Absolutely.
He would know nothing.

         DETECTIVE INSPECTOR MICHAEL LAYTON - Called

                              Bv THE CORONER:

Inspector Layton. - A. Sir, Michael Layton,                  Detective
Inspector in the West Midl ands Police.




                                                                         1016
                                                                                                 1



                                                                  O.T.   MICHAEL LAYTON




                              Sir, an examination has been made of video fiIn and
                         photographic evidence and Kevin has been identiried in
                         Enclosure No- 3, also, sir, being carried across the pitch
                         and at•the Spion Kop end of the ground.

                              On a photograph referenced DAC3/1 Kevin is shown
                         apparently unconscious near the perimeter fencing in
                         Enclosure No. 3.    On a BBC video tape, referenced rtAP 7
                         timed at 1528:33:22 this shows him being removed from the
            B            terraces via G a te No. 3 -

                               PC Craighill has signed a plan of the pitch showing
                         where he first came into contact with Kevin and where in
                         fact he laid him on the ground and that plan, sir, i»
                         referenced MJC2-   The Officer has identified himselt on
                         video, again a BBC video tape, MAP 7, timed at 1 5 2 8 : 4 ^ : ^ 4 ^
                         carrying a youth who he knows to be Kevin - that is a typing
            C            error there-    It says Keith  in the summary but it should be
                         Kevin - from Gate 3 and on to the pitch.    The Officer did
                         not know the identity of the youth and at first in *act
                         believed it to be anot her of the deceased but that has been
                         clari f i e d .

                              Photograph referenced PR5/32 and PR5/33 which are both
                         timed at 1532 show Kevin being carried across the pitch on a
            D            temporary stretcher by a number of s p e c t a t o r s and two Police
                         Officers.  PC Hayes has confirmed his identification on
                         those photographs.  The Officer assi sted to carry two peop e
                         on temporary stretchers, both of w h o m w e r e deceased, but he
                         couldn't recall any other details and he didn't know the
                         identity of the persons he carried.     He m e r e l y L as it were,
                         assisted in carrying - We have mentioned that before-            t is
                         not an unusual feature that people's recollections weren t
                E        8 X d iC t -


                            A number of photographs, including a photograph
                       referenced TT1/30 show Kevin b            e       i       h
                    Afresuscitation on the pitch by PC Bruder w h o confirmed his
                    /W identification.    Sir, you mentioned this Officer earller-
                    { In fact~ it H T t r u e to say Mr-- and Mrs. Williams have
                       previously seen visual evidence.      They have in fact seen
                F      some of that visual evidence again today and I think I am
                       right in saying they have confirmed that Kevin is shown On
                       that photograph so, as it were, PC Bruder is confirmed as
                       having given mouth to mouth resuscitation to Kevin.

                    Q. The reason I asked is because it refers to a friend and
                       there doesn't seem to be any other evidence of that?
                G   A- No, that is right- It is true to say the initial
                       identification was from clothing but it has subsequent y
                       been confirmed.

                              Sir-, can I refer’ you to a plan which has been given the
                         reference MWJL40 which is a plan of the terraces?


            H


L Harpham Ltd
                                                                      n -I . MICHAEL LAYTON




                   Q . Y e s , C20V.   - And H W J L 4 1 which   is a plan of the pitch.

                        MJC2 are they the same markings? - A. I would say, oir
                        in fact although there are two markings the reference to MAP
                        7 on the previous plan actually would deal with PC Craighill
                        on chat occasion.

                   Q    So MWJL41 we make C 2 0 2 . Let us incl ude that one a& w6ll
              B         MJC2 will be C203 - - A. Which is PC Craighill's plan.
                        Cmoved to p l a n ) Sir, if we can deal with the plan HWJL40,
                        which is the pla n of the terraces, t he first photograph
                        DAC3/1 referred to in this summary indicates the position
                        here ( indi cat ing ; and this indicates Enclosure No- 3 and it
                        is at this point here ( indi cat in .g) t hat Kevin is shown quite
                        close to the peri m e te r fence.

                             the second identification, MAP 7 > the BBC tape, refers
                        to the identification by PC Craighil 1 ’and the point at which
                        we see Kevin is a pp roximately here ( indi cat irig ) and it is
                        prior to his removal via Gate 3.

                             Then, sir, in respect of PC C r a i g h i l l ‘s plan, MJC2, it
                        is a terrace plan he refers to but he actu ally indicates a
                        position here (i n d i c a t i n g ) in front of Gate 3 arid a turtner
               D        position which is shown just off the plan but it is here.
                        It is just on to the pitch.

                        It is diagrammatic'          A. Yes.

                   q   . Certainly the s e cond location can't be taken as giving us
                        any sense of distance? - A. No, but factually the next plan
                        will do that.  I think, sir, just to correct myselt I should
                        have been pointing there.

                   Q. Yes- - A- Sir, in respect of M W J L 4 1 , the video reference on
                      BBC tape  MAP 7, indicates a position here (indicating.)
                      which accords with PC C r a i g h i l l ‘s recollection. There is
                      also photographic identification on PR5/32 which is where
                      Kevin is being ca rr i e d across the pitch and the location
                      referred to is there (in d i cating) -

                   q   . Re mindme, do we know the time for that one? - A- Yes, I
                         think it is 1532, sir-  Yes, 1532.  A further photograph,
                         sir, TT1/30, which I think refers to PC Bruder, the location
                         of that is approximately this position here < indicat- ing.)
                         which is towards the Spion Kop end of the pitch-

                               THE CORONER:'       Mr. Fraser.

                               MR. FRASER:        No questions.




               H
                                                                                              1018
. L. Harpham Ltd
                    Cross-Examined by MR. LIMB_;

Q. Was the photograph with the reference DACo/1        a timed
   photograph? - A. No, sir.

                 Cross-Examined bv HR. C ATCHPOLE;

Q. Andrew Duncan, did he show any visual evidence or did he
   give a plan showing where he last saw Kevin, when they
   parted company? - A- I don't believe so.   Can you just giv<_
   me a moment?  The answer is we don't have a plan from
   Mr. Duncan.

         THE CORONER:   If I can help you a little bit on that
   one, what Andrew Duncan says is, "We stood up and were
   standing about two to two and a qua rter yards from the
   perimeter fence around the pitch.   We were waiting for the
   game to start.   At about 1445 or so a group of friends were
   standing behind me, Stuart Thompson and Tony Grier.     I wa&
   stan ding with Kevin Williams".  Then he describes the people
   coming out and he says, "When the game kicked off I was
   pushed forward down the terrace about two yards.   After this
   push I lost Kevin and did not see him again".    His final
   remark is that he saw Kevin for the last time on the terrace
   just before the crush started-   "The last time I s a w Kevin
   was on the terrace just before the crush started.     After
   this I did not see him again".   That is his statement, ju&t
   so that we know what it is which one we are talking a b o u t ,^
   dated 17.5.89.   Anything else, Mr. Fraser, you want to ask?

        MR.   FRASER:    No, sir-

          THE CORONER:       Mr. and Mrs. Williams, that is the
   evidence we are going to take.         As I said to you in the
   middle of the hearing we spent quite a lot of time wondering
   what we should do for- the best.        Obviously we knew Kevin
   lost his life and we were worried about upsetting you i_n
   Court but I think on balance we have done the right thing
   because you have heard within the limits of what we are
   doing and su mmarising the evidence what happened and what
   went o n . Fortunately, Dr. Slater has been able to be here
   and he has been able to'give you his opinion as to what
   happened in his view and what in his view is poss ible and I
   think I arn sure that will help you - not to come to terms
   with the loss of your son but it is very difficult to come
   to terms with that loss at all but just to appreciate in the
   stress situation in which pe ople found themselves "           ‘
   reco 11a c t io n s tend sometimes to be mistAkaia— and— Lndeed tjngre
   are lots of m is taken recollections-not— only— m r e l a t ion^ to
   Ke v in~but also in relation t o m a n y of the other peopl e _ o£    ,
   which we have h e a r d.     That is not at all uncommon and occurs
   in normal fatal incidents as well.         It is exceedingly
   difficult when you are suddenly confronted with a situation
   to then recount exactly what happened.




                                                                    1019
 r        #

                           I realise Kevin was a young boy, just fifteen, which is
                 A   very very young of course and I would like you to know how
                     very sorry we are that he should have lost his life at such
                     an early age in this tragedy.   The Jury have had to deal
                     with many cases but today, at this moment, we are just
                     dealing with yours and so far as we are able we would
                     you to know we are conscious of that.   Thank you for being
                     here.
                 B
                          Ladies and gentlemen, we rise for a moment or two and
                     then we proceed to deal with our next Inquest.

                       (The Inquest into the death of Kevin Daniel Williams
                              was adjourned until a date to be f i x e d )


                 C




              D




                 E




                 F




                 G




              H
                                                oS
                                                                              1020
L. Harpham Ltd
#

      HER MAJESTY’S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                   (WEST DISTRICT)


            INQUESTS INTO THE DEATHS OF THE

        VICTIMS OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL
                   STADIUM DISASTER
                ON THE 15TH APRIL., 1989



               INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF
                KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS
                      (Further)




                        Before
    DR. S.L. POPPER, LL.B, B.MED.Sci. BM, BS, MRCGP

                (Her Majesty's Coroner)




                          At
              The Medico-Legal Centre.
                   Watery Street,
                     Sheffield.

                          On

                     4th May 1990



               TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS




         From the Notes of J.L. Harpham. Ltd.,
              Official Shorthand Writers,
          55, Queen Street. She££*ALd SI 2DX          1021
                               £20
  ‘"r




                                   INDEX
                                              Pa%e


OPENR       BY THE CORONER                      1.

SERGEA NT JOHN KILLOCH Recalled
        By THE CORONER                          2   .
INSPEC TOR MATTHEW ROBERT SAWERS Called

        a y THE CORONER                         5.

DR. DA ^ID SLATER Recalled
         By THE CORONER                        10.
         Cro ss-Examined by MR.. LIMB          13.

DR.     jpiEST   JOHN WALLACE GUMPERT Sworn

         By THE CORONER                        15.
          ross-Examined by MR. LIMB            18.
          urther by THE CORONER                19.




        F
riday, 4th May, 1990


                      FURTHER EVIDENCE IN

               THE INQUEST INTO THE DEATH OF

                    KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS


      THE CORONER:    Now you may remember on Wednesday I
 kept you late.    I said I had to go out and do a little
 bit of thinking, and that is what we are going to deal
 with this afternoon.

      What we were thinking about was that one of the
 inquests which we had done related to Kevin Daniel
 Williams.    I will remind you of this inquest.             This
 was the case of another young man, in fact he was only
 15.    The problem in tha,t case was that the evidence
 was difficult to unravel a s t o w h e n h e d i e d a n d what
 had happened when he was being taken across the pitch
 and had he said something inHOie^^temporary mortuary' and
 so on.           — --- — -----------— — — — —--                  ...

       After the inquest was concluded my attention was
 drawn by some of my legal colleagues, and very
 rightlybecause they were realised it was a sensitive
 problem and did not want to upset the family, so they
 brought it to my attention privately first.       The point
 which they were bringing to my attention was that one
 of the witnesses appeared to say that when he came to
 this young man at the Spion Kop end, more or less,, of
 the ground, he had convulsions and he also said he
 could feel a pulse.       We knew from the visual evidence
 - we are going to repeat all the relevant evidence in a
 moment - we knew that he was being taken across the__
 pitch and we had a timing at 1532.      Assuming that was
 right, "TTTis convulsion- or whatever it was, was
 happening after that point of time.      The question was:
 what on earth was going on?

      I agreed that this was a valid point.    I think we
 were so concerned about the event which happened after
 that, namely, what happened in the gymnasium, did he
 speak or did he not speak - this was the lad with the
 fractured voice box - that we may not have put quite '
 enough concentration and thought into the earlier
 evidence, but we are going to do it now. We are going
 to sort it out'so that we know, as far as we are able,
 so that we understand, if we can, what happened.

      I think if Sergeant Killoch could come back.

                                                                        1023
               s F.R r,E A NT J O H N KTT.T.OCH- R e c a l l e d

                           By T H E C O R O N E R :
       Tin; WITNESS: Sergeant John                    Killocb      from the
 West Midlands Police.

 Sergeant Killoch, i f y o u read - we are not f®1"!                  _
 read the whole summary again because we don t nee“ 1
 but I think paragraph 5 which is where somebody s t a r t
 describing helping him from the t e r r a c e s . - A*
 Following the severe crushing in the West Stand
 t erraci ng Police Constable Michae-1 John Cr ai ghi l l went
 into enclosure 3 and as s i s t ed a number of c a s u a l t i e s .
 Police Constable Cr aighi l l a s s i s t e d to carry a young
 rnan he now believes to be Kevin Daniel Williams from
 the gate in the perimeter fencing of enclosure 3 and on
 to the pitch.

 The o f f i c e r attempted r e s u s c i t a t i o n but without
 success.

  Derek William Bruder is a Police Constable with                       the
  Merseyside Police who was off-duty at the match                       that
  day.         He was a spectator in the North Stand.                   He
  r e c a l l s seeing a person lying on the p | t c h M a r            toe
  St>ion Kop and North Standing and describes that                      person
  as having convulsions-.

  Mr. Bruder went on to the pitch and gave mouth to mouth
  resuscitation, aided by a St. John's Amb ula nce man w o
  carried out cardiac massage.     M r . #Bruder recalls that
  a friend, of the casualty was with him on the pitch.
  Resuscitation was concxiiuecf and tney were joined by a
  St. John's Ambulancewoman who took over from Mr. Bruder
  and after a short time by a St. John s Ambulanceman.

  The St. John's Ambulanceman said the casualty was dead
  and Mr. Bruder then l e f t the scene.

  Neither of the St. John's Ambulance personnel or the
  friend of the casualty have been i d e n t i f i e d .

  The person Mr. Bruder t ri ed to r e s u s c i t a t e is known to
  be Kevin Daniel Williams and there is visual evidence
  to show t hat , s i r .

). Then the next paragraph deals with the lady police
   officer.    Just read that next paragraph as well. - a.
   Special Constable Debra Jane Martin went on to the
   pitch to a s s i s t and helped to carry several deceased
   and many injured to the gymnasium.        She assi st ed to
   carry one young boy, now known to be Kevin, into tne
   gymnasium and she remained with him.

                                 -   2 -
                                           @ )                                   1024
             Aci. Now what she said we are not going   to deal with because
                   that was satisfactorily explained. What we are
                   interested in is that bit which has been read.    If we
                   turn to page 41, I think I am right in saying that what
                  Mr. IJruder says - he says he saw a person about a
                  quarter of the pitch length away from the Spion Kop.
                       A.   i'es.

             Bf . t{e was lying on the ground or thereabouts? - A. That is
                  correct, sir.

                       He says he can remember this because he recollects an
                       ambulance going past which locates it in his mind and
                       in fact he tried to flag it down? - A. Yes.

                       Then he says:
                              "I saw this man lying on the floor having
                              convulsions."

                       - A. That is his exact wording.

                       Then if we turn over the page and pick out the bits
             D         that are relevant.   He says he went down and he went
                       up to this man:

                              "...and than went to the man having convulsions.

                       - A. Yes, sir.

                 (J. Then he says:

                              "I was joined by a St. John's Ambulanceman."

                       - A. Yes.
                 (J.          "That chap said, 'You do mouth to mouth and I will
                              do heart massage'"

                       - A. That is correct.

                 $. He goes on to say:

                               "I then took his pulse in his neck.   I could feel
                               a slight pulse."

                       - A. Yes, sir.     - .

                       He then tried to resuscitate him, mouth to mouth, and
                       undressed him so he could do it more conveniently
                       probably. - A. Yes.

                       Then he says:

             H
                                                                                    1025
L. Harpham Ltd
          "Ue'continued to work on the man but aftgr about
          five minutes he went grey and his £ace_was
          withdrawn."

     - A. That is right, sir.
i. Ue talks about the man vomiting and being sick and
   having a peculiar smell - at least, the breath...
   Well, his rnouth had a peculiar smell? - A. Yes.

     lie also noticed there was something unusual about his
     rib cage:
          "As I did heart massage his ribs were unnaturally
          prominent."

     - A. Yes.

5.   -Then eventually another St. John's Ambulance person
     came and he left the man? - A. That is right.

5.   This whole thing took quite a few minutes? - A . Yes,
     obviously the officer had no conception of time.

5.   Can you remind me about the visual evidence?    It is
     just to make sure I have got it right that there is
     visual evidence, both of Mr. Bruder... - A. One
     photographic print was mentioned, sir, and was given
     the reference number TT.1/30.   That is a photograph
     which shows Kevin lying on the pitch.   The person has
     been identified by Kevin's parents.   Shown about to
     give mouth to mouth resuscitation of Kevin is a man who
     has been identified as Police Constable Bruder.    PC
     Bruder has identified himself on that photograph.

5.   Then there is another timed print, is it PR.5/32 or
     PR.5/33, showing Kevin being carried across, paragraph
     18? - A. There are two photographs, sir: PR.5/A/32,
     which is timed at 1532 and PR.5/A/33.   That is also
     timed at 1532.
3.        THE CORONER:   Inspector Layton, just show us
     where those photographs are.
          INSPECTOR LAYTON:    Yes, sir.      They are referred
     to in the plan MUJL.42.    P R . 5/32 is approximately at
     this position here, on the pitch.      That is the timed
     photograph, sir.    TT.130 is not timed, but I believe
     it is somewhere in this area here.       From recollection
     I think I did that actually from what Mr. Bruder says
     in his statement, about the positioning on the pitch.




                                                                  1026
     THE CORONER:   Now Inspector Sawers went to see
Mr. Bruder because we wanted to be sure we had the
facts.

       INSPECTOR MATTHEW ROBERT SAWERS Called

                   By THE CORONER:

     THE WITNESS:   Matthew Robert Sawers, Inspector,
West Midlands Police.

I believe you went to see him yesterdav-7 - A. Yes, sir.

In fact it was Mr. Bruder's day off but he very
willingly gave his time? - A. He did.

Now can you summarise for me what he says? - A. Yes,
sir.   He starts off by referring and identifying his
two previous statements to us, sir, the first of which
was approximately a fortnight a fter the disaster
itself, arid" ci second statement in August of last year
was a very short statement in which he merely
identifies himself on the photographs that you have
heard reference to, sir.

He goes on to say that I had shown him a number of
documents and plans, from which he was able to refresh
his memory.   He refers to the fact he had made some
notes on the day after the disaster but that they did
not refer specifically to his dealings with this
casualty.

He refers, sir, to joining Merseyside Constabulary in
1987 and receiving basic first-aid instruction during
his initial training.    That was both in theory and
practical application.    He refers, sir, following the
incident and his dealings with this youth, to feeling
he was inadequately trained in his own confidence,
although it is also true to say- that he is absolutely
satisfied that the first aid he rendered on the day was
the very best he could do and he felt he could do no
more.    He goes on to say as a result of feeling
depressed about the incident he applied of his own
volition for further first-aid training within
Merseyside Police.    Indeed, he attended a full week,
Monday to Friday course, leading to a further
qualification and much greater confidence in his own
ability.    However, with the benefit of that training,
sir, he is able to reflect on his actions of the day
and he is still absolutely satisfied that the first aid
he rendered in terms of mouth to mouth and heart
massage were^correct and he could have done no more for
Kevin.
                     He goes on then, sir, to deal with specific matters
                     that I referred him to in his original statement.
                     Specifically, sir, from the transcript and police file
                     he deals with page 41 of the police file statements,
                     which is r>aee 6 of his original statement in April last
                     year.   He reters and confirms seeing Kevin a quarter
                     of the length of the pitch.from the Spion Kop end of
                     the ground.    He refers to his being on the floor and
                 B   clarifies that as on the grass surface of the pitch.

                     He has given very careful consideration, sir, to the
                     expression that he used of having convulsions and in
                     the light of his further training and what he now knows
                     and thinks about the incident was that "convulsions"
                     was not the word that was applicable to these
                     circumstances.   He refers specifically to having seen
                     epileptic fits and says that what he originally
                     described as a convulsion was not anything like an
                     epileptic fit.   He goes on to say later, sir, that if
                     there was a part of the body that he saw move it was
                     his head and that the word that he best thinks
                     describes this movement is that of a twitch.

                 D   He refers to comments he made originally about
                     approaching the body, the body that was convulsing,
                     ilaving specifically considered it again, sir, he does
                     say that the body was not convulsing as he approached
                     it.    He referred originally, sir, to feeling for a
                     carotid pulse and originally he thought he had detected
                     a slight pulse.     On*'reflection, illr, he feels he would
                     be" much more~slcilful if he were required to perform
                 E   this action again and he cannot discount the
                     possibility that he did not feel immediately in the
                     right place for the carotid artery.       He certainly felt
                     in the neck    region where he thought he would find the
                     artery but he cannot say he would have gone to it
                     directly.

                     I put to him, sir, the specific point I believe Dr.
                     Slater made   in his evidence about this inquest a couple
                     of days ago   and PC Bruder specifically discounts having
                     felt for the carotid artery with his thumb.     He refers
                     to the first two fingers of his left hand.

                     He says in dealing with the carotid pulse that he may
                     have touched other areas around the neck region,
                     including the Adam's apple and that whatever he felt
                     there he cannot be categoric it was a pulse.     He feels
                     he may well be mistaken in that matter, sir.

                     Later in his statement of April last year, sir, he
                     referred to the face of Kevin Williams going grey and
                     being withdrawn.   He wanted you to know, sir, that he
                     cannot specifically say he saw the face change from a
             H                              -   6   -
                                                                                   1028
                                                        (
L. Harpham Ltd
normal pallor, or colour, to grey.   He mentioned it in
his statement, sir, in the sequence that it occurred to
him that he was now noticing that he was grey.   He may
have been grey as he approached him before he mentioned
it, or it may have occurred as he noticed it.

In his original statement he referred to vomiting and
thinking that Kevin had been sick.         He has given this
matter some further thought and h e is
satisfied that Kevin was/fulfe sick.       He did not see
Kevin vonrf'ting and he d i d n o t see vomit on the ground
or on his clothing.

Does he still confirm that there was a distinctive
smell? - A. Yes, he does, sir.

To finish with the vomiting aspect of his original
statement, he does have a clear impression in his mind,
sir, of a fluid of some sort in the mouth, but he
cannot discount that that could be„s.pittie or phlegm of
some sort.

He referred in his original statement to the original
resuscitation attempts whereby he gave mouth to mouth
resuscitation and the St. John's Ambulanceman commenced
heart compressions.   His original thought, sir, was
that that was for approximately seven minutes and, give
or take, he is happy with that time and thinks it is
reasonably accurate.    He then later referred to
swopping over with the St. John's Ambulanceman and PC
Derek Bruder was then involved in external heart
compressions and this was when he noticed the unusual
rib cage and he had earlier referred, sir, to
unbuttoning his shirt, I believe.    He referred to
unzipping his trousers and noticing some striped boxer
shorts that you will see in the photographs that have
been referred to, TT.1/31 and 32 respectively.

I have put to him the apparent difficulties in the time
sequence of the action that he describes near the Spion
Kop end of the ground and his specific reference to am
ambulance and asking the St. John's Ambulance colleague
who was assisting nim and who has not been identTfiecT,
fco stop crie an’Duianve because he was considering
utilising it, sir.

I have drawn his -attention to the problems in relation
to the known timing of ambulances arriving on the
pitch, both of St. John's and of the South Yorkshire
Metropolitan Ambulance Service and I have drawn his
attention to the apparent discrepancy in relation to
the time shown on photographs PR.5/ a .32 and 3, sir.



                       - 7 -
 The point is that the ambulances were known to arrive
 at about 1515 and 1517 or thereabouts? - A. Yes, sir.

. And the photograph, PR.5/A/32 and so on, is timed at
  1532? - A. That is correct, sir.

. We are saying he was dealing with this young boy after
  that? - A. That is correct.
. In fact I put the wrong times to you.   It is 1515 on
  the pitch for the St. John's Ambulance and 1520 for the
  first South Yorkshire... - A. That is correct, sir,
  irrespective of which...

. It is still earlier... - A. It is still earlier than
  1532, sir, and that point has been put specifically to
  Mr. Bruder and try as he may he is simply ur»ble to
  reconcile those differences.   I have put to him, sir,
  was it for instance a question of one of those
  ambulances actually exiting the stadium across the
  pitch rather than entering the stadium.   He has
  considered that point and try as he may his
  recollection is still of it being an ambulance that
  entered the stadium.
  He refers then to being joined by the woman St. John s
  Ambulance Officer, who he refers to pushing him out of
  the way to become involved as a trained first aider and
  recollects this was approximately six minutes after he
  changed places with the male ambulance officer.   ^or
  that reason, with the original seven minutes mouth to
  mouth resuscitation, PC Bruder feels that that total of
  thirteen minutes he could amend to a period of time of
  between ten and fifteen minutes of sustained attempts
  to resuscitate Kevin.
  It was at this point, sir, that after approximately two
  minutes of the involvement of the woman St. John s
  Ambulance Officer, that the male St. John's Ambulance
  Officer stood up and said, "He's gone."    He referred
  to the expression being completely grey and would seek
  to reaffirm that choice of words as his description of
  Kevin at that particular moment in time.   He says,
  sir, and I quote:
         "There is absolutely no doubt in my mind, both now
         and with the benefit of further training, that
         then at the moment the youth I had tried to save
     ?   was dead, certainly dead, and beyond any further^
    /    help;   r~lmd~~3T7Johr^sAmbu lance personnel would
    /    not have stopped if there had been any glimmer of
    I    hope at all.   There was none."




                                                              1030
He refers to the personal description of Kevin again,
sir, and refers to the fact he is absolutely satisfied
it was Kevin Williams that he was attempting to
resuscitate.
     THE CORONER:    I just want to make it crystal
clear that there is no suggestion in any of this of any
criticism of PC Bruder.    I think he did absolutely
valiantly and did his best.    Not only did he do his
best on the day, he is doing his best today as well,
through Inspector Sawers, to try and help us understand
what he remembers and I want that clearly understood by
everybody.    I don't want you to think we are knocking
him. We are not. All I am trying to do is finding out
what happened.
      Mr. Fraser, any questions of this officer on this
part?    I had better tell you who else I am going to be
calling.    Dr. Slater and Dr. Gurnpert, whom I will tell
you about when TveTcomes.   He is~a neuro physiologist,
a clinician, and an expert on this sort of thing.

     MR. FRASER:   No, sir, I have no specific
questions, save to say that I understand, Officer, you
have spoken to Mr. and Mrs. Williams, having spoken to
the officer?   I rise because I appear for Mr. and Mrs.
Williams and obviously have their interests at heart.

     THE WITNESS:   I did go and visit Mr. and Mrs.
Williams, sir, yesterday evening, having seen PC Bruder
and I have outlined briefly to them the contents of PC
Bruder's further thoughts and recollections for Kevin
on the day.

     MR. FRASER:   Sir, I understand they are
appreciative, both of the efforts the officer has made
and of his visit and they have no questions.   They
have decided not to come today, sir, for reasons which
I am sure you will understand but they are fully aware
of exactly what is going on on their behalf.

     THE CORONER:      Thank you.    Have you got any
questions?

     MR. LIMB:      No, thank you.

     MR. CATCHPOLE:      No, thank you, sir.

     THE CORONER:    When we have heard the rest of the
evidence I arn quite prepared to recall any of these
officers, or, indeed, any of these witnesses because I
want us to understand it.

     Dr. Slater.
                                     DR. DAVID SLATER Recalled
                                          Bv THE CORONER:

                     D. Dr. Slater, you have, of course, already dealt
                       this case a couple of days ago.    If I remember rightly
                       you said, among other things, that (a) this lad had a
                       broken voice box.   It was broken in four places.
             B         Also (b) he was, of all the cases you dealt with,
                       perhaps the most asphyxiated, if one can judge that by
                       cyanosis and so on.   Would that be a correct
                       recollection? - A. That is absolutely correct, sir. Of
                       all the cases I dealt with K^vin showed really the
                       wWfs'F*lmuhes to the neck in that there were four
                       fractures to the voice d o x . In additionthere were
                       thTyy VSty LaTge scratches; to the neck.   In addition
                       to cne normal signs ot asphyxia, the blueness and the
                       hemorrhages which were very marked, there is no doubt
                       this was a very, very severe case of asphyxia and
                       probably the worst one I dealt with, sir.

                        We established to everybody's satisfaction what had
                        happened in the gymnasium and the account, we dealt
             D          with that as to whether this lad could have spoken and
                        so on, so we don't need to be concerned about that.
                        What we are interested in this afternoon is the
                        evidence relating to Mr. Bruder.   I wi ll a l s o remind
                        you that in general that what has been said is that a
                        person becomes unconscious in an asphyxial situation
                        within anything from zero to twenty to thirty seconds.
                        There is a slight variation amongst pathologists, but
                 E      quickly.   Then that death usual supervenes within four
                        to six minutes or thereabouts.   The problem is, as you
                        have already heard, that whichever way you look at it,
                        Mr. Bruder was dealing with this young man quite a few
                        minutes after he had been taken out from the Leppings
                        Lane terraces.

                        In the light of the evidence can you help us as to what
                        you think was going on on? - A. Yes, sir.   I will deal
                        with this in three general areas and then Dr. Gumpert
                        certainly will come and enlarge on these and help us
                        out further.
                        Firstly, and I apologise if this is an emotive area, I
                        think I need just to spend thirty seconds in explaining
                        what Hoahh io           ic- a sequence of events.   It is
                        not one set event and the sequence 1 will put to you is
                        an individual becoming unconscious;    whilst they are
                        unconscious they quickly lose all sensation of pain and
                        discomfort;   then there is a period of various tissues
                        in the body which are susceptible to a lack of oxygen,
                        dying.   The most important one of these is, of course,
                        the brain, and after about three to six minutes the
             H                                - 10 -
                                                                                1032
l. Haroham Ltd
                     brain undergoes irreversible brain damage.             There is
                     then a point which we call brain death.          This is a
                     difficult concept, but by this I am implying that the
                     brain is irreversibly damaged.   The brain is no longer
                     able to control respiration and in fact that person,
                     for effective purposes, is dead, ir r e v e r s i b l y . ^ That
                     is a medico legal definition, #t least one medico legal
                     definition, of death.
             B
                     The problem now comes that I have not mentioned other
                     tissues in the body.   For example, the heart, a very
                     emotive organ.   When somebo(^£— ls — bra in d    it is
                     quite possible that the heart is still— ali.   ve and— still—
                     beating and this can go on for a few minutes or longer,
                     perhaps even half an hour.
             C       Then we come to the point where the brain is dead, not
                     controlling respiration, and finally the heart stops
                     and that is really the point of whole body death and
                     that is really what the lay person understands by
                     death.  A doctor going up, putting the stethoscope on
                     the chest, no heart beat, no respiration, then that
                     person is unequivocally dead.
             D
                     I hasten to add there that although the person is truly
                     medico legally dead, in fact even then there are
                     tissues in the body that are still alive.^ The skin is
                     still living.    The kidneys are still living. ^ This is
                     how we can then transplant them.     In fact it is an
                     emotive area and although that person is dead, there
                     are still tissues living.    It then takes another six
             E       to twelve hours for all the tissues in the bodyto die.

                     Really, when we use the word "death" we have to be
                     very, very careful we are not talking About one set
                     event at one point in time.    We are talking about a
                     whole continuum of events that go on.

                     I mentioned that some tissues do not die as rapidly as
                 F   the brain and this includes both nerves and muscle.
                     In fact one can have a situation of somebody being
                     brain dead but the muscles and the nerves in what we
                     call the peripheral nervous system - not the brain -
                     are still living and in fact these can occasionally
                     function in some way.

                     Sir, that is a -general comment on death.
             G
                     In relation to the Hillsborough incident, the sequence
                     that myself has given, and although I have not heard
                     the other pathologists I understand they have given a
                     very similar sequence of events, has been a rapid loss
                     of consciousness, perhaps five to ten seconds.   I
                     understand I have been the nearest by quoting a paper
             H                                - 11 -


L. Harpham Ltd                                     @)                                   1033
where u n c o nsciousness can be instantaneous.     lhat is
the rapid loss of consciousness.

As soon as that person becomes unconscious I have said
several times that pain modalities, discomfort, again
disappear very, very quickly, perhaps within a second
or five seconds.

In very general terms, certainly myself - and I have
tried to keep it general - I then said thatdeath - and
I have used the word very broadly, as you will
appreciate in my previous evidence - that c j MttL.°£.
                                                     CHF.S
five, ten perhaps                   ^er>   1 purposely
kept that very open because human beings are very
variable.   You cannot say that somebody is going to
die in fifteen minutes, and not in fifteen minutes.

I am trying to put the concept that although I have
talked about averages, very occasionally you are going
to have additional extremes.     I thiiik_hjSVio;wa.s— one— ojl.
these extremes that did not fall iH-Lo— this fivgj ten— or
fifteen minute sequence of solnatic death, whole b o d y __
death, but” in fact this was tixlencled^.

Having said that, Kevin had extremely severe asphyxia.
I have no doubt in my own mind that he had suffered
irrecoverable brain damage and death within the three
to six minutes that I said.    Therefore^ I am quite
contident at that time cnat Kevin was dead and there is
notiiing that anybody on this earth could have done for
him after that time, including PC Bruder and any
ambulance people who arrived.

Again, you will appreciate from what I have said to you
that although Kevin was brain dead I have not said that
other tissues in the body may not have been living -
the heart, muscles, nerves.       In fact I know. Drr
Gumpert will explain in a minute that in factthere are
mechanisms whereby when oomeDody is brain dead in fact
the rnMgr1<3g *n ♦‘hp body can twitch._ This will come as
a sur^jrTse^ and I apologise TT f t i s emotive, this can
even happen to somebody who hasn't got a head.         That
person is clearly dead, they haven t got a head, but
those persons can actually have twitches in their^
muscles.     This is what happened to Kevin.       He died
early - brain death - but unfortunately in this
particular instance we are talking about an extreme
case where perhaps the heart beating went on for a bit
 longer and we noticed these twitches, at least PC.         I
 Bruder noticed these twitches in the body.                 1
               ^    —--- —■
                          — —                                 '
 I feel this is what happened in the case of Kevin.
                  Q. From the description - in fact it is only fair to say
                     you also had a word with PC Bruder because you were
                     concerned, you wanted to be quite sure that you
                     understood his evidence personally, so to speak? - A.
                     Yes, sir.
            0 . In the light of what you heard and what we have heard
                now, do you feel that this lad died, if you like, in
          B     the totality sense, I don't meant that his skin was       f
                dead, but in lay terms at the point in time when__Mr. %
                Bruder was with him? - A. ~Yes, sir, I am quite
                confident ot that.      When one speaks to lay people who
                have experienced people dying, a word which is
                recurrent in these descriptions of death is the way
                that individuals turn grey.      In fact I was very
                impressed by the content in PC Bruder's statement of
                the word "grey". recurrfng" several^ times.    To me as a
             ^^fforiroT^haT~ imp lied that that~was the~point of whole
                body death.      In fact I feel that it was probably ^
                ITrouivdHtTTat time that Kevin's whole body died. Jlis
                brain had died twenty/twenty five minutes before that
                at the time ot the crusning«_ but his whole body died ~at
                 the""time PC Bruder was with him.
          D
            Q. We have mentioned these twitches and I think sometimes
                 they are referred to as spinal reflexes? - A. that is
                correct, sir.
                          THE CORONER:   Now, Mr. Fraser, is that reasonably
                     clear?
              E           MR. FRASER:   Even to me, sir, thank vou. and I am.
                     sure it will be clear to the family.
                          THE CORONER:   Any questions?
                                 Cross-Examined by MR. LIMB:
                  Q. Doctor, it is an emotive subject.   I remember in your
                      evidence about Kevin you described death in terms of a
                      process rather than as a moment? - A. Yes.
                  Q. I would like to ask you a few questions about the
                     process following unconsciousness.     As I understand
                     it, in the cases of these victims, unqpnscinnsness has_
                  f come ten to twenty seconds a_£-tcr comp&esAjon of the J
                     chest? - A. Yes.-
                  Q. That is as a result of oxygen to blood mix leading to
                     unconsciousness? - A. Yes.   There are various...    We
                     are now not talking about the actual cause of death,
                     but mechanisms.   One very profound view that has been
                     put forward of crush asphyxia, traumatic asphyxia, it
                     is not simply only the reduction of oxygen going to the
          H                               - 13 -
                                                                                1035
Harpham Ltd
brain, but the fact that in fact there cannot be
circulation through the brain.   The pressure from the
chest is reflected up into the brain so in fact
effectively the cerebral circulation stops, so it comes
up against a dead end and it cannot circulate round.
But, yes, your concept then is right.
Following unconsciousness, that is to say, twenty
seconds^ say, after the start of the crush becoming,
       is the body capable of facial expressions or
uoes it have a neutral expression? - A. First of all
the word "unconscious" itself is a very vague term, as
you probably appreciate.    There are varying degrees of
unconsciousness - superficial unconsciousness, perhaps
a sort of sleeping...    You are unconscious, really,
when you are sleeping, and then, of course,
unconsciousness becomes deeper and deeper and deeper.
The deeper bit is when one truly loses pain sensations
and in fact in this particular instance having spoken
both to Dr. Gumpert and, indeed, a consultant
anaesthetist, everybody I have spoken to is confident
that pain modalities have disappeared very quickly,
perhaps within one or two seconds, five seconds is the
longest I have heard somebody express.
As I understand your evidence, following that short
period of five, ten, twenty seconds at the most, there
is profound unconsciousness rather than, say, the
unconsciousness of sleep.    Is the face then of the
unconscious person, the profoundly unconscious person,
capable of expression of any sort, or is there a
neutral expression? - A. I think I prefer to leave that
to Dr. Gumpert because you are into a clinical area
there of what we call refj.exes.   I am not trying to
avoid the^question.   I tFTink he will be able to give
you a very expert professional witness reply to that.
Would that be reasonable to you?
     MR. LIMB:   Certainly.    Sir, may I pursue that
matter with Mr. Gumpert?
     THE CORONER:   Certainly.    I want to be as
helpful as I can.   It is a difficult subject and in a
sense we are slotting it into the inquest, of this poor
boy, but it is a more general topic and it willa ^ot
couise, apply in a sense to everybodyt but i don t see
how we can avoid doing It.    Please do pursue it with
Dr. Gumpert.
     Thank you, Dr. Slater.




                                                           1036
           DR. ERNEST JOHN WALLACE GUMPERT Sworn
                       By THE CORONER:
Q. Dr. Gumpert, could you first of all give us your full
   names, qualifications and appointment? - A. Ernest John
   Wallace Gumpert.   I am a Bachelor of Medicine of the
   University at Cambridge, Bachelor of Surgery of the
   University of Cambridge.   A Member of the Royal
   College of Surgeons and a Fellow of the Royal College
   of Physicians of London.   I am consulting clinical
   neuro physiologist and consulting neurologist to the
   Sheffield Area Health Authority, Teaching.
Q. Dr. Gumpert, although you are a Sheffield man
   professionally, I dragged you bacK. crom Cambridge
   today? - A. Yes, sir.
0. Where I tracked you down!     I very much appreciate the
   fact you dropped all your other arrangements in order
   to be here.     Thank you very much.    Dr. Gumpert, you,
   of course, had nothing whatever to do with this case.
   I think you dealt with quite a Lot of the injured
   following. Hi 11sborough auu inueeci you may well know one
   or two people I will be referring to later, but this
   particular case was not one you came across.      You have
   heard the evidence which has been put regarding this
   young man.     What I would like you to do now is to give
   us a short explanation, as you see death, in the first
   instance and then we will try and relate it to this
   young man and particularly Mr. Bruder's evidence
   relating to him. - A. In about 1979 or 1980 when it
   became possible to carry out renal transplantations or
   kidney transplantations, it became very important that
   the supply of kidneys of people who had died acutely,
   usually in accidents, could be increased because the
   life of a patient who has had a kidney transplant is
   completely different to the life of a patient who has
   to have dialysis three times a week.      They can go back
   to normal life.
   A hypothesis of brain death was then d i s c u s s e d , agreed
   and published.    This consisted of certain examinations
   of the back part of the brain, the part we call the
   brain stem.    If you imagine the brain as beinglike a
   walnut, and it is,, it is like having a carrot stuck
   underneath the walnut, and it is the carrot that
   matters.    This is where blood pressure, pulse,
   respiration and a whole variety of other functions are
   controlled.    Once this part of the brain is dead, and
   this death occurs, as you heard from Dr. Slater, in
   between four and six minutes after deprivation of
   oxygen, then the person is going to die.          Theycan be

                           - 15 -
                                                                     1037
                                    3SS]
      kept alive by artificial means and some of you^may
      remember the case in America which was kept alive for
      thirteen and a half years.
      Some of us were concerned that the guidelines that were
      drawn up were not strict enough and that there was no
      call for them to be repeated after a passage of time.
      Perhaps unwisely we said this and this resulted in a
      BBC "Panorama" programme one night at ten o clockwhen
      the medical profession for once actually debated it,
      eight of us.    As a result of that debate the
      regulations were hardened.    They had to be carried out
      by senior people who were used to doing it and they had
j     to be repeated.    A satisfactory outcome from my
      personal point of view, although I don't know whether
      the anguish was worth it really.
      As a consequence of that I suppose in the next three
      years I had to go through this rather unpleasant
      procedure many times.   It was part of my professional
      duty but still to this day I cannot certify someone
      dead without being disturbed by it still.
      From this I suppose I have gained a great deal of
      experience of brain death and brain damage.     It seems
    V clear to me, sir, in this case that poor Kevin was
    I grobablv dead before he was got ..out oT~the area_i.n_
    \ which he was standing.   I would agree with Dr. Slater.
      I woula think consciousness was lost probably within
      ten seconds.   I would say loss of pain would be almost
      instantaneous - not quite, but almost.
      I cannot explain the Liysfpopl Police Constable's term
      "convulsion because ‘to me a convulsion is a major
      epileptic attack and he has quite clearly said he does
      not mean that, so I don't know what he does mean.   I
      think it would be wrong for me to try and guess what he
      means.   I think we could accept that he does not mean
      any significant movement.
      Unfortunately, after people are brain stem dead, they
      can twitch and very unnerving _it is tooT     This is
      really ~cTue~To~a~ spinal ret lex. What we think happens
      in anoxia - lack of oxygen - is that the brain stem
      dies first.     The cortex, that is the thinking part of
      the brain, your walnut, probably goes on quite a bit
      longer and the-peripheral nervous system probably quite
      a bit long still and I think that is the explanation of
      what has been described by the Liverpool officer.
    0. I know the Liverpool officer in his supplemental
       statement when he was discussing the question of a
       pulse says he may have been mistaken, butclet us
       hypothesise that in fact he wasn*t and he had felt a
                       pulse when he approached this young man on the pitch,
                       would that fit in with your understanding...   Is that
                       a possibility? - A. It Is a.possibility, sir.   I would
                       like just to observe that feeling the carotid pulse is
                       quite difficult in somebody who has got a low blood
                       pressure, as would have been here.   In fact it can be
                       so difficult it is impossible and you have to put an
                       electrocardiogram on to know whether the heart has
                 B     stopped or not.
                       I would also like to say something about resuscitation.
                       I was very fortunate when I qualified that I became
                       house surgeon of a famous heart surgeon called Lord
                       Brock at Guy's Hospital.   That was in the days when we
                       did open cardiac massage.   In other words, if somebody
                       died you opened their chest and you massaged their
                       heart between your hands.   A terrifying experience.
                       It was while I was working for him that one day three
                       of us were doing it one morning, that he stopped it,
                       and that was the start of external cardiac massage.
                       Even to somebody like me who has been doing it for
                       twenty-five years, it is still very difficult.    The
                       last time I tried to do it I failed completely.    Even
             D         to a trained person it is difficult.   Indeed, when
                       junior doctors are examined for this now, as they are,
                       a significant number fail rather than pass.    It is
                       quite difficult and for the lay person it must be
                       incredibly difficult.
                     Q. You heard Dr. Slater's account of death, shall we say.
                        Would you go along with that? - A. I thought it was
                 E      eloquent.   I felt quite nervous!
                     Q. You mentioned this point about unconsciousness and the
                        loss of pain and I think you distinguish slightly
                        there. Can you give me any idea that if a person
                        becomes unconscious, can he feel pain, and for how long
                        can he feel pain, in your judgment? - A. Again, Dr.
                        Slater put it very clearly.   You all read in the
                        newspapers about patients - particularly when they have
                        had caesarean sections, the ladies as usual - being
                        able to tell what the doctors were talking about during
                        the operation.   Again I have experienced this at first
                        hand when I was doing heapt surgery because then it was
                        often very important not to depress the state of
                        consciousness too far because things were pretty tricky
                        anyhow.   When we used to resuscitate the patients we
                        used to give them an electric shock.   Lord Brock used
                        to always shout, "Give it two fast ones."   The patient
                        would then ask you the following morning two fast ones
                        were.   Then you would ask, "Did you hear anything
                        else?" and they didn't, so it is all very much a
                        question of degree.

             H                               - 17 -
                                                                                  1039
L. Haroham Ltd
                                                      57,
 (■




                             I think slipping from slight unconsciousness to deep
                             unconsciousness in this circumstance, one, because of
                             the compression and two because of the asphyxia and^
                             three because as Dr. Slater again explained everything
                             is shoved up into the head and so there is nothing
                             moving around, it would have been very quick, almost as
                             quick as a rabbit punch I would have thought.
                  B              THE CORONER:      Mr. Fraser?
                                  MR. FRASER:     No questions, sir.
                                         Cross-Examined by MR. LIMB:
                    Q. Dr. Guinpert you have spoken in terms of passing in a
                       very quick space of time from slight unconsciousness to
                       deep unconsciousness.    Following deep unconsciousness,
                       do the eyelids remain open or are they closed? - A.
                       Either may occur. There is no particular rule.     The
                       thing we all see on the cinema of the person going to
                       close the dead person's eyes.    I don't think I have
                       had to do that more than two or three times in my life.
                       Most of the people I have seen die have died with their
                  D    eyes shut.
                    Q. Deep unconsciousness is associated with no longer
                       feeling any p^in or discomfort.    Is then the face of
                       the person who is profoundly unconscious capable of
                       grimaces or expressions which might be taken as showing-
                       pain or discomfort? - A. Not in my view, sir.

                      E 0.   Is it in fact capable of any facial expression? - A.
                             Not in my view.
                        0. Following profound unconsciousness, is it right that
                           the face will become discoloured towards the next stage
                           of the sequence of events, namely, brain damage and
                           thereafter brain death?
                                  THE CORONER:     Could you repeat that question?
                                  MR. LIMB:    I am referring back to the process, or
                             the sequences of events as outlined by Dr. Slater, sir.
                             Firstly, unconsciousness, thereafter brain damage and
                             thereafter again brain death.    The nature of my
                             inquiry was as to whether following profound
                             unconsciousness^, although there may be no outward
                             expressions there"is this change that the face becomes
                             discoloured?
                                  THE CORONER:     The greyness you are driving at?
                                  HR. LIMB:      Sir, that is right.

                  H                                  - 18 -
                                                                                        1040
l H a r o h a m Ltd
     THE WITNESS:   Are you asking me to say when I ■
think the greyness came on or just the way it changed.I
cannot tell you when it came on.   I think probably j.t
came on during the unconscious stage and I don t think
the Face would change when the moment of death came,
total somatic death, I don't think there would be any
change.
     MR. LIMB:   Doctor, I am asking whether it happens
following the entry into unconsciousness towards the
next stage in the sequence, namely, brain damage?- A.
I don't think there is a change of facial expression at
the time of brain damage necessarily.   This change of
expression will be a gradually evolving process from
the minute the crush started.
     MR. LIMB:         Thank you, sir.
     THE WITNESS:   Sir, you cannot tell by looking at
a person that they are dead or unconscious, at least I
can't.   You can by feeling them but you can't by
looking at them.
                    Further by THE CORONER:
If a person has been, shall we say, somatically dead
for long enough, would you accept or would you agree
that sometimes the face goes paler? - A. Oh, it goes
paler, and becomes rigid and takes on a stare.   Yes,
that is quite different.
        THE CORONER:      Anything else you wanted to ask on
that?
        MR. LIMB:      No, thank you, sir.
        MR. CATCHPOLE:      No questions, sir.
     THE CORONER:   Is there anything else we want to
ask Dr. Slater?   (No)
     Ladies and gentlemen, I will give you a chance.
It is emotive but it is also very interesting.   Is
there anything else while we have two experts here?
You have understood it as far as one is able to
understand it?
        THE FOREMAN:'     Yes.
     THE CORONER:  Dr. Gumpert and Dr. Slater, may I
say to both of you, you have done remarkably well in
explaining what is clearly a very (a) emotive and (b)
difficult subject, succinctly and clearly to all of us
and I very much appreciate your help.   Dr. Slater has

                                                               1041
 i'm

                     had to come as well, but not quite so far, and I am
                     very grateful to you for taking the trouble and the
                     time to come and I am sure it will be of benefit not
                     just to Kevin's family, but to other people who of
                     course are involved in this tragedy as well.   Thank
                     you very much indeed.
                          MR. FRASER;    Sir, I will certainly make sure that
                     Kevin's family have the opportunity to see the
                     transcript of what the doctors have said and I am sure
                     they will feel some benefit from that when they feel
                     able to look at it.    Thank you, sir.



                 c



                 D




                 F




                 G




             H
                                                                                1042
L. Harpham Ltd
                  ANDREW DUNCAN Sworn
                    By THE CORONER;
 You are Andrew Duncan? - A. Yes.
 Is it still                          - A. Yes.
 You too are a Liverpool supporter? - A. Yes.
 I think you came to the match with several of your
 friends including Kevin Williams? - A. Yes.
You came by train, is that right? - A. Yes.
Did you come to the main station in Sheffield or’did you
come on the special train? - A. The main train.
What time did you get to Sheffield? - A. About half past
ten.
 When you got off the train were you steered towards
•coaches? - A. Yes.
Were you wearing regalia?    Could they tell you were a
football supporter? - A. No.
Just ordinary clothing? - A. Yes.
How come you were steered towards the coaches to take you
to the ground?   Did you ask or did they just say, "Young
man, are you going to the match?"   What happened? - A.
There were people getting off the train who obviously
weren't going to the match.   If you were like a lad they
asked, they said, "Are you going to the match?"   If you
said, "Yes , they said, "Go that way."
Did they check your tickets or anything at all that you
can remember? - A. No. The train tickets?
No, the match ticket? - A. Oh, no.
So you then got on to the coach? - A. Yes.
That brought you to Hillsborough? - A. Yes.
You got to the ground at about 11.30? - A. Yes.
Did you go straight in or did you do a bit of shopping? -
A. Well, the ground wasn't open so we walked round for a
bit.   We went to the shops and just walked round until
about half past one.
That was you and Kevin? - A. Yes.
Both of you had tickets, I take it? - A.    Yes.
I think you entered about half past one? - A. Yes.
Were you searched when you went in? - A. Yes.
And on the other side of the turnstiles as well? - A.
Yes.                                    :'          r
You had no difficulty getting through, I take it? - A.
No.
Then I think you went and bought yourself a cup of coffee
inside? - A. Yes.
You saw the tunnel and you went down it?    - A. Yes.
Had you been to the ground before? - A. No.
Were there people going down the tunnel at that time
already or... - A. There were a few, but there wasn t
many people.
It wasn’t too bad anyway? - A. No.                         ^
You came out of the tunnel and you entered the terracing?
- A. Yes.
Did you go left or right, can you remember? - A. At first
we went left and then we decided to go to the right.
You just thought that would be better? - A. i e s .
There wasn't any other reason for changing at that point?
- A. No.
Do you know what time it was when you got into the right
hand pen? - A. Probably about twenty-five to two/twenty
to two.
How would you describe it at that time? - A. Well, it was
pretty empty because we actually sat down on the
terracing.
With the passage of time of course it started filling up?
- A. Yes.
You were standing fairly near to the perimeter fence, is
that right? - A. Yes.
Fairly near to the front?   In line with the goal, or a
bit further? - A. Just right of the goal.
                                                 A. DUNCAN

You were iust talking and waiting for the match to start?
- A.   Yes.'

At that stags I taka it nothing concerned you, apart from
the fact that Liverpool shouldn't lose? - A. Yes.

It happened that you actually saw two of your friends,
Stuart Thompson and Tony Grier, is that right? - A. Yes.
I know what time you said in your statement, but do you
remember about what time you saw them? -A. Well, it was
pretty full then so we didn't speak to them, we just saw
them.   They were further up.
They were behind you, were they? - A. Yes.
When you saw them can you remember Tony climbing up on to
a barrier? - A. No.
You don’t remember that? - A. No.
It doesn't matter, you may not have been watching him at
that particular moment.   Do you remember a beach ball
being knocked about? - A. Yes.
Was that at about the same time as you saw Tony or was it
earlier or later? - A. I can't remember.
Can you remember the players coming on to the pitch,
pre kick-off? - A. Yes.
Were you still in the same position? - A. Yes.
At that point, what was it like? - A. Just like a normal
game, really.   A bit of pushing and that but not bad.
Nothing that concerned you at that stage? - A. No.
You of course were excited, the match was going to begin,
soon, you hoped. Did you see the kick-off? - A. They
were about to kick-off - I didn't actually see it because
of people pushing about.    You were sort of moving round
everywhere.
So when the players came out pre kick-off, it was still
like a normal match as far as you were concerned? - A.
Yes.
Just before kick-off something had happened.   Tell me
what had happened in that period between the players
coming out and kick-off? - A. Well, there was^a bit of
pushing and moving round and that, then I don't know.   I
just don't remember actually seeing any of the game, so I
obviously can't remember seeing the kick-off.
                                                   A. DUNCAN

You say you don't remember the game at all? - A. Not
really.
When the players came out, which you do remember, was
Kevin still with you? - A. Yes.
What hapDened to Kevin?   whan did you last catch a
glimpse"of him? - A. Well, there was a big push forward
and he went off to the right a   bit. He saidsomething,
"It's a bit packed, isn’t it?"   Then I didn't see him
after that.
Are you saying you felt a big push then? - A. Yes.
Where did that push take you?   Did it leave you.in the
position that you were in, but moresquashed, or did it
move you? - A. It moved you forward and you were
squashed, but normally what would happen is it would go
back.   You know, people would   pushback.
That's what didn't happen? - A. No.
We have tended to use the word "surge", but you can use^
"push", it doesn't matter.   How many of these pushes did
you feel, just the one or more than one? - A. Well, there
was the first one and then it didn't move back andthen
another one came, a bigger one.
There was a bigger one after the first one.   Did the
first one move back or not? - A. It did slightly. It
eased off slightly.
Not as much as you would expect? - A. No.
Then the second one was much stronger? - A. Yes.
But you don't know what was happening with the game? - A.
No.
You were fairly near the front. Had you seen   the gate
which is in the fence? - A. Yes.
You had seen that.   Could you see what happened to that
gate? - A. Well, there were people shouting for tne
Police or stewards or whatever on the other side or tne
fence, for them to open it because they were, getting _
crushed.   No-one opened it and then I think some of tne
crowd who were in front of it started pushing on it to
get it open and it came open.   Then a few Policemen ran
over and shut it again and were leaning on it. After
about five minutes or so - I think they got it locked
again, and then after about five minutes or so one of
them opened it.
                                                           45
                                                   A. DUNCAN

Q. So you were sayinc this happanad. Did this happen
   aftar kick-off or just at kick-off cr befcra kick-
   off? - A. It was aftar the kick-off.
Q. You think it was aftar? - A. Yes.
Q. You are saying it was opened by seme fans who pushed
   it open? - A. Yes.
Q. Did you see any of them run on to the field? - A. A
   few ran out and then when the Police had seen them
   run out they ran over and shut it, leanedagainst it.
Q. Did they get them back in, can you remember? - A.
   They tried to. I am not sure whether they ran off in
   another direction, I am not sure.
Q. I cannot hear you? -A. I am not sure whether they
   ran off in a different direction or the Police could
   not get them.
Q. We have heard from several young men who were
   standing at the gate and who ran out into the field.
   What I am trying to find out is what you remember.
   You remember this happening. You remember the gate
   being shut? - A. Yes.
Q. Howconfident are you about your timings? - A. I
   could not really tell you. I am not tco certain.
Q. Do you know how long the match played frcm beginning
   to end? - A. I did not know at the time. I have
   heard since.
Q. Pardon? - A. I have heard since but I didn't know at
   the time.
Q. What X am trying to find out is whether you are
   saying the gate was shut for the whole of the
   duration of the match because the match only played
   for five minutes? - A. X do not think so.
Q. Didyou see a Police Officer open the cata or was it.
   the fems that opened it the second time that you
   noticed? - A. I could not really be certain. It was
   either a Policeman or an ambulanceman, I think. One
   of the St. John Ambulance or what have you.
Q. You were standing in the crowd and there was a man in
   front of you who was not very well, is that right.
   A. Yes.
Q. Somebody shouted to you and said, "Try and revive
   him”, is that right? - A. Yes.
     p r o g r e s s a t t h a t p o in t ?   - A . N o,   I c o u l d n ' t s e e on t o
     th e p it c h .

Q. In fact, this man told you to bite his ear, did he
   not? - A. Yes. His friend was standing outside the
   fencing and told me to bite him.
Q. He told you to do that? - A. Yes.
Q. How did you get out? - A. I was there for a bit and
     eventually I suppose I got on to my side.
Q. I am sorry? - A. I got sort of sidewards on a b i t s o
     that I could get a bit of air and then scmecne pulled
     me over the fencing.
Q. Somebody pulled you over the fence? - A. Yes.
Q. Eventually another friend told you that Stuart was
   missing, did he not? - A. Yes.
Q. Unfortunately your friend Kevin also lost his life? -
   A. Yes.
Q. I want you to show us on a plan where you were? - A.
   Yes. (witness marked the plan)
       MR. BEECHEY:            C.457, sir.
Q.        THE CORONER:  Did you notice the barrier at ail
     behind you? You have put your cross from near the
     barrier. Do you remember that barrier at all? - A.
     No.
Q. You do not remember anything about it? - A. Not while
   the crush was on I didn't.
                           Cross-Ey*min«»fS bv MR. PAYNS

Q. Have you followed the team to other grounds? - A.
   Yes.
Q. How long have you been doing that? - A. Actually that
   was the first away game I went to and since then I
   have been going now and again.
Q. ■This was the first time you had been to an away
   match? - A. Yes.
Q. At this particular Semi Final? - A. Yes.
                                                             47
                                                      A. DUNCAN

                Cross-Examined fev MR. ISAACS

Q. Andraw, you tcld the Coroner that you recall the
   players coming out and at that point it was just like
   a normal game? - A. Yes.
Q. There was pushing but it was not that bad? - A. Yes.
Q. You get pushing behind the goal in a normal game? -
   A. Yas.
Q. And surging, as you have told us, with people comznc
   down and people going back up again? - A. Yes.
Q. You said that you started to feel, and I am
   paraphrasing now I think the impression you gave and
   tall me if I am wrong about this or if I am right.
   It started to get bad when this first big surge came
   just when they were about to kick off? - A. Yes.
Q. I wanted to ask you about that because you were asked
   by the Coroner whether you actually saw the kick-off
   and you said you had not. By that you meant you did
   not actually see someone kicking the ball? You did
   not see Rush kicking the ball? - A. No.
Q. When you say they were just about to kick off, do you
   mean they were standing in the centre circle ready to
   kick off? - A. Yes.
Q. In the centre circle ready to kick off? - A. Yas.
Q. They were getting into position to kick off, were
   they? - A. Yes.
        THE CORONER: Mr. Manning, shall we adjourn now?
   Did you say, yes or no, Mr. Manning?
       MR. MANNING: I think we can finish this
  witness. Shall we try?
       THE CORONER: It is easier for him but I do not
  want anybody to feel rushed.
       MR. MANNING:    I actually think it would be
  better.
        THE CORONER:   Go head, Mr. Manning.
               r^ffs-Examined by MR.   manntng

Q. I just want to go further in time just a little bit
   further than tlie gentleman next to me had done.
   After that first push came, of course, that was when
                                                  A. DUNCAN

ycu and Xavin talked, when he had been pushed off to
tr.a rz.z~~ ar.d that is whan he said or you said, I am
net sura, "It is a bit packed, isn't it?1'? - A. Yes,
he said it.
It was him who said it and you agreed with him at
that time? - A. Yes.
The first time you had the push it eased back a bit.
The second time it did not ease back at all? - A.
Yas.
     MR. XING: Do I understand the evidence of
Andraw correctly that he lost two friends?
     THE CORONER:- Two. He went with Kevin Williams
whom he lost and he knew Stuart Thompson.
     MR. KING: I do not think it will serve any
purpose to question him.
     THE CORONER:     Yes.
     MR. KING: I just want to say to Andrew, thank
you for coming, because I suspect it is difficult for
you to relive it.
                    LUNCHEON ADJOURNMENT
                                         E lb o z v L a n e ,    F orm b v L 3 7        4A W
                                                 T e le t> h o n e :(0 7 0 4 8 ) 7 8 6 6 1
                                                      F a x :(0 7 0 4 8 ) 3 2 4 8 8




6 March 1992


To whom it may concern


Dear Sir/Madam

Re Mrs Anne Williams,


I have been asked by my patient, Mrs Anne Williams, to
give my opinion concerning the death of her son Kevin at
the Hillsbrough disaster in 1989.  I can confirm that I
have read the report of the autopsy dated 16 April 1989
and have counselled Mrs Williams regularly since that date.
Mrs Williams has been able to interview witnesses at the scene
of Kevin's death only two weeks ago and was able to discuss with
a Mrs Deborah Martin in detail the final few minutes of Kevin's
life.  I have been asked to give my opinion on whether or not
Kevin was able to utter the word "Mum" following attempted
resuscitation by Mrs Martin of Kevin.  It is. my opinion that from
the given information from Mrs Williams and the detailed report of
the autopsy, it would not be impossible for Kevin to have uttered the
word "Mum" and I have informed Mrs Williams accordingly.


Yours faithfully




Dr S J Crosby




R oger P a rker   •   F orbes In n e s       •    P a tr ic ia    G ib s o n     •   S te v e   C ro sb y   •   G ra h a m   A llz v r r ^ h i
                                                                                              STATION
    r ' ' #'
NAME:
                        .
                     DEREK WILLIAM
                     BRUDER

aE rESS:             MERSEYSIDE POLICE, 'F ' DIVISION,
                     HALEWDOD PSTN, LIVERPOOL.

        / DATE OF BIRTH: 23                 30051965

OyUPATICN:           POL PC7808 F DIVISION


Who s t a t e s : - T h is statem en t c o n s is t in g o f 012 p a g es, ea ch sig n e d
b jlm e, i s tr u e t o th e b e s t o f my knowledge and b e l i e f and I make
i l knowing th a t i f i t i s ten d ered in e v id en ce I s h a ll be l i a b l e t o
p ro secu tio n i f I have w i l f u l l y s ta te d in i t an yth in g w hich I know
t * b e f a ls e o r do n o t b e lie v e t o be tr u e .




T
I
(
         . 270489                                                             DW             (SIGNED)



           I am a serving P o lic e O ffic e r w ith Ife rsey sid e P o lic e , on Saturday 15th
    I      Ap ri l     1989   (150489) I was o f f d u ty and went t o su p p ort L iv erp o o l in

    |      the match a g a in s t Nottingham F o r e st a t H illsb o ro u g h F o o tb a ll Ground.

           I want t o th e game in my own c a r w ith my fr ie n d D avid MALONE, 18 Devon

    I      Way, Huyton, L iv e rp o o l.      He had bought our t i c k e t s fo r s e a t s in th e

           North Stand fo r # 1 4 .0 0 , from L iv erp o o l f o o t b a ll c lu b su p p o rters c lu b I
    I      th in k .
    |      We drove t o th e ground v ia H u d d ersfield where I dropped my s i s t e r o f f

           a t P o ly tech n ic and th en c a r r ie d on t o H illsb o ro u g h .   On th e way t o th e

           ground th e r e was a s h o r t d e la y a t th e M anchester In terch an ge on th e

           M62 w ith roadworks.
    I      A fta r we a r r iv e d a t S h e f fie ld I w ent w ith David MAD3NE t o th e Gateway

    |      s t c r e on th e c o n tin u a tio n o f H a lifa x Road.   T h is b e in g w ere v® parked

           th e c a r a t about 1.10pm (1 3 1 0 ).       A t th e Gateway s to r e th e r e v e r e

    |      betw een 200-300 L iv erp o o l fa n s .     Wfe sta y e d w ith th en and w ere allo w ed

           in to th e s to r e in sm a ll numbers t o buy d r in k s .        D avid and I bought

    I       fou r can s o f la g e r betaken us and th en went o u ts id e and s a t on a

    |      g ra ss v e rg e to g e th e r w ith th e o th e r 200-300 fa n s and v® drank two cans




    I                                                               0W,                                      3;
    I
BRUDER                  DEREIK WILLIAM

eacri.    The group of fans was well behaved and I didn't see any

drunkeness.     We were supervised by a Merseyside and South Yorkshire

Police Officer who were sat on two horses outside the Ccxnet

Superstore.

Whilst I was sat on this verge everyone was happy and amenable and at

one point I saw a uniform Superintendent and Chief Inspector WALK past

us.      Between 1.45pm and 2pm (1345) (1400) the two mounted police

officers     came over and told us it was getting on and time to make our

way to the ground.     The whole crowd moved on without any problems at

all. I renenber it was the Merseyside Officer who actually spoke to

the crowd.                           ..
We walked to the ground and when we got into lappings Lane its e lf i t

was packed with people even half a mile from the ground its e lf.

Because of the crowd my friend asked a policeman for directions to

the ground, he was manning a junction either two or three roads up

from the ground off Leppings Lane.       He then directed u s to go back the

way we had cate and round to the Spion Kop end. .I didn't think that

was right but followed his directions and walked back the way we had

cars and to the Spion Kop.      This was about 2.20pm (1420).

We then went to the Spion Kcp but three quarters of the way round on

Penis tone Bead I realised we were going totally the wrong way and we

walked back.

The time was getting on now and the walk round was long because a lot

of the connecting roads between Leppings Lane and Penistone Read were

blocked by Police.      Because of the time I approached a police officer

on one of the barriers and he allowed us to take this short cut when I

explained what had happened and shoved him my police warrant card.        We

arrived back at Leppings Lane at 2.30pm (1430).       When David and I

arrived back at the turnstiles there were no queues whatsoever and a
                       DEREK WILLIAM                                      3



large mass of people all trying to get through the turnstiles and into

the ground.   It had reached the point of every man for themselves in

orriar to get to the turnstiles.
I made for and entered the far left hand side turnstile of turnstiles

1-15.   There was no police officer by my turnstile.    Cver to my far

right I saw a number of police officers on horses. I could not see

any police officers on foot but could not say whether this was

because there were none or they were blocked from my vxew by the



Outside the ground my friend had both our tickets and to try and stay^

together I had hold of his jeans.      However, the pushing of the

people was that much that we were pushed apart and separated.

Ones we were apart I decided to make for the turnstile on my own.

David had got in before me and once I reached the turnstile he handed

my ticket out to me and I was allowed inside.      I handed my ticket into

the turnstile operator and retained the stub of the ticket.

I had difficulty in finding the entry point only by the misdirection

of the police officer, but once I got back into lappings Lane, I found

the turnstile but had difficulties getting in because of the sheer

nurrber of people.   At the time of rny entry I saw no gates open other

than the turnstiles.    I did not see any of the gates open.

As I was trying to get to the turnstiles I saw about five or six

teenagers climb over a concertina gate immediately to the left of the

turnstiles.   After the first five or six went over I saw a number of

othars climb to the top of this gate but then drop back into the crowd

outside as if there was someone in authority on the inside telling

them to get back.
Onea David and I had got into the ground I saw a police sergeant and

four constables immediately behind the concertina gate where I had
                       DEREK WILLIAM


   n th e teen agers climb over.   I approached the sergeant and said

scirBChing along the lines of "I am a Police Officer frcm Merseyside,

th e res a huge crowd outside and they're pushing to get in, can you do

scirathing about it or get something done?".     At this time, I was with

David but I did not produce my warrant card or formally identify

myself.    He made no reply to me and by this time it was close to

kick off time so I left it at that.

Once inside the ground I saw no direction signs to my seat in the

North stand and had difficulty in finding it because the sections of

seating were given letters of the alphabet, however, the letters did

not follow alphabetical order ie ABFDGCM, though I can't remember the

exart order.
I entered the North Stand through a tunnel, there was no crowd within

this tunnel and no problems at all.    I saw no Police within the

tunnel and only a few stewards right at the beginning.

Once inside the ground I saw no alcohol being drunk at all.

I tcok my seat along with David just as the two teams came out onto

the pitch.   This was about 2.57 pm (1457).    Once through the

tunnel and up the stairs, I went to the section of my seats where two

ste.vards directed us to our particular seats.    These were right by the

entrance to this section of seating.    People continued to enter after

me and after about ten minutes between ten and twenty people arrived

at this entrance and didn't appear to have tickets for this stand.      I

actually saw two people holding tickets which were for the West

Stand.    This was after the incident in pens 3 and 4 and people had

started to ccme out onto the pitch.     Everyone started to discuss what

was going on and these two men said that they should be in those pens

and shewed the tickets which were complete without the counterfoil

being removed.
 W   „                 DEREK WILLIAM                       *               5
BFC3ER
r - -ccerier-csd no personal crowd crush within the ground only that

cut3icie   which was about 2.45 pm (1445).    I did not see any crowd

su rze within the ground and was not injured.

At about the time these men had appeared at the entrance to my section

of seating which was three quarters of the way along the North Stand

nearest to the Spion Kop about ten rows frcm the front, I saw people

cliThing over the fences frcm pens three and four of the lappings Lane

stand fran kick off but initially they were directed behind hoardings

and sat near to the pitch.     I could not see whether they were directed

by stewards or Police.
Aft=r about five minutes a Police officer ran on to the pitch and

stepped the gams.     People then began to climb over the front fencing

onto the pitch at will and I could also see people pulled up into the

seating area above.     At no point did I see any gates opened to allow

escape frcm the pens.
Ones plav had been stopped the Nottingham Forest fans in the^Spion^Kop^

began to taunt the Liverpool j^ q ^ r t e r s ^
A fan then ran onto the pitch and then ran up to the Spion Kop and

began shouting and making 'V' signs with two fingers at the Forest

supporters.     Myself and other fans in the North stand began to shout

telling him to go away because we could see there was something wrong

in the Leppings Lane end.     This man who was in his early twenties with

long hair and a black capped sleeve T shirt was then turned back by

either stewards or Police and ran back towards lappings Lane but was

detained by Police before he got back.
Ancther older man then ran up to the Spion Kcp and then began to wave

his hands at the Forest fans.      He wasn't taunting, he was signalling

for them to calm down and trying to tell them there was something

wrong. Shortly after this the Police formed a cordon across the
                       DEREK WILLIAM                                          6


^ , _v3V line.   I'm not sure if this was after the f ir s t or second man.

F^-ole in the Leppings Lane end then ripped down advertising hoardings

ar.c beaan to carry people on them up towards the comer formed by the

Spion Kop and the North Stand.    I could see that sane of then were

presumed de*H as they had coats over their faces and one man in

particular had a jumper pulled back to cover his face.      These people

wer= then rolled onto the pitch and the carriers went back for more

people or bodies.

The police then formed a further cordon in front of the North stand.

Around the same time a number of people wearing tracksuit trousers arid

sweatshirts came fran the direction of the players tunnel and went to

the Spion Kop end.    They then pulled down more hoardings here and went

to help carry more people up frcm Leppings Lane.

A number of people were also carried up to the comer in front of me

bodily.   There were a large number of people in this comer either

laid out behind the police on the pitch or sitting with their heads in

their hands.

I did not see any of the Police in the cordon in front of the North

Stand break ranks to assist these people.
/
I saw one person on the pitch about a quarter of the pitch length away

from the Spion Kop about twenty feet fran the hoardings in front of

the North stand.     I distinctly remember this because later on as I

will describe an ambulance drove directly past us and a St John's

Ambulance man who was with me tried to flag i t down but i t carried on.

I am not sure if this man had been carried on a hoarding or by his

friend who was with him.     I saw this man lying on the floor having

convulsions.

The Police cordon in front of the North Stand appeared unconcerned and

'smarmy', this agitated the supporters in the stand who vrere shouting
 jj^g                % DEREK WILLIAM                                       7

for then to go and help the people on the pitch.    None of the Police

officers left the cordon.
I was very close to the pitch so I went down the aisle, over a small

fiva foot wall with hoardings on, I walked through the cordon without

being challenged at all and then went to the man having convulsions.

Alxrost immediately I was joined by a St John's Ambulance man.     I

identified myself to the St Johns man as an off duty Police Officer.

He then said to me " You do mouth to mouth and I'll do heart massage”.

I then took his pulse in his neck.     I could feel a slight pulse.    I

then corroenced mouth to mouth resuscitation and the St John's man

started heart massage.    I undid two buttons on the top of the man's

shirt.    If I remenber rightly the bottom of the shirt appeared

ripped.
We continued to work on the man but after about five minutes he went

grey and his face was withdrawn.     As I had approached the man his head

had moved as if he was being sick.     When I got to him I cleared his

mouth    and the back of his throat of vanit before commencing mouth to

mouth resuscitation.     There was no bleed in^thejranrtrrHt^ about

fiva minutes when the man went grey, a ^sery dist^ti^e--sxnell came

frcm his mouth.    I can still renenber it now but could not describe

it.
Aftar about seven minutes I swapped places with the St John's

Ambulance man and he commenced mouth to mouth and I heart massage.         As

I did heart massage his ribs were unnaturally prominent in the whole

of his rib cage even though he was only thinly built.     His stomach

was depressed and abnormally lower than his rifceage.
Aftar a short time I undid the button on his trousers and ripped open

 the zip.    I then continued heart massage.
 Shortly afterwards an ambulance entered the ^ground.    It appeared
                       DEREK WILLIAM                                       0

a Health Authority ambulance as opposed to St Johns.    It began to

drive dcwn towards Leppings Lane.     I then told the St John's man to

try and stop it.     He tried to flag it dcwn but it continued on as if

it had been ordered not to stop in the top comer but to go to the

Leppings Lane end.
The St John's man then rejoined me and continued to give mouth to

mouth resuscitation.
Shortly after this we were joined by one of the men I described

earlier in the tracksuit trousers and I think green sweatshirt.       He

asked ne if I was all right and knew what I was doing.                   **

I said "I'm an off duty bobby, i'm all right", with that he left as if

to go scnewhere where he could be of more use with other injured

persons.
Shortly after this man, which must have been about six minutes since I

had changed places with the St Johns man, a fenale St Johns Ambulance

officer cane over and pushed me out of the way and took over fran me.

I then steed up and watched as she was obviously better trained in

First Aid than me.
I then steed by the injured man together with his friend who had been

there all along, telling vis to keep going and not to let his mate die.

Within two minutes of this, the St Johns Ambulance man told the St

Johns Ambulance wanan, "He's gone", and steed up.     I looked at the

man's friend who was standing by his head, he was caroletely grey.

By this time, I felt ill m y se lf and just turned away as there was

nothing else I could do.
I would describe the man who died as:- between 17 and 20 years of age,

approx 5'8 - 5'9 tall, short sandy or reddish coloured hair, slim

build, no facial hair, white eurepean, I could see no cuts or

abrasions cn him.     I seem to remember freckles on his cheeks, but Im
                      DEREK WILT .TAM                                     9

fr
not   sure if it could have been vcmit, I'm almost positive it was

fre-kies.   As I said previously he had an unusually prominent rib cage

anc depressed stomach.
He v*as wearing a light, possibly white button up shirt, licnt grey or

beige cotton trousers, light coloured boxer shorts.     I noticed no

jewellery or footwear.
His friend I would describe as 21 or 22 years of age, carx brown hair,

shortish hair, about 5'9 tall.    I cannot remember much of his clothing

but he appeared quite plump with a slight beer belly.      He had no

facial hair nor glasses.                                                **
The St John's man was in uniform, 'the only thing I can remenber was

that he had dark hair and was thirty plus years of age.

The St John's woman was in uniform again very slimly built and no

older than 18 years of
After the St John's man had said the man was dead I'd seen enough,

I felt ill and had to get out of the ground.    I knew David would have

stayed where he was because he knows no First Aid.    I went over to the

wall where I had climbed in.     As I got there I saw a photographer

kneeling dcwn with an orange tabard he was taking photographs of the

injured and dying.
A fan who was already on the pitch went over to him and said "Fuck

off, you're taking pictures of my injured mates".
The photographer carried on taking pictures so the fan started pushing

him.    The photographer stood up and the fan then pushed him back to

the wall and tried to take the camera frcm him.     The camera then swung

and smashed into the wall.     I then climbed over the wall using the

photographers case as a step.     I then rejoined David.

He said to me "Come on we're going", and we both then left.      I cannot

say what time this was.
                                DEREK WILLIAM                                                           xu

W hilst a t H illsb orou gh th e o n ly c rim in a l o ffe n c e s w ere o f a minor

p u b lic ord er nature i e , th e fa n s clim b in g o v er th e g a te s e t c .           A fte r

th e d is a s te r w ith in th e sta n d , I saw a number o f in s ta n c e s such as

th e ph otographer's camera and sau sage r o l l s thrown a t th e cordon in

fr o n t o f th e North Stand and one o ld man who threw a cup o f te a a t an

o f f ic e r in th e cordon.
T his was caused p u r e ly by a g it a t io n amongst th e crowd by th e apparent

c a llo u s n e ss o f th e photographer and apparent i n a c t i v i t y o f th e p o lic e

w ith regard t o th e in ju r ed and d y in g .

I w itn esse d no s e r io u s o ff e n c e s .

There were a number o f fa c to r s w hich I b e lie v e c o n tr ib u te d t o th e

number o f d eath s and in j u r ie s .

O utside th e ground th e r e appeared t o be a la c k o f c o -o r d in a tio n

betw een th e mounted and fo o t p o lic e o f f i c e r s .           The approach roads t o

th e ground w ere w e ll manned w ith P o lic e o f f ic e r s a t ju n c tio n s and

o u tsid e pubs and o f f lic e n c e s .         However, I made a c a m e n t about b e in g

m isd ir e c te d by th e p o lic e o f f i c e r t o an oth er o f f i c e r and he s a id i t

was un derstand able b ecause a l e t o f th e o f f ic e r s w ere d r a fte d in from

o u tsid e s ta tio n s and had p e e r lo c a l knowledge o f th e a r e a .              T h is may

have c o n tr ib u te d t o th e b u ild up o u ts id e th e ground w hich cau sed th e

i n i t i a l cru sh o u ts id e .
In sid e th e ground once th e d is a s t e r had occu rred th e r e appeared a la c k

o f c o -o r d in a tio n betw een s e n ic r p o lic e o f f ic e r s and lew er ranks on th e

p it c h .   The a c tu a l s c a le o f th e in c id e n t w a sn 't a p p re c ia te d

im m ediately w hich r e s u lte d in a d e la y in th e resp o n se and p erso n n el

b ein g despatched t o d e a l w ith i t .

From my own p erso n a l e x p e r ie n c e I and m ost P o lic e o f f i c e r s have o n ly

b a s ic F ir s t Aid know ledge.           When I a d m in istered f i r s t a id t o th e man I

f e l t t o t a l l y in ad eq uate on r e f l e c t i o n .   However w ith th a t p a r tic u la r
        gpL’C)£R            DEREK WILLIAM                                      11

       man, I don't think more knowledge would have helped but it might have

       in others.
       I would also like to add that though the Police in the cordon did not

       assist the injured and dying I saw a number of other officers who did.

       In particular two small policewomen who tried to help a very large man

       but couldn't carry him until helped by fans.




                                                         D W ERUDER SIGNEJJ

■jATEMENT taken
          FLACE

         TIME            DATE:   270489

   ISS TO SIGNATURE:

 TCERS SIGNATURE
                                                                                                                                                              WG 414

                                                     West Midlands Police                                                                                      | ^ <d
                                                     STATEMENT OF WITNESS                                                                                                U S'
                                 ( C . J . Acc 1 9 6 7 ,3 .9 ; Sl.C. Ac= 1980, s . 102; il.C . R ulaa 1981, r . 7 0 )


                                                                                         De^k William BRUDER
Name
^ge                   22               C?-s)            Dace of Birch                    3 0   .0   5 . 6 6



Occupation                                                                                 police Officer (Merseyside Police)
Home or business address
   ...            •                                                                      Merseyside Police
and te:epnone mimoer                                                                                  J
                                                                                          •F ' Division
                                                                                         Halewood Police Station

                                                                                          Liverpool                 (05i 709 6010)



T h is s ta te m e n t, c o n s is tin g o f   sever.page (s ) e a c h           * s ig n e d b y m e , is tr u e to th e b e s t o f m y k n o w le d g e a n d b e l i e f
a n d I m a k e i t k n o w in g th a t, i f i t i s te n d e r e d in e v id e n c e , I s h a ll b e lia b le to p r o s e c u tio n i f I h a v e w ilfu lly s ta te d

i n i t a n y t h in g w h ic h I k n o w to b e f a l s e o r d o n o t b e l ie v e t o b e tr u e .


Dated the                  3rd day of                   May           .                   1990

S ig n e d            D Bruder                                                         S ig n a tu r e w it n e s s e d b y         M Sawers

                                                                                        O ffic e r s M a r n e                       M R Sawers

                                                                                       R a n k      Inspector                                 N o           3451

 Further to my previous statements of 27 April 1989 and 17 August 1989, I

 have been asked to think about a number of the points which are raised in

 the statement I made nearly a fortnight; after the Hillsborough Stadium

 disaster on 15 April 19S9.




 Before clarifying a number of these points I would point out; that I have

 today been shown a number of photographs, plans and documents by Inspector

SAWERS cf West Midlands Police which I have used to refresh my memory.                                                                                                   Its

also fair to say that my first statement (27.4.89) was the first occasion

 that involvement with the disaster was set dcwn in any detail, in writing,

although I did make some brief nctes myself cn Sunday, 16 April 19S9-                                                                                                I

retain these in my possession and would say that they do not relate to my

dealings with any deceased casualty that day.




Signed                     Bruder                                                 Signature witnessed by                      M Sawers Inspector

* De!«»r“ r>s .irniicable
                                                                                                                   (Amended 9.31)
                                     O C O i iV U U idilU O i


                                     S T A TEMENT OF WITNESS
                       ( C .J . ACC i 9 6 7 , a . 9 ; M.C. Act 1980, 3.1*02; M.C. R ules 1981, r-7 0 )


                               •                     DEREK WILLIAM BRUDER                   (2)
Continuation of statement of




 I am a single man and joined Merseyside Polios on *7 Cc-obe.                                                1. 8, .

 initial training at Bruche District Training Centre, Worrington, I received

 basic first aid resuscitation in both theoretical and practical

 application.           I obtained a pass and was issued with an identifying oarc

 qualifying me for, I think, 2 or 3 years.                                Cn 15 April 1989. I had received

 no further instruction or refresher training in basic iirsu <*-d.                                                      «orfe/e. ,

 as a direct result of the situation I found myself m                                        on the d^y or

 disaster I personally felt inadequately equipped in either uaeory-or

 practise of first aid.                  I am absolutely satisfied that the first aia I

  rendered in terms of mouth to mouth resuscitation and heart massage were

  correct and that I could have done no more, but, nevertheless, i fe-«

  didn't know enough and regretted not having taken that aspect of initial

  traning seriously enough.



                                                                                           r* f ,n r i " h e r'   f i r s ^     3 .1 0
  For those reasons, I applied on my own mi--<a'--

  training in the form of a one week full time course d-..=
                                                                               .               rar>          t undertook
  qualification as a first aid public oraer u.

  the course in June last year, which means I now have a special rcie

                                                                          a <5 o ’-h<=r of members o:                         t..e
   public order deployments to trsao caSUo.w                                  ■

   public or police officers as injuries occur.



                                                    !                                           ■-or-ar' ■S'ruicced to
   As a result of that course, I feel confiaer.t ana

   deal with injured people whether those ir.jur--s be

   threatening.           It also confirms that, in zact, my
                                                                                   ur«""''scsful, were pro^e.-/
   day and my attempts at resuscitation, a--..c l *.,                              je-   —

   administered.


                                                               2X
                                                             SignaturawiSiessed    by       M Sabers Ins^ec-or
   Signed      D Bruder
                                      STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                        ( C . J . Act 1967,s . 9; M.C. Acs 1980, s . 102; M.C. R u les 1981, r . 7 0 )


                                             DEREK WILLIAM BRUDER (3)
 Continuation of statement of




I will now deal           with a number of specific points from my original statement

(27.4.8?) using           the page nurtcersof that statement.                          I understand       that the

numbers I will use in brackets are these of the file of statements

contained in respect of Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS, prepared by West Midlands

Police under the deceased reference number 51 •



On Page 6 (File           page 41 ) I first refer to the youth I new know to be Kevin

Daniel WILLIAMS           lying a 1/4 length of the pitch from the Spion Koo.                                 I

refer to him being "on the flcor,,, meaning the pitch suriace, and "having

convulsions".          I have thought about this carefully today and with the added

benefit of my training I can say that this was not a process that lasted

for any time.          It certianly wasn't anything similar to an epileptic fit,

for example.          It was an impression that I had which I originally associated

with the lad vomitting.                 I will say that I did not see the casualty vomit

nor did I see any sick on the body or grassed area around him.                                           I will

correct further references to vcmit as they occur in my original statement.




On pase 7 (42) I describe approaching the body.                                  He was not convulsing as I

did so (line 5)•



I refer to feeling for a carotid pulse in tne neck and said cr_^—nail/ thau

I thought I could detect a slight pulse, hcwever, I now feel tnat I am acie

to correct this.            I felt for the pulse with my first two fingers of my le.-

hand, I believe, to the carotid artery.                             I cannot say acsoiuteiy tha- I

felt for the pulse before I started mouth to mouth or after; nor indeed

whether I did both simultaneously.                         Whilst I would now have much more




  Signed      D Bruder                                     Signature witnessed by      M Sawers Inspector
                                                                                                                  MG 415   (SO G22)
                                           West Midlands Police                                                    (Amended 9.31)



                                           S T AT EMENT OF WITNESS
                             ( C . J . Ace 1 9 6 7 ,3 .9 ; M.C. Acs 1980, 3 .1 0 2 ; M.C. H ulas 1981, r .7 0 )


C ontinuation of s ta te m e n t of         DEREK WILLIAM BRUDER                  (4 )




skill, on the day I cannot say with absolute certainty that I went

accurately straight to the carotid artery.




For all those reasons, I can say that I felt for a pulse in the region of

the carotid artery, but I may have also touched the area or the "Adams

Apple" or felt something in the neck region which I originally thought was

a pulse but may have been mistaken.



I refer to the face going "grey" and "his face was withdrawn".                                                    I cannot

say specifically that this was a change frcm normal pallor to grey, or wna^

I new know to be cynosis or blueness.                                   I mentioned it in the sequence of

when I became aware of it.



I refer tc approaching the lad and having the impression that his head

moved and associating this with his being sick.                                           I air. new aosoluteiy

satisfied that he was not sick, or certainly I did not see vcmitiing or

vomit.        The movement of the head, if thats what it was, I would say i-s

best described as a "twitch” .



I refer tc clearing his mouth before resuscitation, by tnat i mean to s&'f .

checked that his airway was clear before expressing air into his mouth.

 :ere w.is a fluid of some description but I accept readi_y tnat this ccu_c

have been spittle or phlegm.




 signed          D Bruder                                        Signature witnessed by           M   Sawers Inspe_-Or
                                                                                                                         WG 415   (SO G22)

                                 West Midlands Police                                                                    <*—*•* 9-31>
                                  S T A T E M E N T OF WITNESS
                       (C .J.   1 9 6 7 , 3 . 9 ; M.C . Ac= 1 9 8 0 . 3 . 1 0 2 ; M .C . R u l e s    1931, r w O )


                         tnt       ' DEREK WILLIAM BRUDER (5)
Continuation of statem ent ot



                                       ~hnn*" c m ^ u i e s and a very distinctive
  x rar-»r to the man going grey alter aocu, „ nun
                            ,-v,                      tv, -
                                      wac a-ain not vomit but its true to say
   smell coming from his mcuo...            -         T-.— .
                                           ■ „ a ‘--:we=ve and feel sick myself.
   I can still remember it now as it causea me



                                         u-ioc “hp St John ambulanceman did
   I refer to performing mouth to mcutn whij.  u.       -
                          • f 7    mi-as                                     Whilst this is purely recollection
   heart compression for aoout 7 m_nu^_ .

    I believe it to be reasonably, accurate.


                                                •
    Having changed places with the St Johns a m o u l ^ c - s
                *,     an usual'r<b cage and abdcnen.                                                  Aphotograph I have been
    what I thought was an usual r^o cdfe. cu

    shown at post mortem appears to support this.



                                                                        *.<=-*• fh’s oc->nt and                       inmy second
     I refer tounzipping the lac's trousers                                     th-s po_
                                                                                            ..             *r         ^ssn xn
       tatsmer.t recollect the striped boxer shorts wnic.* -

     photographs (Her So TT1/31 and TT1/22).


                                                                                „          _<ve -innr.ss of the arrival on
      t have been shewn documents which purport *0                                                     -        - -
                                                                                                                         ?nd ambulance
      the pitch of the 1st ambulance (St Johns: Amouian
                                         > r h-ve c - n ^ d e r e d this information
      (being the 1st SYMAS amouxance).             J- n«ve c~n“
                                              ._              os) in ccmcariscn witn tne
      (ro
      \t
         r',a^ e d to as MA? i '- •1----  —_
                                             Ju **--r
                                                              _      cV'rw ‘•v,e casuc-i -/ o=— =
      ohctosrachs PR5/A/32 and PR5/A/33 which curcc. - ~ ‘                  ••
                                               . 1C r           ,rd wr^c-i I understand would                             be   before x
       carried on        astretcr.er at          15.3c          and ^r._ca
                                       m m a*- t*e Scion Xco end of the ground,
       saw and assisted to resuscitate him a. t..e




                                                                                                                 M Sawers Inspector
                                                                     S la n a tu re w itr.assad b y
                                                                                                                   WG 415   (SO G22)
                                       West Midlands Police                                                        (Amended 9.81)



                                       S T A T E M E N T OF WITNESS
                        ( C . J . Acc 1 9 6 7 ,3 .9 ; M.C. Acs 1980,. 3 .1 0 2 ; M.C. R u les 1981, r . 70)


 Continuation of statement of              DEREK WILLIAM BRUDER                    (6)



I c 2.nr.ct reconcile the time secuences and I am still sure that I did see an

ambulance, distinguish in my own mind that it was not of St Johns but

Health Authority and that I told the St Johns man with me to stop the

ambulance.        I have considered that what I referred to may have been this

ambulance exiting from the stadium but I don't think it was.                                                  My

recollection is still that it was entering the stadium.




I refer to being joined by a woman St Johns Ambulance Officer who pushed me

out of the way.           I recollected this to have been about 6 minutes after I

had changed places with the male St Johns Officer.                                         That makes a total,

from recollection, of 13 minutes joint resuscitation with the St Johns

male.     I would standby these estimates only in as much as I feel we

attempted resuscitation for between 10 and 15 minutes. Within a further two

minutes of both St Johns people working together the man declared "He's

gene" and stood up.              I referred to and re-affirm that he was "completely

grey" and there is absolutely no doubt in my mind, both now with the

benefit of further training, and then at that moment, that the youth I had

tried to save was dead; certainly dead and beyond any further help.                                                    I and

the St Johns personnel would net have stopped if there had beer, any

glimmer of hope at all - there was none.




I describe the body of the youth on p. 8 and 9                                         4        ) and believe the

distinguishing features I referred to 12 monthsago are plain to see                                                   on

photographs.




             D Bruder                                                                          M Sawers Inspector
Signed                                                    Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                           UG 415   (SO G22)
                                      West Midlands Police                                                 {Amended 9.31)


                                      S T A T E M E N T OF WITNESS
                        ( C . J . Acs 1 9 6 7 ,4 .9 ; M.C. Acc 1980, s . 102; M.C. R ulas 1981, r   .70)

 Continuation of statement of
                                            DEREK WILLIAM BRUDER {'




I have seen injuries shewn on photographs of the neck area, however, I did

not see them or notice then on the day.




                    D Bruder

                    M Sawers Insoector




                                                              (2 £            7 )


Signed          D Bruder                                Signature witnessed   by    M Sawers Inspector
I
I        .    •    ..................................................

-^ L         cm    /) z t e r a    < JcxA s^                   a     'fef/npr
JLccfoQzM si^                   L^Q Jb<^
m p fo d U G a d                           x jr s & * j\ j b   fo z , ^hibre>              " r x m 3-!*
                       AXj 5 f a s U o n g n 6 > »                     < ^ x b b b «<5 c^f                                         ._.



    U \\J ( $ X ) M & r ( >         <^0 J X 4 l $ > a c M u ^ \                          s5^x^'Ci^3

ll^ l^ a L J 3 H ^                                      ------ _
                          J k c *s K J b & - c a ^ e r & S             O f ^ lH S s

                     'Q ^ a         Q&       J ru e -                                .. ..... ..„       _       _    _    _    —         _
                     irn          ib c s X h i b ^        fO J / n i c,                                                                      .
              to p?\/¥s n f c JKc<k 4 t e ^                                             c c ^ t jc ? \< ^ t     > J h ^ i^ , c k 3 & .



^ X 2 jr ^ r o P 4 ^                    t0 ^ t= /T n i^ c w ^ p d V fe $S fC ^- k }fe                       ~ t i U £ ^ . ...
W ffte#& ) _ V ) 6 ii^ ..WL.CO A v j MPSL. (SO n ^ A ^ u th iQQO . C ^ .                                                                         .
^yro^? db          c f)'jJ iA C & '      ...fao< J M o &       M a    c s fiQ n c d                                      dbfes!^.
        " “         J5§J            teas u ty tfu e ^ .                    '                                -             — .— .— .


    ta0 £tu<2 2 c l         ^                                                                      jo . ti> v 'L £ E ~

          )\Utea,             ^                                       X    b e U gm ^ *s vi'fco-G^ o ff& tte d
                                                                                    * & ia M c y \ -*3 ^ h / b ^ O ^ r r y J ^

         tOC'K?- lx v M & -                 io f&^c%           jjto ^ 5t3^>e-iim ^                 fi/cftDtfzej. h o
                                                               AXj S ^     o    & sl- c f - c X & ^ s s             jQ flS \iji(= ^ < sn

l a                                   7<sv^^          _____....
    X    5*0^^                                                     c & y 'c h    < 8 ^ > ^ p 0 c fC X ^ ^                     „ „ _ .
% ^C j £JU U L ^ ^ ,C fc 4 ^ ^ {)fe S 3 U fiS r                                      )O j JSQS OAzA )Q3ZCxXJ3B'
    :t                            i > „ p u f e 4h A y o ^ d ^ Q K         loehTAcA          t ^ - . .....




I. . . . „ ___            hg
                                  17yi,S C ±z2tteftarf>. has] lo<s&i S e y *= & t
                                    e tr              2 Z l    C J" m U n A                                                              .........



■                                              ..
                                                ,
                                                .,
                                                 .
                                                 v,.,..... .... _                  Q e W c ^ ,.< 3 o t£ ~ .     W o ik ^ ~ ............
                                                                                                                                                 .




                                     m '     {h e .     p r ^ s e j^ c e    c *f      m £-       $ nn         W lO /ie
|                                                                  ^ ^ U ^ l^ a - r        J lX * c i   f c h y u a ^ j.




i
                                                                                                    STATION



           ■'     CESS'M
                  martin      J?i<E

JU
      / CATE 3F BIFTH: 25                   26091963

(^TJFATICN:        POL Sv-2-1

who s t a t e s : - T his statem en t c o n s is tin g o f 004 p a c e s, each sig n e d
,m „       i s tr u e t o th e b e s t o f my knowledge and b e l i e f and I make
9 knowing th a t i f i t i s ten d ered in ev id en ce I s h a ll be                     to
S s e c u t i o n i f I have w ilf u lly s ta te d in i t an yth in g w hich I krcw
t a be f a ls e o r do n ot b e lie v e t o be t r u e .


DftlED: 080539                                                                     D J SffiKTSJ (SIGNED)

I
 _        x an Debra Jane MARTIN and I l i v e a t th e above a d d re ss.                    I am

 ■        s in g le .    Kv occu p ation i s      a d e n ta l n u rse, I am a ls o a S p e c ia l P o lic e

           C on stab le number 221 based a t WXDSEATS (E2 S u b -d iv isio n ) o f South

           Y orkshire P o lic e .
           On Saturday 15 A p r il 1989 (150489) I paraded fo r d u ty a t 9.00am

            (0900) a t HULSBCECUGH F o o tb a ll stadium where th e r e was a b r ie f in g fo r

           a ll o f f ic e r s in v o lv ed in th e s e m i-fin a l betw een LIVERPOOL and

           NOTTINGHAM FOREST.            The b r ie fin g was a t 9.45am (0 9 4 5 ).

           A t 10.20am (1020) I retu rn ed t o th e gym a t th e f o o t b a ll ground fo r a

           sep a ra te b r ie fin g fo r s p e c ia l c o n s ta b le s .

           A t 10.35am (1035) I l e f t HUISBCFCUGi stadium t o p a tr o l HERRIES FCAD

            S0U3H t o ste p th e parking o f c a r s by fan s on th e hard s h c u lc e r s .                 I

            d id t h is w ith S.C .206 EAKER.           We co n tin u ed to p a tr o l KERRIES FCAD

            SCUIK, w hich i s a v e r y lo n g road , u n t i l about l.lOrxn (1310) th a t

            a fta m c c n .    At t h i s tim e we had ord ers t o go to PENISTCNE RD to c o v er

            t r a f f i c o u tsid e th e main en tra n ce g a te s fo r th e NOTTS FOREST fa n s.

            A t t h is p o in t I saw about 6 t ic k e t t o u t s .        I saw th e n s e l l i n g t ic k e t s

            and money changing hands.               I a ls o saw numerous fan s b oth Liverpoo^


      Y k is        L?                                                                                   ^

     S - t a t ^ e n ir



I
                    DEBRA JANE

fans and Notts Forest, who were obviously drunk, although at this

stage they were behaving reasonably.
At about 2.45pn (1445) I started to make my way to the LEPPINGS
                                                                            )
entrance., as I passed what I think is the main entrance to the SPICN^

KDF, the turnstiles were shut dcwn.
At about 2.50pm (1450) there was trouble at these turnstiles when the
Notts Forest fans, realising they were being locked out, were trying
any way they could to get in, this included paying money to the
turnstiles stewards and trying to buy tickets from the touts. The
crowd became very abusive and angry and I had to assist in the
removal of fans fran the ground. . I was on the road side and the
police inside were passing fans back out over the turnstiles and
there was a very large number of fans trying to get in still, so much
that mounted officers and their horses ware being pushed up against
the wall. The next thing I know is a large blue gate was opened and
a large majority of the crowd pushed their way into the ground.     I
found myself being carried along with the crowd unable to resist. A
mounted officer grabbed my collar but had to let go, because he would
hava been pulled fran his horse.   I got pushed to the floor, but I
managed to get back to my feet by pulling myself up a man's back.       I
then renamber opening my eyes and finding myself inside the ground,
at the botton of the Spion Kcp^and the gates had been shut behind----

me. I asked the steward on the gate to let me out, but at first he
refused, it was only when a mounted officer, the same one who had
triad to help me a few manents earlier, put his horse up against the

 gata, he opened it a short way and let me out.
Onca outside I found myself surrounded by drunken fans, screaming
 abuse, and the area covered by police. An officer used my radio to
 try and call for back up but to no avail because the channel was
i
^ p IN               DEBRA JANE

full of static. My radio was handed back to me and I ran to the
Lefpings Lane end of the ground. Ambulances and police cars were

rusnincr to that end of the ground. When I got to the Leppings Lane
enc of the ground I saw a vast crowd outside the turnstiles trying
to get in, it must have been about four tiroes larger than the crowd
I laft at the other end, so that would mean the crowd at the Spion
Kcp end numbered about 1000 plus and I would estimate about 4000

outside Leppings Lane end.
I can't really remsnber how, but somehow I got inside the ground,      I
                                                                     i
through the large blue gate which was open, and I ended up on the          .
pitch. I did not go through the tunnel.
Onca on the pitch I saw a lot of people who were obviously injured
and I can renstiber a man caning up to me shouting, "THERE'S TWD DEAD
YOU BASTARD". I then saw people who appeared to be dead. People
wera screaming and shouting and ambulances were driving onto the pitch
I assisted other police officers with dead and injured people and
helced to take them on stretchers to the gym, and I can ranember

seeincr officers fran E2 (WCODSEATS) everywhere.
I took about 6 dead to the gym, as well as many injured and whilst I
was trying to revive a young boy I renember something hitting me on
the back of my head, but I didn't really notice until much later when
I fcund a large swelling.    I could see many bodies being put on the
pitch, sate of them appeared to be (tying. I lost count of the number

of bodies I helped carry into the gym.
I halted carry a young boy into the gym frcm the pitch nearby. Ke
steeped breathing so I gave him the kiss of life, and heart massage
and a doctor also helped. He started breathing and opened his eyes,

his only word was "MUM' and then he died.
At 4.06pn (1606) Dr CURPEN certified death and I stayed with him.        I
                      DEBRA JANE

would describe him as white male, 5'6-5'7, 14-15 yrs, slim build and

brown hair, with a cut under his chin.    He had slightly crooked

teeth, there were no other marks on the body.    He was wearing a white

shirt, green sweat shirt, beige trousers, white socks, white Reeboks

and green and white boxer shorts.    He had a gold metal cnain with a

gold horn, a bus ticket, a train ticket and an entrance ticket.     He

had no identification or money.     I later found out the number given

to this boy was 51.
I stayed with the body and at 5.20am (0520) Sunday 16 April
(160489) an ambulance arrived and I went with the bcdy together with -

DC PONT and GRIFFITHS to the Medico Legal Centre, WATER LANE,

Sheffield.   I stayed with the body until he was stripped and details

taken fran me.   I finally went off duty at 6.30 (0630) on Sunday

16 April 1989 (160489).
At about 6.30pm (1830) Itonday 8 May 1989 (080589) I saw PC's MORGAN

and GODWIN fran West Midlands Police at ny hone.     PC ? shewed to me a

partially canpleted report of death form that I identified as being

the form I filled in whilst in charge of the bcdy, derails of name

and other personal details are missing because there had been no

identification made by the time I went hone.     All I can say is this

form relates to bcdy 51.   I new knew this is Kevin David WILLIAMS,

b. 27.5.73 (27051973) of __________________________________ *
                          DEBRA JANE
                                         %

                                         D J MARTIN SIGNED

        - TAKEN;
          FLACE:
 |        TIME:         DATE:   080589

WjJNESS TO SIGNATURE:

  rICERS SIGNATURE:
0*ICE
                                                                               STATION

                 D ESFA    JA£IE
                 MARTINI

    CCRESS:



       / ELATE OF BI3TH: 26          26091963

OCCUPATION:      DENIAL NURSE POL SC221


Wio s t a t e s : - This statement consisting of 005 paces, each signed
   me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make

I  knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
   secuticn if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I knew
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 170390                                                       D J MARTIN (SIQ1ED)

I
           Further to ny previous statenents I would like to add the following,

I          On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489) I worked in the capacity of

           Special Constable at the F.A. Semi-Final football match between
I          Liverpool F.C. and Nottingham Forest F.C. which was being played at

|          the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield.

           My recollection of the events of that day are vague and confused.

I          As a result of the disaster I was prescribed medication by my Doctor

           to assist me to sleep.    I was really upset by the whole incident and
I          was on medication for ahcut a week.          The result being that I was in a


I          state of what I can only describe as semi-consciousness. I felt like

           a 'Zanbie.'

|          As a result of this I feel that my memory, my recollection of that day

           is possibly inaccurate.       I am unsure of what time I arrived at the
I          Leppings Lane entrance to the ground or even hew I came to be on the


I          pitch but I did.

           Ey time I got onto the pitch it sesned to be mass confusion, there

|          wera police officers and supporters all over the place.         I could see

           people who appeared to be injured and possibly dead, lying on the

■     ^fhsl.c     lr       E x h ib it     X>Thn ^                              ~£e       L^
■     ,ctatc^a<i             d a & o l _____
I      .                                  —     n   .


I
                               DEBRA JANE
       N

            I was in a s t a t e o f sh o ck .         I d id n 't knew what t o do but my

natoral in s t in c t was t o h elp th e s e p eo p le in th e b e s t way th a t I c o u ld .

X can't d e scr ib e t o you in any d e t a i l my e x a c t movements o v e r th e n ex t

half an hour o r s o .         I knew th a t I approached s e v e r a l p eo p le ly in g on

th e p it c h and a s s is t e d i f p o s s ib le .     I d id n ot g iv e any o f th e s e

p eo p le ncuth-to-m outh o r h ea rt m assage.

I d ecid ed th a t th e r e were enough p eo p le d e a lin g w ith th e s it u a t io n

a t th e Leppings Lane end o f th e ground and made my wav t o th e Spion

Kop end o f th e ground.
I co u ld s e e th a t b o d ies were b e in g c a r r ie d from th e L eppings Lane end^

t o th e Spion Kcp end o f th e ground and th en b e in g p la c e d on th e p it c h .

I a s s is t e d t o ca rry a number o f dead and in ju r e d p eo p le fr a n th e Spion

Kop end o f th e p it c h , in to th e gymnasium where a tem porary m ortuary

had been s e t up.         I was ta lk in g t o some o f th e s e p e o p le , com fortin g

th en and tr y in g t o r ea ssu re th en .            I am unable t o d e s c r ib e any o f

th e s e p eo p le in th e d e t a il .
By this time I really was in a state of shock, I couldn't believe what

I was seeing.          I seemed to be on automatic pilot.                  My memories are

very confused and distorted.
I can r e c a ll c a rry in g a youth who I new know t o b e , K evin D a n iel

WILLIAMS fran th e p itc h t o th e gymnasium.                   He was th e l a s t p erson th a t

I a s s is t e d in c a rr y in g .   I f i r s t saw Kevin WILLIAMS ly in g cn th e p it c h

near t o th e g o a l area a t th e Spion Kop end o f th e ground.                    A t th a t

s ta g e he w a sn 't on a hoarding o r a s tr e tc h e r .

 I ramember th a t th e r e were s e v e r a l p eo p le around where he was ly in g .

 I c a n 't r e c a ll anyone g iv in g him mouth t o mouth.              W ith th e h e lp o f

 o th e r p e o p le , who I c a n 't r e c a l l , K evin WILLIAMS was p la c e d o n to a

 hoardin g and c a r r ie d in t o th e gymnasium.              Saneone in s tr u c te d me t o

 s t a y w ith th e body.



                                                                                                      5
                      DEBRA JANE

I didn't knew what to do.   I didn't want to believe the bey was dead.
I didn't knew if he was dead or not but I decided that I had got to

attanot to revive him.   I started to give him mouth-to-mouth but
sar.aone, I don't knew who, touched me on the shoulder and told me he
was dead. By this time my head had gone, I wasn't aware of what I was

doing or what was really happening.
At 16.06 hours (1606) Doctor CURPEN examined Kevin WILLIAMS and

certified him dead.
I ranember a detective officer, DC Paul MDNFREDI helping me to
carolete the GEN 18 form (sudden death form).                         .
I stayed with the body until the -early hours of Sunday 16th April
(160489) when I escorted Kevin WILLIAMS, who at this stage had not
been identified, to the Medico Legal Centre.
I identified the body by the number allocated, which in the case was
Number 51. I had no further dealings with Kevin WILLIAMS.
This statenent is made to the best of my recollection and I believe it
to be the truth. However, under the circumstances I cannot be
positive that the details are accurate.   I have been quite badly
affected by the whole incident and I am trying to erase it frcm my

merory.
I have marked on a plan of the pitch (Reference D.J.M.l) the
approximate location where I first came into contact with the

deceased, Kevin Daniel WILLIAMS.

D J Martin
                              DEBRA JANE                                4


                                                    D J MARTIN SIGNED

    JVTEMENT TAKEN
             PLACE:

|             TIME:          DATE:   170390

WITNESS TO 5IQIATUFE:      WPS 7844 APPLETCN

J   f ICEHS   SIGNATURE:   JULIE APPLETCN




I                                              7j
                                                                            6

I
                                          #


IN THE MATTER OF THE CORONERS* ACT 1988

AND IN THE MATTER OF THE DEATHS OFj


            PAUL WILLIAM CARLILE
             IAN THOMAS GLOVER
               RICHARD JONES
               MICHAEL KELLY
                PETER TOOTLE
            KEVIN DANIEL WILLIAMS


TO HER MAJESTY’S ATTORNEY GENERAL:


          THE HUMBLE MEMORIAL OF

    SANDRA STRINGER AND DONNA CARLILE
        (the mother and sister of Paul Cariile)
           JOHN AND THERESA GLOVER
         (the father and mother of Ian Glover)
                    JOAN SINCLAIR
               (the sister of Michael Kelly)
            LESLIE AND DOREEN JONES
      (the father and mother of Richard Jones)
             PETER AND JOAN TOOTLE
        (the father and mother of Peter Tootle)
     JAMES STEPHEN AND ANNE WILLIAMS
      (the father and mother of Kevin Williams)




 Malcolm J. Gregg & Co
 Second Floor
 Centuiy Buildings
 31 North Street
 Liverpool
 L2 6RG

 Solicitors for the Memorialists
