                                                                   4 August 1992


In my opinion authority should be refused in all six cases.                    It
is neither necessary nor desirable in the interests of justice
for a further        inquest to be held in respect of any of these
tragic deaths.


The cases of Carlile, Glover, Jones, Kelly and Tootle.
The negligence of the police which caused the disaster, and the
slow response        of the police    and emergency         services after    it,
could not, having regard to the scale and nature of the incident,
amount in law to lack of care.             cf R v. Southwark Coroner ex.p.
Hicks [1987] 2 AER @ 140.


Therefore, the Coroner was right not to leave a verdict involving
that ingredient to the jury and to prevent inquiry into matters
which were not relevant to any verdict properly open to the jury.


In regard to each of these applicants there is no special feature
in their cases which could properly have led to a verdict based
on lack of care being available in law.


Kevin Williams
I do not think that the further material^advanced in respect of
matters which have        occurred since Patrick Mayhew refused Mrs
Williams'     first     application       on   11    February    1992^ justifia^a
different conclusion.


The legal issues in this case are precisely the same as in the
five others.         Taken at their highest the facts would not justify
 lack of care in law.


 In any event the medical evidence given by Dr Slater and Dr G
 Gumpert is compelling.


 The boy's death was due to lack of oxygen in the blood.                      This
 resulted     from    compression    to    the      neck   and   chest ^ preventing
 breathing.
i
I
I
    V   *
%




    m
        Dr Slater said (p.199) that Williams was probably the worst case
        of asphyxia he dealt with and four fractures to the voice box
        were highly unusual and the worst injuries to the neck he found.
        The easing of the brain indicated irreversible brain damage which
        would totally prohibit communication: p. 200 F.


        On 4 May, when he was recalled to give evidence Dr Slater said,
        p.220, that death was not a single but a sequence of events and
        that   after   brain    death,    heart   and   kidney   death   occurred   at
        different times.       Dr Gumpert, a highly qualified and independent
        specialist in his field of neurology^also gave evidence on 4 May
        about the process of death and in effect agreed with Dr Slater
        that Williams was brain dead before he was attended to by P.C
        Bruder.


        It was possible that Williams still had a pulse, had fits, and
        emitted liquid from his mouth as P.C Bruder said in his statement
        but in their view, he was then beyond recall.             In any event, Drs
        Slater, Gumpert and P.C Bruder were all agreed, and have always
        agreed, that by the time Bruder finished trying to resuscitate
        Kevin Williams his whole body was dead.


        The events in the mortuary later described by Special Constable
        Martin can only be explained on the basis that they were sounds
        emitted from the body after movement or that due to the very
        distressing    events    S.C     Martin witnessed    she was     confused   or
        mistaken.


        In view of the above,          the opinion vouched by the G.P.        of Mrs
        Williams, Dr Crosby, as late as 6 March 1992 i.e. this year; cf
        p.239, carries no weight.



                                                  m
                                                  . *    »
        SOLICITOR GENERAL
        4 August 1992
