                                                      THE LEGAL SECRETARIAT TO THE LAW OFFICERS
                                                                 ATTORNEY GENERAL'S CHAMBERS
                                                                           9 BUCKINGHAM GATE
                                                                                LONDON SW1E 6JP
General enquiries 071-828 7155
Direct line      071-828          1721

        Messrs Malcolm J. Gregg & Co.,                               Your ref: JH/LF/H359
        Second Floor,
        Century Buildings,                                               Our ref: INQ/4/92
        31 North John Street,
        Liverpool, L2 6RG                                                       August 1992




        Dear Sirs

         PAUL    CAKLILE,         IAN     GLOVER,   RICHARD     JONES,    MICHAEL    KELLY,

         PETER     TOOLE         and     KEVIN   WILLIAMS

         (APPLICATION            UNDER    SECTION    13   OF   THE   CORONERS    ACT   1988)


         Further to my letter of 21 April 1992, the Law Officers have now
         given very careful consideration to the application made by your
         clients for authority under section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988
         to apply to the High Court for an order directing a fresh inquest
         in relation to the above named persons who died in the Hills­
         borough disaster on the 15 April 1989.     The material submitted
         under cover of your letter of 3 June 1992 has also been taken
         into account together with representations received on behalf of
         some of your clients from Members of Parliament with Merseyside
         constituencies and a letter received direct from Mrs Teresa
         Glover.
         As you will know section 13 of the Act applies when an inquest
         has been held and, "by reason of fraud, rejection of evidence,
         irregularity of proceedings, insufficiency of inquiry, the
         discovery of new facts or otherwise, it is necessary or desirable
         in the interests of justice that another inquest should be held."
         The Law Officers have considered the matter very carefully but
         they have come to the conclusion that there is nothing which
         would justify authorising an application to the High Court for
         a new inquest in any of the above cases.
         They have reached this decision on the grounds that the applica­
         tion would have no reasonable prospect of establishing that it
         is necessary or desirable in the interests of justice for a fresh
         inquest to be held.
■‘Svxa


4^ ? 1L     -
         o slo
The Law Officers recognise the importance to the families of the
deceased of having the fullest possible information about the
precise circumstances of the deaths and have taken that carefully
into account when considering the sufficiency of the inquiry made
by the Coroner and his directions to the jury.   All these issues
must, however, be considered in the context of the statutory
framework within which Coroners are required to work and the
questions required to be answered on the inquisition.   It is not
appropriate, therefore, that they authorise an application to the
High Court under section 13 unless it could be said, with
reasonable confidence, that further information would be likely
to be elicited which would have a bearing on the issues to be
considered at any such further inquest.
The Law Officers recognise that this decision will be deeply
disappointing to your clients. They are aware of the strength of
the continuing feeling on the part of those whose friends and
relatives died or were injured in the tragic events at
Hillsborough but their task has been to evaluate the application
objectively against the statutory criteria. Their decision does
not indicate any lack of feeling for the families of those who
died at Hillsborough for whom they have the deepest sympathy.

Yours faithfully,




S. J. WOOLER
