                                                                                            *TU w|   » # | IV-'
                                                                                             ‘        O U   I   <




          H I L L S B O R O U G H             S T E E R I N G      C O M M I T T E E


                         r/fl Castfc Cftomftrs,
                                              CookStreet, LiverpoolLZ 9S‘J i
                           ref: 051 25'$'062$ To.\: 051 236 0047 <DX 14100




 The Attorney General's Chambers,                                    51-,h February 1990
 Royal Courts of Justice,                                            EMS/DW
 Strand,
 LONDON   W2CA 2LL

 F.A.O. MR MICHAEL CARPENTER
                                                                    i: <       » r; , . ;




 Dear MR. Carpenter,

 RE:      RIMMER -v- CHIEF CONSTABLE OF SOUTH YORKSHIRE AND ORS
 ________ APPLICATION FOR APPROVAL OF THE TRUST DEED

 I confirm my telephone conversation with your Colleague last week and that
 the Steering Committee of the Hillsborough Solicitors' Group are acting to
 co-ordinate Solicitors instructed by potential Plaintiffs, whose claim's arise
 as a result of the Disaster at Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield on the 15th
 April 1989.

 As you may have seen from the Press two test actions on liability (both fatal
 claims one - the case of Rimmer involving infant children) have been taken
 and following an approach by the South Yorkshire Police those actions have
 been stayed on terms.

 The application to stay was heard by Mr.' Justice Steyn on the 20th December
 when, in addition to the application to stay the substantive actions we also
 a ™ e£ - him in the..case of Rimme               rove a form of'trusti deed coupled with-'




 The Trust deed (and Deed of Appointment) involved was in the form settled
 by Counsel Mr Robert Ham instructed by the Hillsborough Appeal Trust Trustees
 to be used for the receipt of- monies paid by the Trust Fund for the benefit
 of infants.

 It appeared both to us_ and to the Appeal Fund Trustees that it was an,.
fQuplication for a'‘Trust to be set up to administer monies paid from the Appe.
   ‘ust which was not in a form'which would make it an acceptable vehicle for"''


 The Trust Deed itself provides for the Fund to vest at the age of 25 and thus
 a Deed of Appointment providing for an earlier vesting date at age 18 has
 been settled to enable part of the Funds and most particularly any damages
paid to comply with the usual court requirements.


           f
       H I L L S B O R O U G H          S T E E R I N G         C O M M I T T E E


                      c/o Cosift Chambers, Coo^Strccl, LivcrpoofL2 9S'Jf
                       ' ref: 051 255 0628 fa ^ : 051 236 0047 1)X 14100




C/tnd.......(2)




At the hearing on the 20th December after dealing with the Order to Stay and
consequential directions in other matters Steyn J continued the application
for approval as an ex parte matter:.  He adjourned consideration to enable
Chancery Counsel to prepare a note for him and to address him.

The matter again came before him o n 'the 22nd January when the Plaintiffs were
represented by Mr Bytner QC and Mr Robert Ham Chancery Counsel who had settled
the Deeds and was instructed by the Solicitors acting for the Trustees, appeared
to assist the Court, amplify his note if required and to deal with any queries
the Judge might have.

Steyn J said that in the particular circumstances this was a matter where
he would want to give a formal Judgment which could be used in other cases
and in those circumstances he asked for an amicus curiae to be appointed.


a Junior Chancery Counsel /to undertake the task and that an "informal approach"
be made to the Official Solicitor as to instructions.

The Judge was quite specific as to the terms of the Brief to the amicus.

These were

1*           To consider the draft Deeds (two draft Trust Deeds and two draft
             Deeds of Appointment).

2.           To look at the note prepared for the Court by Mr Ham.

3*           To consider a transcript of the two hearings,. 20th December           1989
             and 22nd January 1990.

4.           To speak formally with Mr'. Ham and Mr Hytner QC to come to a view
             as to the Deeds.

5.           If that view was favourable then the Judge asked that theamicus
             should write a short report for the use of the Judge.  If the
             amicus opposed some features then again he was asked to list them.
             If the opposed features could be amended prior to hearing then
;            so much the. better .

The Judge will be on Circuit until the 23rd February and would like to hear
the matter again before leaving Manchester.   He indicated that he did not
I
I             H I L L S B O R O U G H       S T E E R I N G          C O M M I T T E E


                          c/o Cast(c Chambers, Coof^Strcct, Liverpool L 2 9S9{
                            Tc(: 051 255 0628 'J a \: 051 236 0047 I)X 14100




     C/tnd.......(3)




    wish significant costs to be involved in this exercise and if the amicus view
    of the Trust Deeds was favourable then he would not require the attendance
    of Mr Ham or Mr Hytner at the next hearing although he would require the
    Plaintiffs Solicitors to be present.
                                                                                 /
    The case was adjourned on the basis that it should be relisted before, *h*m) ’' "
    the date to be fixed with his Clerk and that date be prior to the 23rd February.

    We have applied for the short hand note of the two hearings which is not yet
    to hand.

    With that exception everything the Judge required is available.

    Mr. Rowe QC Leader of the Northern Circuit has been asked to nominate a Chancery
    Junior in pursuance of the Judge's request and the Junior he nominated is



    jMrV N. Riddle J
     Queen Avenue,
     Castie Street,
     LIVERPOOL   2

    051-236-8240


    I approached the Official Solicitor informally as suggested.    He would not
    be able to act in this particular matter because of the possible conflict
    of interest as the Official Solicitor is already involved on behalf of the
    family of one of the victims where the children are Wards of Court. The Solicitor
    dealing with that aspect, (Mr Hincliffe) commented that their own Trust Department
    had looked at the particular draft Trust Deeds and were satisfied and intended
    to adopt those in that particular case.

    On approaching the Treasury Solicitor 1 understand that subject to the appointment
    of an amicus through you they anticipated there should be no problem about
    their acting.

    I hope you will forgive the Writer's lengthy letter setting out the background
    and accept this letter             request;'to appointment an amicus" in accordance




               t
r

            H I L L S B O R O U G H         S T E E R I N G        C O M M I T T E E


                           c/o C m ik CfmmBcrs, Coo^Streci, LiverpoolL2 9S5f
                             Ocf: 051 255 0628 J cvq 051 236 0047 D X 14100




    C/tnd.......(4)




    I enclose herewith copies of the documents (other than the transcript which
    is not yet available) which the Judge asked the amicus to consider ;


    1.           Draft Trust Deed for Single Infant.

    2.           Draft Deed of Appointment for Single Infant.

    3.           Draft Trust Deed for more than one infant.

    4.           Draft Deed of Appointment for more than one infant.

    5.           Mr Robert Ham's note for the Court.

    If you wish, in accordance with Mr Justice Steyn's proposals, to instruct
    the Chancery Junior nominated by Mr Rowe, i.e. Mr Riddle, and if it would
    be of assistance then we can, of course, supply him directly with a copy
    of the documents numbered 1 - 5 and a copy of our own file attendance note
    of the two hearings before Mr Justice Steyn.

    I look forward to hearing from you and would be grateful for any assistance
    you can give; particularly in view of the relatively short timetable involved.

    Yours sincerely,




    MISS E M STEEL




             I
