ATTORNEY GENEI                                      cc:   Solicitor General
                                                          Private Office

HILLSBOROUGH                 L /     '

You have a meeting tomorrow (Thursday 17 December 1998) a t the
House a t 4pm with Chris Newell (Director of Casework Evaluation a t CPS
headquarters). He will be accompanied by Robin Booth (Assistant Chief
Crown Prosecutor, Central Casework). The purpose of the meeting will
be to discuss the m atters raised in Chris Newell’s letter to me of 3
December about the private prosecution being brought by the
Hillsborough Families Support Liroup against two former police officers
(Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent M urray) who
were responsible for policing operations a t Hillsborough on the occasion
of the disaster which occurred a t the sta rt of the FA Cup semi-final
m atch between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest in April 1989. the
charges are m anslaughter (both) and attem pting to pervert the course of
public justice (Duckenfield only). The CPS h as a statutory right under
Section 6(2) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 to intervene and
assum e responsibility for the conduct of the proceedings. Those acting
on behalf of the defence have made representations to the CPS to the
effect th a t they should intervene and discontinue; those who are
responsible for the prosecution firmly resist th a t proposal.

The new DPP h as declared interest in the m atter because of connection
with one of the defendants (I believe he may have been retained). Chris
Newell h as been asked to take the decision. He is minded n ot to
intervene b u t wishes to consu lt you on th a t point.

The issues are fully set out and explored in a very helpful letter from
Chris Newell which is immediately beneath this note a t Flag 1. You may
wish to focus your attention on reading that, together with the bound
volume entitled “The Hillsborough Report 1998” which sum m arises the
whole history of the case, together with the assessm ents and reasons for
the various steps taken at different stages. I do not suggest th a t you
read all the representations made by the different parties which are
largely predictable. You may, h o w e v ^ r^ ish to lookjat the CPS policy on
private prosecutions which is a t red Flag G. BatlP parties are familiar
with th a t docum ent. It is impor5tan t th a t tfag'CPS decision in this case
should accord with th a t policy.



s w /r6r2/r o
                                         1
The issue of private prosecutions generally raises im portant issues of
principle with widely differing views being held. Some consider it
inappropriate th a t the m ost intrusive power of the state should be
capable of being invoked at the behest of individual citizens, often
approaching the m atter on a highly partisan basis. The contrary view
(recently publicly espoused by the Law Commission) is th a t the right to
initiate a private prosecution is an im portant constitutional safeguards
against an im proper refusal by the proper authorities to act. My own
suspicion is th a t this issue may well assum e greater significance in the
not too distant future given the increasing readiness of individuals and
pressure groups to resort to private prosecution. There is a substantial
risk th a t private prosecutions on a significant scale will underm ine the
ability of public prosecutors to pursue sensible and moderate policies
because partisan individuals may so easily underm ine their decision.

 Be th a t as it may, CPS policy is based on the premise th a t the right of
 private prosecution is enshrined in statute and the use of the statutory
 power to intervene for the purposes of discontinuing should be used
 sparingly. It is not appropriate to utilise the power to impose the polrcres
 and standards of the CPS on private prosecutors. Otherwise, the right to
 bring a private prosecution becomes meaningless. Thus, the CPS will
 generally intervene against the will of the parties only in circum stances
'where the evidence is clearly insufficient to found a case, or clearly
 against the public interest. In particular, the CPS do not apply to private
 prosecutors the “reasonable prospects of conviction” test. Applying this
 approach to the present case, the CPS have concluded th at, although the
 evidence does not afford a realistic prospect of conviction against either
 Duckenfield or M urray in relation to the 3 charges of m anslaughter
 (common to both), they cannot go so far as to say th a t there is no case at
 all and accordingly they would not intervene on evidential grounds.
 Given the seriousness of any offence of homicide, ” they would not
 intervene to discontinue on public interest grounds. By contrast, they
 are satisfied th a t the charge oi attem pting to pervert the course of justice
 against Duckenfield is evidentially unfounded. Nonetheless, they have
 concluded th a t it would be w rongto effect a partial intervention simply to
 discontinue one charge.

I agree with the CPS having regard to their existing policy. In particular,
I am quite sure th a t partial intervention, even if technically possible,
would serve no useful purpose. It would complicate the proceedings, be
misunderstood'~~and probably ridiculed and send a signal that, by
implication, the CPS positively supported the proceedings for
m anslaughter.
s w /r 6r2 /r o
                                                                                          1




•#


 My reading of the papers h as identified 2 issues which I have raised with
 Chris Newell. One is now resolved. They are:

 (i)     The prosecution case (as sum m arised at Flag C) is expressed to rely
         heavily on the evidence of the 2 officers to the Taylor Inquiry. It
         struck me th a t this was a situation where w itnesses would, had
         they contem plated the possibility of criminal proceedings, have
         invoked the privilege against self-incrimination or sought some form
         of undertaking th a t w hat they said would not be used in evidence
         against them. I understand th a t th a t was not done. There is on the
         face of it no bar to the use of th a t evidence in crim inal proceedings.
         B ut it may well be th a t some point will be taken by the defence on
         fairness - particularly if Lord Taylor did not adm inister any warning 5     ‘
         to the individuals.                                                '

 (ii)    Those responsible for the prosecution place em phasis on the fact
         th a t the House of Lords in the relatively recent case of Adomoko
         clarified the law of m anslaughter making it clear th a t concepts of
         recklessness should no longer be regarded as relevant: the test is
         now one of grosa_negligence. The law was far from clear when the
         issue w as considered by counsel (including Lord Williams of Mostyn)
         in 1990. I would have been concerned if the present prosecution
         were being founded on substantive law of m anslaughter which was
         significantly different (and more extensive) th an th a t prevailing in
         1990 when the decision not to prosecute w as first taken. It would
         give rise to an element of retrospection and possible ECHR
         implications. B ut it is clear from the CPS background note (Flag A,
         paragraph 8.7) th a t counsel approached the evidence on the basis
         th a t the gross negligence test (in addition to th a t of “recklessness”)
         was sufficient to establish the offence of m anslaughter. Thus,
         although the House of Lords h as clarified the law, the 1990 review
       J proceeded on substantially the same substantive law as is presently
       I applicable. It is therefore simply a case of a different view now being
         taken of the evidence.

 I have m uch sym pathy for the points made by the defence th a t it is very
 h arsh for the defendants now to face proceedings in circum stances where
 they have been through a public inquiry, a crim inal investigation
 followed by a decision not to prosecute, an inquest and judicial review of
 the inquest followed by a review by Lord Ju stice Stewart-Sm ith which
 concluded th a t there was no reason to fault the decision to institute no
 proceedings and th a t the so called fresh evidence did not add to the
 sw /r 6 r 2 /r o                          o
position. (The latter claim is hotly contested by the prosecutors in his
case who also allege th a t they now have even more evidence eg. the
result of papers disclosed to them by the Home Office.) However, the
right to bring a private prosecution is enshrined in statu te and the court
h as in recent years developed a wide discretion to stay proceedings if
they are unfair and constitute an abuse of process. Thus, I am firmly of
the view th a t any unwelcome trend in relation to private prosecutions
should not be controlled by executive action b u t by the use by the court
of its own wide discretion.

The m atter h as now become pressing, largely because of pressure of
work upon myself - for which I apologise. I am confident in advising you
th a t the approach adopted by the CPS is sound and th a t you should
acquiese in the approach proposed in Chris Newell’s letter. Nonetheless,
the im portance and sensitivity of the issue suggested to me th a t it
merited at least some discussion and for th a t reason I have arranged the
meeting for tomorrow.




S J WOOLER
16 December 1998




SW /1612/10                         4
