                                                                          yV-oo/qo//
                                                               90b2
<                                               D EPA R TM EN T OF THE E N V IR O N M EN T
                                                2 MARSH AM S T R E E T L O N D O N SWlP 3EB
                                                               01-276 3000
                                                My ref
                                                Your ref
                                                                   26 January 1990


             PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL


             The Rt. Hon David Waddington MP
             Home Secretary
             Home Office
             50 Queen Anne1s Gate
             London SW1H 9AT




                 Your Private Secretary invited comments on the further draft
            of your statement which you circulated last night. I indicated
            to you when we discussed this yesterday afternoon that I did not
            believe that my Secretary of State would find a draft on these
            lines acceptable, and I have since confirmed with him          by
            telephone, that this is so.                                  '

                 The central difficulty is that the Government has argued
            cogently during many hours of debate in both Houses that a
            National Membership Scheme will prove a powerful weapon against
            football hooliganism.    In doing so, we have firmly rebutted
            every one of the contrary arguments put forward by Lord Justice
            Taylor except his scepticism about whether satisfactory
            technology is available (which can only be established on the
            basis of a proper technical appraisal of the tenders now
            Submitted).   If we do not now proceed with Part I of the
            Football Spectators Act, our position in relation to football
            hooliganism will therefore be indefensible unless we put forward
            a credible alternative.

                 Taylor, of course, provides us with such an alternative in
            the form of his package of measures against hooliganism
            including new criminal offences, an extension of attendance
            orders, and electronic tagging.     It is therefore perfectly
            defensible for us not to proceed with Part 1 of the Act

                     provided we act on Taylor's proposals, and

                     provided we continue to develop the Football Membership
                     Scheme technology so that, if regrettably it should
                     prove necessary to do so, a scheme can be introduced
                     quickly.

                 These two key issues are correctly recorded in the minutes
            of the No. 10 meeting on 23 January, and were reflected in the
            draft paragraphs Chris Patten sent over to you on Wednesday



    I K .
 indicating how he thought th^s part of the Statement might read
 Ghris understood from his discussions with you immediately
 before his departure for Nairobi that you were able to accent
 the bulk of his suggestions and that these issues would
t her efo re be fully reflected in your Statement.        I am afraid
howeveir, that the latest draft does not. achieve that.                 t
recognise, of course, that you do not wish to commit yourself to
implementing the Taylor recommendations in precisely the form
which he proposed, but the present reference to looking
carefully and sympathetically at the case for making these
changes gives the impression that they might not be implemented
              Moh      J;  no reference to further development of
Football Membership Scheme technology, merely the neaative
s t a t e ^ t that "Part I of the Act wifi r e m a i n ^ n the s ? a ^ e
        * , If J * ® imPression conveyed by this draft were true we
would be defenceless, if there were to be another He^se?
incident, against the charge that we had neither followed
Taylor s recommendations nor developed our own alternative.

     In discussion with Robin Ferrers after our meetino yesterdav
af ?£n°°n 1        in fact accepted a draft of the relevant Darts
of the statement which is attached to this letter.        it would
stand ip place of the last sentence on page 5, and the two
drJ??r?HhS £ nriP-?9ei 6 °f thS draft circulated last night.   The
draft attached deals much more satisfactorily with the two key
             implementation of Taylor and testing of the
technology, and I hope that it, or something very like it can
be substituted for the version which you have now circulated.

.• / “ “ sending copies of this letter to the Prime Minister
Seort^J    St'         Chancellor of the Exchequer, the ForeigA
Secretary, the Secretary of State for Scotland, the Attornev
tltllr .’     L° r d   PrlVY   S e a 1 ' th® Chief W h i p ' and   Si




                                                           CcUL
                                                  COLIN MOYNIHAN
I



.   #
                                             CONFIDENTIAL


         DRAFT


            ...    I shall look expeditiously at how best these measures can
         be implemented against the background of recent changes in the
         criminal law.



              I now come to the proposed Football Membership Scheme. Lord
         Justice Taylor examined the Invitation to Tender for a scheme
         which was issued by the consultants employed by the football
         authorities. He came to the conclusion that he could not support
         a scheme of that kind because he did not believe the technology
        would work well enough to avoid the danger of congestion and
        disorder.          Instead he proposes the measures to which I have
        referred.



                  The Government have decided in the light of his advice not
        to proceed         with   the   establishment           of   a Football      Membership
        Authority.          Instead     we   propose       to    follow      his    strategy   of
        combining certain measures aimed directly at hooligans together
        with progress towards all-seating, improved accommodation, better
        facilities, improved arrangements for crowd control and better
        training      of   police     and    stewards,     which      Lord    Justice    Taylor
        believes give the best               chance   of    eliminating        or    minimising
        football hooliganism.



                  In the meantime Part I of the Football Spectators Act will
        remain on the statute book and the practical concerns expressed
        by Lord Justice Taylor about the type of scheme envisaged in the
        Invitation to Tender will be fully explored in the light of the
        available advice, including,that from the specialist companies
        who responded to the Invitation to Tender.




        '
                                         CONFIDENTIAL
                          CONFIDENTIAL




     If hooliganism is not defeated by the alternative strategy
proposed in the Report and if at some future time a workable
membership scheme can be produced, we will then be in a position
to come back to the House and seek the approval of the House for
the scheme.



     The right course now is to implement Part II of the Act and
to give effect to Lord Justice Taylor’s proposals in the way I
have indicated.   Mr. Speaker, we are giving the industry and the
clubs a final opportunity to put themselves in order.   The public
will not forgive them if they do not now act.




                         CONFIDENTIAL
