                                                            Case Nos: CO/ 856/99. CQ/0934..
                                                          CO 1070/99. CQ/1071/99.CO/Q582/99
m THE SUPREME COURT OF JUDICATURE
DIVISIONAL COURT
                                                                    Roval Courts of Justice
                                                               Strand. London. WC2A 2LL

                                                                       Date: 31 March 1999
                                        Before:

                              LORD JUSTICE LAWS
                             MR JUSTICE CRESWELL
                                      and
                              MR JUSTICE LATHAM

                                      R
                                      v
                     THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
                                          ex parte
                                    (1) DUCKENFIELD
                                        (2) MURRAY

                                        R
                                        v
                 (1) SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
                                       and
(2) ANN ADLINGTON (ON BEHALF OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP)
                              (3) DUCKENFIELD
                                 (4)          MURRAY
                   (5) HILLSBOROUGH POLICE AUTHORITY
                                     ex parte
               THE CHIEF CONSTABLE OF SOUTH YORKSHIRE


         Mr Michael Harrison QC and Mr Simon Myerson (for Duckenfield & Murray)
       (instructed by Winkworth Sherwood for Duckenfield and Walker Morris for Murray)
      Mr Alun Jones QC and Mr Janies Lewis (for the Hillsborough Family Support Group)
           Ms Presiley Baxendale QC and Mark Shaw (for the South Yorkshire Police)
                           (instructed by Garretts for the Respondents)
                    Mr P Havers QC (for the Director of Public Prosecutions)
                              (instructed by the Treasury Solicitors)
                 Nigel Baker QC and Ms Louise Varty (for the Chief Constable)



    JUDGMENT: APPROVED BY THE COURT FOR
    HANDING DOWN (subject to editorial corrections)
 t

     Judgment: Approved by the Court for handing down                        Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield
     (subject to editorial corrections)                        R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
                                                                   Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



                               R v THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
                                                ex parte
                                        DUCKENFIELD & MURRAY

                              R v SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
 6                                               and
                                           ANN ADLINGTON
                                               ex parte
                           (1) THE CHIEF CONSTABLE OF SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                     (2) DUCKENFIELD & MURRAY

12
     LORD JUSTICE LAWS

15                    These are linked applications for judicial review which require the court i
      to revisit the terrible disaster which took place at the Hillsborough Football Ground at
      Sheffield on 15 April 1989. In what I will call the first case the applicants Mr
18   Duckenfield and Mr Murray (to whom I will refer as “D” and “M”), who are retired
      police officers, seek leave to move for judicial review of the decision of the Director
      of Public Prosecutions (“the DPP”) to refuse to take over and discontinue private
21    prosecutions which have been instituted against them by Ann Adlington (“AA”) on
      behalf of the Hillsborough Family Support Group (“the HFSG”). The decision was
      communicated by letter of 18 December 1998. On 15 March 1999 Latham J adjourned
24    the leave application to 22 March 1999 and directed that the parties should then be
      ready to proceed with the substantive application if leave were granted. On 22 March
      this court granted leave and proceeded at once to hear the inter partes application. In
27   the second case the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire (“the CCSY”) seeks to
      challenge a decision of the South Yorkshire Police Authority (“the SYPA”) made on 5
      February 1999 to the effect that it lacked the legal power to fund the defences of D
30    and M to the private prosecutions brought by AA, or to fund their prospective judicial j
      review applications against the DPP. On 12 February 1999 Latham J granted leave to
      the CCSY, joined AA as second respondent, abridged time and ordered expedition. On
33   24 March 1999 this court (having reserved judgment in the first case the previous day)
      granted leave to D and M to challenge the same decision and, again, proceeded at once
      to hear the inter partes application. We now deliver our judgments in both cases.
36
                     I                     will first set out the facts material to the first case, which also
      necessary background to the second. I will later describe the further facts which are
39   specifically relevant to the second case.

                  The football match at Hillsborough on Saturday 15 April 1989 was the
42   FA Cup semi-final between Liverpool Football Club and Nottingham Forest Football
     Club. In the events which happened 96 people lost their lives. The Divisional
     Commander in charge of police operations at the match was D, then holding the rank
45   of Chief Superintendent in the South Yorkshire Police Force. The second applicant,

     Dralt 3 0 March 1 9 9 9 1 2 :26
        Judgment: Approved bv the Court for handing down                       Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield
        (subject to editorial corrections)                       R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
                                                                     Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



        then Superintendent Murray, held the position of Sub-Divisional Commander and was
        also on duty at the match.
    3
                       On 17 April 1989 Taylor U , as he then was, was appointed by the
         government to conduct a public inquiry into the disaster. He heard the oral testimony
    6   of 174 witnesses between 15 May and 29 June 1989, and presented an interim report
         on 4 August 1989. He found that the immediate cause of the gross overcrowding
         which had taken place, and thus of the disaster, had been the failure to cut off access
    9   to the central pens behind the goal (which were already overfull) when Gate C was
         opened. He found also a number of contributing factors including the condition of the
         ground, police planning, police operations on the day, and the interaction of parties
   12   responsible for safety issues. Lord Taylor’s final report was delivered on 18 January
         1990 and included a number of recommendations relating to crowd control and safety
         at sporting events.

                       Meanwhile, immediately after the disaster, the West Midlands Police
         had been appointed to conduct a review of the policing operations of the South
   18   Yorkshire Police. In March 1990 the West Midlands Police reported to the DPP. After
         taking the opinion o f two experienced leading counsel the DPP announced on 30
         August 1990 that in his view there was insufficient evidence to justify any prosecution
  21    for a criminal offence, relating to the disaster, against any member of the South
         Yorkshire Police Force. Then from November 1990 to March 1991 HM Coroner for
         South Yorkshire conducted an inquest into the deaths in the course of which 230
  24    witnesses gave evidence. On 28 March 1991 the Coroner’s jury returned verdicts of
         accidental death.

  27                    Disciplinary proceedings for neglect of duty were instituted against D
         and M by the Police Complaints Authority (“the PCA”). But D retired from the Force
         on 10 November 1991 on medical grounds, and so the proceedings against him fell
4fc30   away. On 13 January 1992 the PCA decided not to proceed with the case against M.
         On 27 August 1992 he too retired on medical grounds. Then on 5 November 1993 the
         Divisional Court dismissed an application for judicial review brought by family
  33    members of those who had died, refusing orders of certiorari to quash the inquest
         verdict and to require a fresh inquest to be convened.

  36                    On 5 December 1996 a documentary programme called “Hillsborough”
         was broadcast on ITV. The programme suggested that fresh evidence about the
         disaster had come to light. The allegations made in the broadcast were investigated by
  39    the Crown Prosecution Service between March and May 1997. At length on 30 June
         1997          the Home Secretary announced in Parliament that an independent scrutiny would
         be undertaken by Stuart-Smith LJ in order to ascertain inter alia whether there was
  42    evidence relating to the disaster which had not been available to Lord Taylor, or to the
         DPP or the Attorney General for the purposes of their discharge of their statutory
         responsibilities. Stuart-Smith LJ’s report was presented to the House of Commons on
  45    18 February 1998. Chapter 1 paras 55-57 state:

                                                           -2-
        D u l l 3 0 March 1 9 9 9 1 2 :26
     «



         Judgment: Approved by the Court for handing down                        Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield
         (subject to editorial corrections!                        R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
                                                                       Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



                    “55. From my meetings with the bereaved families and their
                    representatives, I am left in no doubt that there was widespread
 3                 disappointment at the DPP’s decision not to prosecute. They find it difficult
                    to understand in the light of Lord Taylor’s trenchant criticisms of the South
                    Yorkshire police and the fact that the force had been paying compensation.
 6
                    56. W hat the Director of Public Prosecutions had to bear in mind, however,
                    is the significantly different and greater degree of culpability which is
 9                 involved in manslaughter, or culpable misfeasance in public office, as
                    against the degree of negligence which gives rise to liability, and
                    compensation payments, under civil law. Any prosecution of an individual
12                  police officer would have to establish his individual responsibility. It would
                    not be enough simply to prove the composite failure of the police operation.

15                 57. The causes of the disaster were many and complex. So far as these two
                    officers [sc D and M] were concerned, the prosecution would have to prove
                    to the high standard required for a criminal conviction that the failure to
18                 give the order to close off the tunnel when Gate C was opened amounted to
                    the serious degree of recklessness necessary to constitute manslaughter.”

21        Para 5 of Chapter 7 (“Summary”) stated:

                    “... I have come to the clear conclusion that there is no basis upon which
24                 there should be a further judicial inquiry or a re-opening of Lord Taylor’s
                    inquiry... I do not consider that there is any material which should be
                    placed before the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Police Complaints
27                 Authority which might cause them to re-consider the decisions they have
                    already taken.”

30       On the same day, 18 February 1998, the Home Secretary announced in the House that
         he, the Attorney General and the DPP had veiy carefully considered Stuart-Smith LJ’s
         report, and said: “We have no reason to doubt his conclusions”.
33
                         The HFSG was clearly not satisfied with this result. There was first an
          abortive attempt on 26 June 1998 by AA to institute criminal proceedings against D
36       and M in the South Sefiton Petty Sessional Division. That was given its quietus on
          technical or jurisdictional grounds into which it is unnecessary to go. Then on 13 July
          1998          Miss Adlington laid informations against them before the Leeds Petty Sessional
39       Division, and summonses were accordingly issued by the Stipendiary Magistrate. The
          charges accuse D and M of the manslaughter of two of those who died at
          Hillsborough, John Anderson and James Aspinall. They also allege against both an
42       offence of “wilful neglect to perform a public duty”; and in the case of D, a further
          offence of attempting to pervert the course of justice, said to consist in his having lied
          about the circumstances in which Gate C at the football ground became open.
45
                                                            -3 -
         Dr ail 30 M arch 1999 12:26
t                                                                                      Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield
      Judgment: Approved bv the Court for handing down
                                                                         R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
      (subject to editorial corrections)
                                                                             Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



                    Both D and M made representations to the DPP that he should exercise
      his power under s.6(2) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 (“the POA”) to take
3     over the conduct of the proceedings initiated against them, and then discontinue the
      proceedings under s.23(3). In order to appreciate the contrary positions being taken
      and the issues in the case, it is convenient to set out the relevant statutory provisions at
6     this stage.

                                 Section 3(2) of the POA provides so far as relevant:
 9
                    "It shall be the duty of the Director -
                   (a) to take over the conduct of all criminal proceedings, other than specified
12                 proceedings, instituted on behalf of a police force (whether by a member of
                   that force or by any other person);
                   (b) to institute and have the conduct of criminal proceedings in any case
                   where it appears to him that -

                                 (i) the importance or difficulty of the case makes it appropriate that
18                               proceedings should be instituted by him; or

                                  (ii) it is otherwise appropriate for proceedings to be instituted by
21                               him;

                   (c) to take over the conduct of all binding over proceedingsinstituted                           on
24                 behalf of a police force...

                   (d) to take over the conduct of all proceedings begun bysummons issued
27                 under s.3 of the Obscene Publications Act 1959...”

       S.6 provides so far as relevant:
 SO
                    "(1) Subject to subsection (2) below, nothing in this Part shall preclude any
                    person from instituting any criminal proceedings or conducting any
33                  criminal proceedings to which the Director’s duty to take over the conduct
                    of proceedings does not apply.

36                  (2) Where criminal proceedings are instituted in circumstances in which the
                     Director is not under a duty to take over their conduct, he may nevertheless
                     do so at any stage."
39
        S. 10 provides so far as relevant:

42                   “(1) The Director shall issue a Code of Practice for Crown Prosecutors
                     giving guidance on general principles to be applied by them -

45                                  (a) in determining in any case -
                                                                -4 -

        Draft 3 0 M ar ch 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 6
1,

             Judgment: Approved bv the Court for handing down                                    Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield




         •
             (subject to editorial corrections)                                   R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
                                                                                      Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



                                                     (i)                       whether proceedings for an offence should b
                                                     where proceedings have been instituted, whether they should
     3                                               be discontinued;...

             S.23 provides so far as relevant:
     6
                          “(1) Where the Director of Public Prosecutions has the conduct of
                          proceedings for an offence, this section applies in relation to the
     9                    preliminary stages of those proceedings.

                           (2) In this section, 'preliminary stage’ inrelation                 to proceedings for an
                           offence does not include -
                                          •••

                                          (b) in the case of an indictable offence, any stage of the proceedings
                                          after -
                                                  (i) the accused has been committed for trial...

     18                   (3) Where, at any time during the preliminarystages of theproceedings,
                           the Director gives notice under this section to the clerk of the court that he
                           does not want the proceedings to continue, they shall be discontinued with
     21                   effect from the giving of that notice...”


     24                    Representations had first been made to the DPP on behalf of D and M in
             early July 1998, after the commencement of the proceedings in the South Sefton Petty
             Sessional Division which proved abortive. In the course of correspondence the HFSG
     27      again contended that it had discovered new evidence, which, it was said, had not been
             before Lord Taylor, the DPP, the Coroner, or Stuart-Smith LJ. At length, after AA’s
              informations had been laid in the Leeds Petty Sessional Division, the considered views
     30      of the DPP as to the approach to be taken to a request to take over and discontinue a
             private prosecution were set out in a letter to the HFSG on 27 July 1998. The letter did
             not contain a decision, but it explained the DPP’s policy:
     33
                           “The policy where proceedings have been commenced by a private
                           prosecutor builds on that contained in the Code for Crown Prosecutors.
     36                   The right to bring a private prosecution is preserved by s.6 (l)... subject to
                           the power under s.6(2). The CPS will take over a private prosecution where
                           there is a particular need for it do so on behalf of the public...
     39                   in the instant case where we have been asked by the defendants to take over
                           the prosecution in order to discontinue it, we would do so if one (or more) of
                           the following circumstances applies:
     42
                                           •                       There is clearly no case to answer. A private pr
                                                commenced in these circumstances would be unfounded, and
     45                                         would, therefore be an abuse of the right to bring a prosecution.
                                                                         -5 -
              Draft 3 0 M a r ch 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 6
                                            j,   j                                    Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfietd
     Judgment: Approved by the pourt for handing down                 r   y Chjef Constab|e of south Yorkshire Police
     (subject to editorial corrections)                                     £x Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority




                               • The public interest factors tending against prosecution clearly
                                 outweigh those factors tending in favour.
3                              • The prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests o f justice.
                               • The prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests o f justice.

6                The CPS would then regard itself as having to act in accordance with our
                 policy.

9                If none of the above apply there would be no need for the CPS to become
                 involved and we would not interfere with the private prosecution.

2                Clearly there is a distinction between the 'realistic prospect of conviction
                 test in the Code [the Code for Crown Prosecutors issued by the DPP under
                 s. 10 of the 1985 Act] and the 'clearly no case to answer’ test mentioned
                 above. Accordingly we recognise that there will be some cases which do not
                 meet the CPS Code tests where nevertheless we will not intervene. It has
                  been considered that to apply the Code tests to private prosecutions would
18               unfairly limit the right of individuals to bring their own cases.

                  Before this decision can properly be made the CPS must be assured that all
21               relevant material has been considered...

                  Until there has been a detailed review of the many papers in the case the
24               Crown’s position cannot be determined...


27                    There followed very substantial representations from D and M and from
       the HFSG. At length the DPP communicated his decision not to intervene, as I have
       said by letter of 18 December 1998. The letter merely stated:
"O
                   “We have considered the evidence, the representations made by the parties
                   and all the relevant circumstances of the case. We have concluded that we
33                 should not intervene to take over any of the charges.”

       The respective solicitors for D and M asked for reasons to be given. There followed a
36     letter of 1 February 1999 (the “reasons letter”) from the CPS’ Casework Director to
       M’s solicitor from which it is necessary to cite at some length.

39                  “As you know, the Code for Crown Prosecutors sets out the general
                    principles applied by the Service when (inter alia) deciding whether to
                    continue a prosecution it has taken over; or whether to institute
42                 proceedings, or whether to advise the police to do so. It is correct that the
                    CPS decided in 1997 that the evidence available at that time was not
                    sufficient, in its view, to provide a realistic prospect of the conviction of
45                 either your client or Mr Duckenfield for any offence. However, it does not
                                                             -6-

        Draft 3 0 Mar ch 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 6
     -inHnmimt: Annroved bv the Court for handing down                            Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield
     ;                                                            r   V Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
     jsub[ect to editorial corrections]                                ^   ^   South             po|jce Authorjty




     ^            follow that, when considering the evidence and the representations
                  submitted by the private prosecutor, and by yourselves on behalf of your
3                 client, the CPS should seek merely to identify whether there is now any new
                  evidence sufficient to provide a realistic prospect of a conviction. The
                  decision whether to intervene in a private prosecution with a view to
6                 terminating it calls for different considerations to be applied. It is quite
                  possible for a private prosecution to continue, notwithstanding that the CPS
                   is not satisfied, on the basis of its own assessment of the strength of the
9                 evidence, that the evidence would pass the evidential sufficiency test in the
                   Code (that there should be a 'realistic prospect of a conviction’).

12                In broad terms, the reason for this is that s.6 (l)... specifically preserved the
                   right of private individuals and prosecuting authorities and bodies other
                   than the CPS to bring criminal proceedings. This right is subject (among
15                other limitations) to the limitation in s.6(2) that the CPS may nevertheless
                   take over the proceedings with a view either to conducting or to
                   terminating those proceedings.
18
                   Private prosecutors are not bound to apply the Code for Crown Prosecutors
                   when deciding whether to institute proceedings, nor do the courts apply the
21                evidential sufficiency test in the Code when deciding whether there is a case
                   to answer. The Service therefore recognises that it is not appropriate to
                   intervene to terminate a private prosecution without good reason. That
24                general principle has recently been endorsed by the Law Commission in its
                   Consultation Paper No. 149 'Consents to Prosecution’ (see paragraphs 6.3
                   and 6.4).
27
                    [The letter then proceeds to set out the DPP’s policy in the same terms as those
                    in which it had earlier been described by the three “bullet-points” in the letter
30                 of 27 July 1998, save that it gives instances of the “public interest factors” test
                    as follows:

33                 “examples might be where the prosecution is malicious, or vexatious; or the
                    offence is one for which the defendant should clearly have been cautioned;
                    or where, although the offence may be serious, the defendant is terminally
36                 ill.” Then the letter continues as follows]

                    In this case, I took the decision not to intervene... I concluded in respect of
39                 the charges of manslaughter and wilful neglect to perform a public duty
                    (which, for the avoidance of doubt, were each considered against each
                    individual separately) that I could not say that there is clearly no case to
42                 answer. It was not right, therefore, for the Service to take over the
                    proceedings with a view to terminating them.



                                                         -7 -

         Draft 3 0 M arch 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 6
      Judgment: Approved bv the Court for handing down                          Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield
      (subject to etHtorial corrections)                          R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
                                                                      Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



                  I should add that, against that background and after specifically
                  considering the appropriate course to take in these circumstances, I
                  concluded further that it would not be right to intervene in respect of the
                  one remaining charge against Mr Duckenfield, of attempting to pervert the
                  course of justice, albeit I had formed the view that there was clearly no case
                  to answer on that charge alone. The charge of attempting to pervert the
                  course of justice is a serious one, particularly when levelled against
                  someone who was, at the relevant time, a serving, senior police officer.
                  Nevertheless, in the context of the case as a whole that charge is not the
                  gravamen of the criminality alleged against Mr Duckenfield and I
                  concluded that my approach to that charge should be led by my conclusions
12                on the charges of manslaughter and wilful neglect to perform a public duty.
                  I also considered whether, nevertheless, there were overriding public
                  interest factors that should lead to the Service intervening with a view to
                  discontinuance, but I came to the conclusion that any public interest factors
                  tending against prosecution did not clearly outweigh those in favour; nor
                  did I consider that the prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests
18                of justice•••


21                  The private prosecution of D and M presently stands adjourned in the
      magistrates’ court. Committal proceedings were due to commence on 19 April 1999.
      But we understand that date has been vacated. There is a directions hearing fixed for
24 hearing later in April. The matter was earlier before the magistrates’ court on 21
      December 1998, an occasion to which I should refer because Mr Jones QC for AA
      contends that the applications in the first case have not been made promptly, as Order
27 53 and the Supreme Court Act 1981 require (Mr Havers QC for the DPP likewise so
     contends but only in relation to the assault which is directed to the legality of the
     DPP’s policy; he says, as is plainly the fact, that D and M had notice of the policy by
 50 the letter of 27 July 1998). Chi 21 December it is said by AA that Mr Harrison QC for
     D and M indicated his clients’ intention to seek leave to bring an application for
     judicial review against the DPP’s decision, whatever the reasons for it (the reasons
33 had not, of course, by then been supplied). Mr Jones contends that the application for
     judicial review could and should have been lodged then or very shortly thereafter.
     There is an issue as to the context in which Mr Harrison said what he said to the
36 magistrate. It is clear from an affidavit sworn by M’s solicitor Mr Manning that Mr
     Harrison took the view (as, if I may say so, one would expect) that he would have to
     consider the DPP’s written reasons before finally advising as to a judicial review. As
39 at 21 December 1998 a reasons letter was expected before Christmas, and Mr Harrison
     so informed the magistrate. In the event the reasons were not delivered until 1
     February 1999. These applications were lodged in the Crown Office on 1 and 5 March
42 1999.

                    In my judgment there is nothing in the delay point. It would have been
45   irresponsible to seek judicial review leave before the DPP’s reasons were available.
      And the letter of 27 July 1998 could not have been a proper trigger to seek leave; it
                                                         -   8-
      Draft 3 0 March 1 9 9 9 1 2 :26
                                                                             Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield
      Judgment: Approved bv the Court for handing down         R v Chief Constable o f South Yorkshire Police
      (subject to editorial corrections)                           Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



      contained no decision. It is due that a challenge only to the legahty of the pokey need
      not strictly have awaited the DPP’s reasons for applying it as he decided to do, but
      since D and M, veiy obviously, were at least as interested in the application of the
      policy as in its legality, overall it was perfectly proper and reasonable to wait for the
      reasons letter before lodging any application for leave.
6




9      The First Case: the Decision o f the DPP
                     I may now turn to the substantive arguments in the first case. The lead
12     skeleton argument is that prepared on behalf of M, which is adopted by D who adds
       further submissions to challenge the distinct decision of the DPP not to take over an
       discontinue the charge against him of attempting to pervert the course of justice. To
15     that I will come in due course.

       S.3(2)(b) o f the Act o f 1985
                      The applicants’ first submission is that the DPP’s decision fails to pay
        any regard to his duty under s.3(2)(b), which I have set out. It is put thus at #2.6 of the
21      skeleton argument:

                   “The applicant’s point is that the policy and decision process in this case
24                 have not recognised that the s.3(2)(b) duty is relevant to the exercise of
                   discretion whether to intervene under s.6(2) and apply s.23(3)”.

27      In the course of his oral submissions Mr Harrison expanded this argument. He
        submitted that in deciding whether to take over and discontinue a pnvate prosecution
        where the case is one of “importance or difficulty”, the DPP should bear m mmd tha
30      it is ordinarily his duty to institute and conduct such proceedings. Accordmgly, as
        understand it, the suggestion is that the DPP should in some way entertain a
        heightened concern where such a private prosecution is launched, and his policy m
 33     relation to the potential discontinuance of such cases under s.23(3) should reflect this,
        presumably (for otherwise I cannot see how the argument can assist Mr Harrison) by
         leaning more favourably towards discontinuance than in other classes of case.
 36
                       In my judgment this is a bad argument. S.3(2)(b) speaks only of the
        institution of proceedmgs by the DPP; contrast s.3(2)(a), (c), and (d), which require
 39     him to take over proceedings. Plainly the DPP would not mstitute proceedmgs with a
        view to discontinuance. Moreover, as Mr Havers submitted, had it been the
        legislature’s intention to require the DPP to treat “important or difficult cases m a
 42     different way from others for the purposes of ss.6(2) and 23(3), it could have readi y
         so provided and it is to be supposed would have done so. In my Judgment.th e jig h : ol
         private prosecution preserved by s.6 (l) is in no way qualified by s.3 (2 )(b) which has
 45     nothing to do with the discretion to take over such a prosecution under s.6 (2 ) with a
         view to discontinuance under s.23(3). I consider that this conclusion is lent support by

         Draft 3 0 March 1 9 9 9 1 2 :26
                                                                                    Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield
          i. iHgmpnt: A pnroved by the Court for handing down       r   ^ chjef Constab)e of South Yorkshire Police
          ^gublact to editorial corrections)                              Ex parte south Yorkshire Police Authority




          the decision of the Divisional Court in R v Bo* Street S O p M ^ P-                             Coasl
          Ltd [1993] 2 WLR 621, in which Lloyd LJ, as he then was, said at

                     “It will be noticed that section 3(2)(a)... provide[s] for the Director to take
                     ove^ the conduct of certain kinds of proceedings. By contrast, s«*on
                     V 2\(U\ nrovides for the Director to institute certain other kinds of
                     proceedings where it appears to him to be appropriate, having regard to the
                     importance and the difficulty of the case. The difference m              * "°*>
                     in my view, accidental. It becomes of crucial importance when one turns to
                      section 6 which deals with private prosecutions... The effect of section 6(1)
                      is to preclude a person from bringing a private prosecution in cases covered
                      bv section 3 (2 )(a), (c) and (d) but not in the residuary category of cases
    12
                      I r b y section 3(2)(b). So far as
                      there is nothing to preclude a private prosecution. (Lloyd U s emphas )

•    5
            The DPP’s policy fails to have regard to the fundamental purpose fo r which private
    18      prosecution is preserved by statute
                         Mr Harrison’s second submission was that the right to maintain a pnvate
    21
            prosecution essentially operates as a constitutional


    24

             Wilberforce said at 477B-C:
    27                  «Thk historical right which goes right back to the earliest days of our legal
                         s y s m though 7 arely exercised fn relation to indictable offences and
                         Z u Z ultimately liable to be controlled by the Attorney-General (by
*                       taking over the prosecution and, if he thinks fit, entering a nolle prosequi)
                          remains a valuable constitutional safeguard against inertia or partiality o
     33                 the part of authority.”

              Lord Diplock said this at 498B:
     36                   “In English public law every citizen still has the right, as he once had a
                          duty W        Pof imperfect obligation), to invoke the aid of courts of cnmina
                          Jurisdiction for the enforcement of the criminal law by this procedure. It
     39
                          i  righfwhich nowadays seldom needs to be exercised by
                               , _ r         mihlic for since the formation of regular police forces
                          charged with the duty’ in public law to prevent and detect crim eandto
     42                   bring criminals to justice, and the creation in 1879 of the office of D,rector
                          of Public Prosecutions, the need for prosecutions to be un^e. ^ n (®
                          paid for) by private individuals has largely disappeared; but it still exists
                           and is a useful constitutional safeguard against capricious, corrupt or
               Draft 3 0 March 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 6
                                                                          Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield
Judgment: Approved bv the Court for handing down
                                                            R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
(subject to eifltorial corrections)
                                                                Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



            biased failure or refusal of those authorities to prosecute offenders against
            the criminal law.”

Reliance is also placed on a passage at para 7.50 in the report of the Royal
Commission on Criminal Procedure 1981, which refers to the retention of the right of
private prosecution “as an effective safeguard against improper inaction by the
prosecuting authority”, and to a recent recommendation of the Law Commission,
contained in para 5.26 of its final report on “Consents to Prosecution” (October 1998),
to the effect that private prosecutions might be made subject to a statutory provision
requiring the consent of the CPS.

               In my judgment this argument is also misconceived. The obiter dicta in
 Gouriet are not reflected in the 1985 statute, which was of course enacted some seven
 years after Gouriet was decided. More particularly, it is simply quixotic to suggest that
 the DPP should allow a private prosecution to go ahead if there has been “inertia,
 partiality or improper action” by the public prosecutor - namely himself - but not
 otherwise. Is he to be judge and jury on the question whether he has let the public
 down? Their Lordships’ dicta in Gouriet do not with respect provide anything
 approaching a compulsory template of a lawful policy to be adopted by the DPP for
 the execution of his duty under ss.6(2) and 23(3).

  The Codefo r Crown Prosecutors

                 The argument here, at least as originally put forward in M’s skeleton
  argument, was that because of his view (referred to in the reasons letter) that pnvate
  prosecutors are not bound to apply the Code when deciding whether to institute
  proceedings, the DPP has erroneously proceeded on the basis that the principles m the
  Code are irrelevant to his discretion under ss.6(2) and 23(3). But the DPP has nowhere
  stated that he regards the Code as systematically or generally irrelevant to his power to
  discontinue. Indeed, as I shall show, there are some aspects of the Code which are a
  reflected in his approach to the question, how his policy should be applied m this case.
  In truth, however, it could not be right for the DPP to apply across the board the same
  tests in particular the “reasonable prospect of conviction test referred to in the
  correspondence, in considering whether to take over and discontinue a private
  prosecution as the Code enjoins Crown Prosecutors to follow in deciding whether to
  institute or proceed with a prosecution themselves; the consequence would be that the
  DPP would stop a private prosecution merely on the ground that the case is not one
  which he would himself proceed with. But that, in my judgment, would amount to an
  emasculation of s.6 (l) and itself be an unlawful policy; and in fairness Mr Hamson
   (#7 of M’s skeleton) made it clear that he did not submit so much. The very premise of
   s.6 (l) must be that some cases will go to trial which the DPP himself chooses not to
   prosecute.
                As it seems to me the only points remaining in relation to the Code
  concern the application of the DPP’s policy to the facts of this case, and I will deal
  with that shortly.
                                                   - ii -

   Draft 3 0 M ar ch 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 6
                                                                                  Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield
         Judgment: Approved bv the Court for handing down
                                                                    R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
         (subject to editorial corrections)
                                                                        Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority




         The “clearly no case to answer” test
    3
                          The argument here (#7 of the skeleton) is that such a test is
          impermissibly rigid. It is said that the policy excludes “any assessment of evidential
    6    deficiencies” and so amounts to an unlawful fetter of the DPP’s discretion; and that it
          “also leads to a distorted evaluation of the public interest factors” . In my judgment
          the test involves no unlawful fetter of discretion. It is plain from the formulation “there
    9    is clearly no case to answer” (my emphasis) that the DPP only intends to stop private
          prosecutions on this ground where no reasonable decision-maker could conclude that
          there was sufficient evidence for the case to go forward. That seems to me to be a
12        perfectly proper approach. Such a prosecution could offer no legitimate benefit to
          anyone and would, potentially at least, be an abuse of the process of the court The
           test rightly identifies a class of case which should always be stopped; if the case is not
    5     within the class, then the decision whether to stop it will, of course, depend on the
*          other two tests which, in my judgment, amply contemplate an exercise of discretion in
           which all material factors will be considered and whose application accordingly
18         negates any unlawful fetter of discretion.

                       As regards any “distorted evaluation” of the public interest test, it is
21       clear that the three aspects of the policy are individually self-standing. Their
          respective application in this case is a another matter, to which as I have said I will
          come. But the applicants have a separate argument about the public interest test.
24
          The “public interestfactors” test

27                       Here it is submitted (#8 of the skeleton) that the public interest
          necessarily involves consideration of the likelihood of conviction, so that the
           evidential test should not be hived off from that relating to the public interest. Mr
130       Harrison also argues that the public interest test as formulated - “the public interest
          factors tending against prosecution clearly outweigh those factors tending in
          favour” - gets it the wrong way round; the test should be whether the public interest
    33    factors in favour of the private prosecution outweigh those against.

                           I see no reason why quite aside from the evidential test of no case to
    36    answer the DPP should not, within his policy as presently formulated, have in mmd
           the likelihood or otherwise of conviction when considering where the public interest
           lies. And I see no basis for the suggestion that the law should compel the DPP to
    39    reverse the effect of the public interest factors so as to favour discontinuance unless in
           his judgment they clearly point in the other direction. The test as presently formulated
           seems to me designed to allow proper scope for the operation of the right of private
    42    prosecution. The private prosecutor is very likely to take a different view as to where
           the public interest lies than does the DPP, and s.6 (l), I think, implies that he is entitled
           to do so. The approach urged by Mr Harrison would in effect require the pnvate
    45    prosecutor to persuade the DPP that his view of the public interest is plainly right. I
            consider it strongly arguable that that would place an illegitimate constraint upon the
                                                            - 12-

           Dral! 30 M ar ch 1999 12:26
                                          . . . .                                   Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield
      Judgment: Approved by the Court for handing down            r   ^        Constflb|e of South Yorkshire Police
      (subject to editorial corrections!                                  Ex Rarte South Y orkshjre Police Authority




      right of private prosecution; but it is enough to hold, as I would, that the present public
      interest policy is perfectly consistent with the objects of the statute and thus well
3     within the proper discretion of the DPP.

                    Mr Hairison directed similar criticisms to the third limb of the policy,
6     but in light of what I have said about the public interest test they possess no separate
      force.
                                                         ***

                     For all these reasons, the DPP’s policy overall is in my judgment a
1 2 lawful one. The real question in the case is whether it has been law fully applied. It is
     clear that (a) the DPP maintains his view that the “reasonable prospect of conviction
     test in the Code would not be met in this case, but that (b) the “no evidence test is not
15 met either (save as regards the charge against D of attempting to pervert the course of
     justice, with which I deal separately below). In those circumstances, tiie apphcation of
     the public interest test was crucial. In this context it is convenient to deal first with Mr
18 Harrison’s submission that the reasons letter shows that the DPP has given improper
      and perhaps decisive weight to the “no evidence” test. He relies on the sentence which
      follows the conclusion that that test is not satisfied: “It was not right, therefore, for
 21 the Service to take over the proceedings with a view to terminating them and
      submits that it suggests the author of the letter considered that that was the end of the
      matter However after dealing with the particular issue concerning the charge against
 24 D of attempting to pervert the course of justice, the letter continues. I also
      considered whether, nevertheless, there were overriding public interest factors
      that should lead to the Service intervening with a view to discontinuance I think
 27 the letter could have been better expressed, so as to make it clear that the public
       interest test is by no means secondary to the “no evidence” test. However I am qrn e
       satisfied that there was no intention to downgrade or sideline the balance of public
 30 interest factors. It is not really credible to suppose that author of the letter
       m isunderstood or failed to apply the very policy which he had just clearly set out.

 33     The DPP’s judgment o f the public interest

                    Mr Harrison submitted that in light of everything that had gone before,
 36 and not least Stuart-Smith LJ’s Scrutiny, there were no public^interest factors
      favouring continuation of the prosecutions of D and M. He said that there is nothing in
      the reasons letter to show that the DPP accepted the suggestion, urged forcefully and
 3 9 at length by the HFSG in the course of their representations, that further evidence had
      come to light since the Scrutiny. With this latter proposition I agree. But the reasons
      letter clearly implies an acceptance that some factors existed which favoured the
 42 prosecutions. It stated. “I came to the conclusion that any public interest factors
       tending against prosecution did not clearly outweigh those in favour What were
       those in favour? If in truth there were no factors which a reasonable decision-maker
 45 could regard as going in favour of the prosecutions, then the DPP’s decision would be

                                                           -13-

         Draft 3 0 March 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 6
         Judgment: Approved bv the Court for handing down                           Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield
         (subject to editorial corrections)                           R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
                                                                          Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



         vulnerable to a challenge on Wednesbuiy1 grounds (as indeed Mr Harrison claims it is)
         since there would be nothing in public interest terms to weigh in the scales against
         discontinuance. When the case was opened there was no affidavit from the DPP
         dealing with the point, nor did Mr Havers’ skeleton argument articulate any such
         factors. So it was that, effectively at the court’s invitation so that the matter could be
         clarified, Mr Newell swore an affidavit for the DPP on 22 March 1999. He is the CPS’
         Director of Casework and the author of the reasons letter. Paras 2 - 4 are as follows:

                   “2. As I now recall, the public interest factors tending against prosecution
                   which I considered were as follows:--------- -------------------------------------------

    12                       (1) Previous reviews of the case, in particular those carried out by
                             the DPP when considering the question whether criminal
                             proceedings should be taken against Mr Duckenfield and Mr
                             Murray and the more recent report of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

                             (2) The fact that the Applicants had been told on previous occasions
    18                       that the DPP did not intend to prosecute.

                             (3) The delay which had occurred between the commission of the
    21                       alleged offences and the commencement of this prosecution and its
                             likely effect on the Applicants, although I took the view that delay
                             may be offset by the seriousness of the alleged offences (as is reflected
    24                       in paragraph 6.5(d) of the Code...).

                             (4) The effect of the delay on the evidence, for example in terms of
    27                       the potential impairment of the recollections of witnesses.

                             (5) The assertion made on behalf of Mr Murray of ill-health,
• * 0                        although I noted that no medical evidence had been put forward in
                             support of this assertion and that, as again reflected in the Code (at
                             paragraph 6.5(e)), ill-health may be offset by the seriousness of the
    33                       offence.

                   3. As against these factors tending against prosecution, there was in my
    36             view one extremely important factor in favour of prosecution, namely the
                   very serious nature of the alleged offences, in particular, the alleged
                   offences of manslaughter. In my opinion, the allegation that two senior
    39             police officers were responsible for the deaths of a number of people as a
                   result of criminal negligence was a very grave allegation.

    42             4. Paragraph 6.2 of the Code reflects the considerable weight attached by
                   the CPS to the seriousness of the alleged offence when seeking to strike the
                   right balance as to the factors for and against prosecution. (I refer also to

         1 [1948] 1K B 223.
                                                            - 14-
         Draft 30 March 1999 12:26
     Judgment: Approved bv the Court for handing down                              Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield



     •
     (subject to editorial corrections)                              R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
                                                                         Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



                  the opening words of paragraph 6.4.) Having carefully considered the
                  factors tending against prosecution and this extremely important factor in
3                 favour of it, I came to the firm conclusion that the factors tending against
                  prosecution did not clearly outweigh what I considered to be the very
                  strong public interest in favour of prosecution.”
 6

                     One of Mr Harrison’s complaints, advanced before this affidavit was
 9   sworn, was that the policy should have taken account of para 10.1 of the Code which
      includes this:

12                “Normally, if the Crown Prosecution Service tells a suspect or defendant
                  that there will not be a prosecution... that is the end of the matter... But
                  occasionally there are special reasons why the Crown Prosecution Service
15                will re-start the prosecution, particularly if the case is serious.”

       This is one of the points relating to the Code which, as it seems to me, bear on the
18   application of the policy rather than the policy itself; and para 2(2) of Mr Newell’s
      affidavit shows that regard was had to assurances or statements made to D and M that
      for his part the DPP would not prosecute. Clearly it was right to do so, within the
21   public interest balance. But I think there is a qualitative difference between the
      situation where the DPP himself goes back upon a previous assurance not to prosecute
      and one where the DPP does not change his mind but a private prosecutor chooses to
24   instigate proceedings.

                     In reply, having by then seen Mr Newell’s affidavit, Mr Harrison made
27   further submissions. While accepting that there could be a case in which a single
      factor favouring prosecution might not be outweighed by a multiplicity of factors
      going the other way, he submitted that if the raft of public interest considerations
30   favouring discontinuance in this case was held not to be enough to outweigh the single
      factor of the allegations’ gravity, it was difficult or impossible to imagine what set of
      considerations might do so; and the court should conclude that DPP had fettered his
33   discretion by treating the seriousness of the allegations as overriding everything else,
      so that he had not in truth carried out a proper balancing exercise at all.

36                  I would reject this argument. There is no reason to suppose that the
      factors against prosecution were not properly weighed and considered, and certainly
      no basis for the supposition that once faced with a private prosecution for something
39   as serious as manslaughter the DPP would inevitably decide to allow it to proceed.

                   Mr Harrison submitted next that Mr Newell’s affidavit showed that the
42   DPP had transposed from the Code the “seriousness of the charge” factor as a
     consideration favouring the prosecution without also taking account of his own view
     that the Code test of “realistic prospect of conviction” was not met. I agree that the
45   DPP’s view of the prospects of conviction is a proper matter for him to consider,
     within the public interest test contained in the policy, when deciding whether to
                                                        -   15   -

         Draft 30 March 1999 12:26
             Judgment: Approved bv the Court for handing down                          Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield
             (subject to editorial corrections)                          R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
                                                                             Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



        ^    discontinue; but, as it seems to me, para 2(1) of Mr Newell’s affidavit shows that in
             this case he has done so.
        3
                            Then Mr Harrison suggested that para 3 of the affidavit demonstrated
              that the DPP’s view of the gravity of the allegation was informed simply by the fact
        6    that there was a manslaughter charge. He had not properly considered the real degree
              of culpability inherent in the facts alleged; and the gravity of the offence of
              manslaughter can vary very widely. There is nothing in this. Mr Newell made it
        9    perfectly clear that he had regard to the species of manslaughter in question
              (“criminal negligence”) and it cannot sensibly be doubted that he was well aware and
              took account of the circumstances in which the alleged offences are said to have been
      12     committed.

                          Lastly on this part of the case Mr Harrison submitted that the refusal to
      k1 5   discontinue was simply perverse, given the “enormous weight” of the public interest
             considerations going the other way.

      18                   The DPP might, in my judgment, lawfully have decided to discontinue.
             The tragic events at Hillsborough have been the subject of repeated, detailed, thorough
             enquiries. Nearly ten years have passed. But the judgment was for the DPP to make. If
      21     we acceded to Mr Harrison’s submission, we would I think usurp the role of the
             primary decision-maker.

      24                    In my judgment the decision not to discontinue is no more unlawful than
             is the policy which the DPP applied.

      27

             Thefirst applicant: attempting to pervert the course o f justice
      30
• •                         Mr Harrison discretely submits that the decision to let the charge of
             attempting to pervert the course of justice go ahead was unlawful, because it runs flat
      33     counter to the “no case to answer” test in his own policy. It will be recalled that the
             reasons letter said:

      36                “I concluded further that it would not be right to intervene in respect of the
                         one remaining charge against M r Duckenfield, of attempting to pervert the
                         course of justice, albeit I had formed the view that there was clearly no case
      39                to answer on that charge alone... in the context of the case as a whole that
                         charge is not the gravamen of the criminality alleged against M r
                         Duckenfield and I concluded that my approach to that charge should be led
      42                by my conclusions on the charges of manslaughter and wilful neglect to
                         perform a public duty.”

      45     Paras 5 and 6 of Mr Newell’s affidavit state as follows:

                                                                - 16 -
             Draft 3 0 Mar ch 1 9 9 9 1 2 :26
     Judgment: Approved bv the Court for handing down                            Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield
     (subject to editorial corrections)                            R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
                                                                       Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



              “5. I was fully aware of the seriousness of the additional charge. I also
              tentatively concluded that partial intervention... was in law open to the CPS
3             and I proceeded on that assumption. However, the existing policy did not
              cover the situation which arose in this case, namely where the conclusion
              was reached that there was clearly a case to answer in relation to some of
6             the charges but not in relation to others. (I can say that with some
              confidence, since I had overall responsibility for formulating the policy.) ...
              I concluded that it was in fact inappropriate to intervene only to take over
 9            (with a view to discontinuing) this additional charge.

               6. First, partial intervention was not, in my view, either appropriate or
12             desirable. It seemed to me that the DPP should either intervene so as to
               take over the proceedings in their entirety or not at all. To have intervened
               partially would still have left the criminal proceedings in place in relation to
15             the other charges which included the even more serious charge of ^
               manslaughter. Secondly, I took into account the fact that Mr Duckenfield
               would not be left without any remedy in relation to this additional charge.
18             On the contrary, he would be entitled to invite the Magistrates’ Court to
               dismiss it on the basis that there was no case to answer. Thirdly, the charge
               arose out of essentially the same events as the events which gave rise to the
21             other charges and thus those events would be scrutinised in any event.”


24                    I of course accept that Mr Newell did not subjectively believe - or intend
      - that the policy covered this situation. But the policy has to be read objectively; there
      can be no doubt that it gave rise to a legitimate expectation on the part of D and M
27   that it would be applied according to its terms. The first question, then, is as to the true
      meaning of the policy on a fair reading of the letter of 27 July 1998 and the reasons
      letter. It is true that the letters use the singular: “the prosecution” and “a private
30   prosecution”. But it is elementary that in criminal cases each count constitutes a £
      separate indictment; it is as if there are separate trials relating to each. And this is no
      mere technicality; for it means, of course, that where there is more than one charge
33   any question whether there is “no case to answer” is, as regards each individual
      charge, wholly discrete. I do not consider that the policy can fairly be read as
      indicating that the DPP would necessarily either take over or discontinue a private
36   prosecution in its entirety. In my view the articulation of the “no case to answer” test
      would be taken by any informed reader, facing a multiple private prosecution, to imply
      that the DPP would consider whether in his view there was clearly no case to answer
39   on each charge.

                     The DPP concluded that there was clearly no such case in relation to this
42   charge against D, and yet decided to allow it to proceed. It follows, in my judgment,
      that there is a breach of D’s legitimate expectation that the policy would be applied.
      The pragmatic factors spoken to by Mr Newell in para 6 can make no difference. Nor,
45   of course, can the vigorous assertion by the HFSG that there is in fact a case to
      answer. What matters for present purposes is the DPP’s conclusion on that issue.
                                                        -   17 -
     Draft 30 M arch 1999 12:26
i
                                                                                Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield
         Judgment: Approved bv the Court for handing down
                                                                  R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
         (subject to editorial corrections)
                                                                      Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority




                        For these reasons I would quash the DPP’s decision only so far as it
    3    relates to this charge against D. I make it clear that I say nothing as to what might
         follow as regards any further decision concerning that charge to be made by the DPP.

    6                    Otherwise, for the reasons I have given I would dismiss the application
         in the first case.



         The Second Case: the Decision o f the SYPA
12
                        First I should describe the further facts which are specifically relevant to
         the second case. These must be read into the narrative of events which I have already
         given in relation to the first case; it seems to me clearer and more convenient to isolate
         here the particular facts which bear on the challenge to the decision of the SYPA.

    1g                  The history shows that at earlier stages the SYPA had been prepared to
         provide fin an cial support for D and M (and other officers) to be legally represented in
         matters arising from the Hillsborough disaster. On 7 December 1990 they resolved to
    21   fund the representation of six police officers, including D and M, at the inquest. They
         had earlier resolved not to do so; the decision of 7 December was taken after
          considering “the most recent legal advice available”. Then on 1 August 1997 the
    24   SYPA resolved to set aside £500,000 for financial assistance for police officers in
          connection with Stuart-Smith LJ’s Scrutiny. In both instances they had considered a
         report from the Chief Constable (or a joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk
    27    and Treasurer). The latter decision was said to be taken “in accordance with the
          principles set out in Home Office Circular No 77/87 Financial Assistance to Police
          Officers in Legal Proceedings”, to which I will have to refer.

    5°                   On 27 February 1998, following publication of the Scrutiny, and
          considering that “there were indications that private prosecutions could be brought
    33   against 3 officers”, the SYPA resolved in principle to authorise consideration being
          given to applications by officers for financial assistance. On 5 March 1998 D’s
          application for such assistance was approved by the SYPA, and M’s was approved on
    36   29 June 1998. It will be recalled that three days earlier, on 26 June, AA had first
          sought to in stitu te criminal proceedings against D and M in the South Sefton Petty
          Sessional Division. On 20 November 1998 M applied for further financial assistance
    39   in relation to the judicial review which was then seen to be in prospect should the DPP
          decide to allow the private prosecutions to continue; and the HFSG had made it clear
          that were the DPP to take over the prosecutions and discontinue, they would seek a
    42   judicial review. On 21 December 1998 counsel for D and M indicated to the
          Stipendiary Magistrate their intention to seek a judicial review of the DPP’s decision; I
          have already referred to this in dealing with Mr Jones misconceived argument that the
    45   first case should be dismissed on grounds of delay. The following day, 22 December
           1998, in a letter of over six pages AA made written representations on leading
                                                            18-
           D ra fl 3 0 M ar ch 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 6
         Judgment: Approved bv the Court for handing down                          Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield
         (subject to editorial corrections)                          R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
                                                                         Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



         counsel’s advice to urge the SYPA that the decision to fund the defences of D and M
         was “unlawful, irrational, ultra vires and procedurally improper on various
    3    grounds”. On 23 December 1998 D applied for further financial assistance in relation
         to the prospective judicial review proceedings. On 5 January 1999 AA wrote a further
         lengthy letter to the SYPA repeating and expanding her assertions that the funding
    6    decisions were unlawful.

                        Then on 5 February 1999 the SYPA passed the resolutions under
    9    challenge, “that, on balance, the Authority has no legal power to provide financial
         assistance” to D and M in respect either of the private prosecution or a judicial review
         of the DPP’s decision. On 10 February 1999 the CCSY’s application for judicial
    12   review in these proceedings was lodged, and on the same day solicitors for the SYPA
         wrote to the Crown Office to consent to the grant of leave and seek expedition. They
          stated:
    15            “SYPA passed these resolutions with great reluctance on the basis of advice ^
                  received from ourselves and Counsel...”
                                                            ♦♦♦
    18

                       The legality or otherwise of the decisions under challenge ultimately
    21   turns on the construction and application of s.6 (l) of the Police Act 1996 and s. 111(1)
         of the Local Government Act 1972. I shall have to look at other statutory provisions,
         but it is convenient to set these out at once. The cross-heading to s .6 reads “General
    24   functions of police authorities”, and ss.(l) provides:

                      “Every police authority established under section 3 shall secure the
    27                maintenance of an efficient and effective police force for its area.”

          S. 111(1) of the Act of 1972 in its present form provides:
0   30
                     “W ithout prejudice to any powers exercisable apart from this section but
                     subject to the following provisions of this Act, a local authority shall have
    33               power to do any thing (whether or not involving expenditure, borrowing or
                     lending of money or the acquisition or disposal of any property or rights)
                     which is calculated to facilitate, or is conducive or incidental to, the
    36               discharge of their functions.”


    39                  S. 111(1) applies to police authorities (but in light of my conclusions it is
          unnecessary to go into the legislative history relating to that). Now, it might be
          thought - indeed this is the applicants’ case - that by s.6 ( 1), securing “the
    42    maintenance of an efficient and effective police force” is plainly made the function
          of a police authority, and that accordingly it is no less plain that s. 111( 1) empowers
          the police authority to do such things as fund the legal representation of police officers
    45    in proceedings if the authority reasonably concludes that to do so is conducive to that
          function’s discharge. That has been the settled view of the Association of Chief Police
                                                            - 19 -
          D raft 3 0 March 1 9 9 9 1 2 :26
             Judoment: Approved bv the Court for handing down                        Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfieid
             (subject to editorial corrections)                        R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
                                                                           Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



         ^   Officers, the Police Superintendents Association, and (until 1998) the Home Office.
              The decision to provide such finance, in common with any decision taken under
         3   s. 111(1), would of course be subject to well known public law constraints enshrined in
              the Wednesbury and Padfielc? principles. There is before the court an affidavit of Mr
              Daines, Assistant Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, in which he describes what he
         6   regards as the “absolutely vital” requirement “that officers should know that if they
              act in good faith in performing their duties their Police Authority will support
              them in the event that they face litigation” . If as a matter of vires s. 111(1) allows a
         9   police authority to incur expenditure in furtherance of the general function seemingly
              conferred by s.6 (l), then in my judgment the use of s.ll 1( 1) to finance police officers’
              legal expenses in litigation, including private prosecutions brought against them and
        12   the bringing of judicial review proceedings, cannot in principle be ruled unlawful on
              Wednesbury or Padfield grounds. The circumstances in which such funding might be
              provided in any particular case is another matter. The policy has in the past been to the
        15   effect that the authority must be satisfied that the officer has acted in good faith in the
              discharge of his duty; and I can see that, at least where a private prosecution is
              involved, there may be issues for the authority to consider which would involve their
        18   taking a view of the merits in advance of any trial. But in these proceedings we are not
              concerned with any question whether, when, or to what extent the SYPA might
              provide financial assistance to D or M. We are only to decide whether the power
        21   exists to do so at all.

                           In fact the argument of the CCSY was put two ways by Mr Baker QC. It
        24   was first said that s.6 (l) of itself, without the aid of s.. 111(1), enabled the funding
             decision. Alternatively, it was enabled by s.l 11(1) read with s.6 (l).

        27                Upon this issue Miss Baxendale QC for the SYPA submits that the
             apparently obvious relation between s.6 (l) and s. 111( 1) is in fact no relation at all.
             The essence of her argument may be expressed very shortly, as follows.
•   *   30
    ^                      (a) S.6 (l) confers no powers of any kind. All the powers possessed by
             police authorities are conferred elsewhere in the Police Act and by the local
        33   government legislation. S.6 (l) does no more than to provide the puipose for which the
             authority’s powers are to be exercised; it states the Act’s “policy and objects”, in the
             language of the Padfield case, as they apply to police authorities. If this is right, it
        36   would contradict Mr Baker’s first argument, that s.6 (l) alone is enough to empower
             the SYPA to fund D and M.

        39                 (b) S. 111(1) cannot be read as enabling the authority to do anything
             which is not ancillary to a power which is elsewhere conferred upon it. If this is right,
             then taken with (a) it contradicts Mr Baker’s second argument which relies on
        42   s. 111(1).




             2 [1968] AC 997.
                                                                -20-
             Draft 30 March 1999 12:26
         Judgment: Approved bv the Court for handing down                         Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield
                                                                    R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
         (subject to editorial corrections)
                                                                        Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



                        There is no doubt that express powers are conferred on police authorities
         by a raft of statutory provisions. Miss Baxendale says that such provisions support
    3    proposition (a) which I have set out, by application of the canon of statutory
         construction expressed by the Latin maxim expressio unius est exclusio alterius. Thus,
         she submits, where Parliament has seen fit to confer a range of specific powers on
    6    police authorities, the intention must have been thereby to set the limits on what such
         an authority may do and it cannot be supposed that s.6 (l) provides an undefined and
         open-ended power to do anything else which the authority may choose, merely on the
     9   ground that in some way it may be said to support the general aim of “the
          maintenance of an efficient and effective police force” . The high water-mark of this
          submission is found in s. 88(4) of the Act of 1996 which confers an express power to
    12   fund police officers’ costs in certain circumstances which do not include the defence
          of private (or any) criminal prosecutions or participation in proceedings for judicial


•
          review.
    15
                        I                      shall have to look in a little more detail at s.88(4). I have c
         however, that the correctness or otherwise of proposition (a) is not in the end at the
    18   centre of the case. The reason is that in the particular statutory context proposition (b)
          is in my judgment wrong; so that the SYPA is enabled by s. 111(1) (subject to
          Wednesbury and Padfield) to finance D and M in the criminal and judicial review
    21    proceedings even if s.6 (l) confers no powers as such.

                         The scheme of the Act of 1996 involves the distribution of
    24   responsibilities between three bodies: the Chief Constable, the Secretary of State, and
          the police authority. The Chief Constable’s role is principally given by s. 10:

    27                “(1) A police force maintained under section 2 shall be under the direction
                      and control of the chief constable appointed under s .ll .”

    30               (2) In discharging his functions, every chief constable shall have regard to
                      the local policing plan issued by the police authority for his area under
                      section 8 .”
    33
          (S.ll provides for the appointment and removal of the Chief Constable, by the police
          authority with the approval of the Secretary of State.) I should notice also ss.22(l) and
    36   44(4):
                 “22(1) Every chief constable shall, as soon as possible after the end of each
                 financial year, submit to the police authority a general report on the
    39          policing during that year of the area for which his force is maintained.”

                      “44(4) Every chief constable shall, as soon as possible after the end of each
    42               financial year, submit to the Secretary of State the like report as is required
                      by section 22 ( 1) to be submitted to the police authority.”

    45 The role of the Secretary of State is principally given by ss.36 and 37(1):

                                                            -21 -
           Draft 3 0 March 1 9 9 9 12: 26
                                                    „ j nuiin                       Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield
           Judgment: Approved by the Court for handmg down             r ^ ^             Qf South Yorkshire Po|ice
       ^ [s u b je c t to editorial corrections!                          Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority




                       “36(1) The Secretary of State shall exercise his powers under the provisions
                       of this Act referred to in subsection (2) in such manner and to such extent
   3                   as appears to him to be best calculated to promote the efficiency and
                       effectiveness of the police.”

   6                     37(1) The Secretary of State may by order determine objectives for the
                        policing of the areas of all police authorities established under section 3.”

   9       As regards the Secretary of State’s position I should notice also these provisions of the
           Act of 1996:                                                                 •
                  “38(1) Where an objective has been determined under section 37, tne
  12              Secretary of State may direct police authorities to establish levels of
                  performance (performance targets) to be aimed at in seeking to achieve the
                  objective.

                         39(1) The Secretary of State may issue codes of practice relating to the
                         discharge by police authorities established under section 3 of any of their
  18                     functions.”

             The role of the police authority is given first by the subsections of s .6 which follow
  21         subsection ( 1):

                         “6(2) In discharging its functions,every police authority established under
   24                    section 3 shall have regard to -

                          (a) any objectives determined by theSecretary of State under section 37,
   27
                          (b) any objectives determined by the authority under section 7,

0 3 0                    (c) any performance targets established by the authority, whether in
                          compliance with a direction under section 38 or otherwise, and

   33                    (d) any local policing plan issued by the authority under section 8 .

                          (3)               In discharging any function to which a code of practice issued under
   36                    section 39 relates, a police authority established under section 3 shall have
                          regard to the code.

   39                    (4) A police authority shall comply with any direction given to it by the
                          Secretary of State under section 38 or 40.”

   42          These provisions, of course, confer duties rather than powers. In relation to the police
               authority I should next notice ss.7 - 9:



                                                                -22-
               Draft 3 0 M ar ch 1 9 9 9 1 2 :55
     i T ^ a . i . y M o ^ C o . 'W t e g l                         £   p . S S o u th Y o rk sh if. Polio. A m h o « v



                 “7(1) Every police authority established under section 3 shall, before the
                 beginning of each financial year, determine objectives forthe policing of the
3               authority's area during that year.

                 (2) Objectives determined under this section may relate to matters to which
6               objectives determined under section 37 also relate, or to other matters, but
                 in any event shall be so framed as to be consistent with the objectives
                 determined under that section.
9
                   (3) Before determining objectives under this section, a police authority shall

12              (a) consult the chief constable for the area, and

                   (b) consider any views obtained by the authority in accordance with
15                 arrangements made under section 96.

                   8(1) Every police authority established under section 3 shall, before the
18                 beginning of each financial year, issue a plan setting out the proposed
                   arrangements for the policing of the authority’s area during the year (the
                   local policing plan).
21                                                                                                               .,
                    (2) The local policing plan shall include a statement of the authority’s
                    priorities for the year, of the financial resources expected to be available
24                 and of the proposed allocation of those resources, and shall give particulars
                    of -

27                 (a) any objectives determined by the Secretary of State under section 37,

                    (b) any objectives determined by the authority under section 7, and
30                                                                              .        (
                    (c) any performance targets established by the authority, whether in
                    compliance with a direction under section 38 or otherwise.
33
                    (3 ) A draft of the local policing plan shall be prepared by the chief
                    constable for the area and submitted by him to the police authority for it to
36                  consider.

                     (4) Before issuing a local policing plan which differs from the draft
39                  submitted by the chief constable under subsection (3), a police authority
                     shall consult the chief constable.

42                  (5) A police authority shall arrange for every local policing plan issued by it
                     under this section to be published in such manner as appears to it to be
                     appropriate, and shall send a copy of the plan to the Secretary of State.
45
                                                       -23-

        D raft 3 0 M ar ch 1 9 9 9 1 2 :55
                                                                                Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield
      Judgment: Approved bv the Court for handing down
                                                                  R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
      (subject to editorial corrections)
                                                                      Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



                  9 ( 1 ) As
                          soon as possible after the end of each financial year every police
                  authority established under section 3 shall issue a report relating to the
3                policing of the authority's area for the year.

                  (2) A report issued by a police authority under this section for any year
6                shall include an assessment of the extent to which the local policing plan for
                  that year issued under section 8 has been carried out.

9                 (3 ) A police authority shall arrange for every report issued by it under this
                   section to be published in such manner as appears to it to be appropriate,
                   and shall send a copy of the report to the Secretary of State.”
 2
       S. 14 is important:

 5               “(1) Each police authority established under section 3 shall keep a fund to
                  be known as the police fund.

•J8               (2) Subject to any regulations under the Police Pensions Act 1976, all
                   receipts of the police authority shall be paid into the police fund and all
                   expenditure of the authority shall be paid out of that fund.
21
                    (3) Accounts shall be kept by each police authority of payments made into
                    or out of the police fund.”
24
       Then s.43(l):

27                 “A police authority shall, whenever so required by the Secretary of State,
                    submit to the Secretary of State a report on such matters connected with
                    the discharge of the authority's functions, or otherwise with the policing of
30                 its area, as may be specified in the requirement.”

        S.92:
33                 “(1) The council of a county, district, county borough or London borough
                    may make grants to any police authority established under section 3 whose
                    police area falls wholly or partly within the county, district, county borough
36                 or                                                                     borough.

                    (3)              Grants under this section may be made unconditionally or, with
39                 agreement of the chief officer of police for the police area concerned,
                    subject to conditions.”

42      S.96:

                      “(1) Arrangements shall be made for each police area for obtaining -
 45
                                                         -2 4 -

         Draft 3 0 M ar ch 1 9 9 9 1 2 :55
       Judgment: Approved bv the Court for handing down                                   Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield
     , (subject to editorial corrections)                                 R v Chief Constable^, of South Yorkshire Police
     ^                                                           Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



                        (a) the views of people in that area about matters concerning the
                        policing of the area, and

                        (b) their co-operation with the police in preventing crime in that area.

                  (2) Except as provided by subsections (3) to (6), arrangements for each
                  police area shall be made by the police authority after consulting the chief
                  constable as to the arrangements that would be appropriate.”


                      Looking at the whole picture displayed by these provisions, it is clear
12   that the Chief Constable is in charge of day-to-day policing (s. 10(1)); the police
      authority has a role in relation to policy, or strategy (ss.7, 8 and other provisions); but
      this is subject to the overall direction of the Secretary of State (ss.37, 38, 39 and other
15   provisions, taken with s.6((2) - (4)). The police authority holds the purse (s. 14). Those A
      provisions specifically concerned with the police authority’s role confer duties rather ™
      than powers, though in some cases there is clearly a discretion as to how the duty is to
18   be performed (as for example under s. 37). Other powers (including those contained in
      s. 111( 1)) are conferred on the police authority by the local government legislation, to
      the extent that measures there contained were applied to police authorities by
21   s.146A(1) of the Act of 1972. The powers so conferred are listed in a helpful note
      provided by Miss Baxendale. I do not propose to set them out. They include (apart
      from s. 111 ( 1)) such matters as the disposition and treatment of staff and the
24   acquisition and disposal of land.

                      The critical point which in my judgment emerges from a consideration
27   of the interlocking roles of Chief Constable, Secretary of State and police authority is
      that it cannot have been within the contemplation of Parliament in enacting the
      scheme, and in embracing within it s. 111( 1), that the police authority should only be
30   empowered to incur expenditure in support of those duties, and ancillary powers,
      which are specifically conferred upon it. The police authority holds the funds from
      which expenses for its local police force will be supplied: s. 14. It is inherent in the
33   system (as Mr Baker submitted in reply) that the Chief Constable will apply to the
      authority for authorisation to incur expenditure; it may be for the use of resources such
      as helicopters, or the installation of video surveillance systems in city streets, or a host
36   of other things. No doubt the Chief Constable presents a general budget. We were not
      referred to any provision in statute which shows or suggests that the police authority’s
      power to accede to such requests rests in anything other than the combination of s.6 (l)
39   and s. 111(1). Given this, it seems to me plain that, in the particular context before us
      in this case, the legitimate scope of the ancillary power provided by s. 111 ( 1) cannot be
      restricted so as to support only those powers and duties which are expressly conferred
42   on the police authority. Those powers and duties are themselves ancillary; though they
      are very important, they take second place to the Chief Constable’s tactical role, and
      second place also to the Secretary of State’s strategic role. S. 111(1) must in context
45   (whatever it does in other cases) allow the police authority to support what its express
      powers and duties also support; and this is no less than its general function conferred
                                                          -25-
      Draft 3 0 M arch 1 9 9 9 1 2:55
J   >   '    J

                 Judgment: Approved bv the Court for handing down                           Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield
                 (subject to editorial corrections)                           R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
                                                                                  Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



                 by s.6 (l). If that is right, the authority may in principle decide to fund officers’ legal
                 representation in proceedings no less than they may fund any other activity which the
             3   Chief Constable might propose as being conducive to “the maintenance of an
                 efficient and effective police force for its area” .

             6                   This result is supported, if only ex silentio, by the decision of this court
                  in R v Derbyshire Police Authority ex p. Wilson (8 August 1989, unreported save in
                  The Times). The court had to consider a decision of the police authority not to
             9   contribute to the legal expenses of two police officers in relation to an auditor’s
                  enquiry. The court assumed that s.4 of the Police Act 1964 (the predecessor of s.6 (l))
                  provided the power to grant financial assistance. However the point of principle was
            12   not argued. The applicants also point to other materials. In 1962 the report of the
                  Royal Commission on the Police was published. It indicated the then current practice
                  in relation to the provision of financial support to police officers in civil proceedings,
                  which included a requirement that “a constable must have acted in good faith in the
                  intended execution of his duty” (para 196(a)). Para 197 stated:

            18               “In England and Wales a distinction is made between a private prosecution,
                             in which the decision as to the support of the constable will be taken on the
                             same basis as in the case of a civil action, and a public prosecution brought
            21               by the police or the Director of Public Prosecutions.”

                 Home Office Circular 77/1987, published on 4 December 1987, stated:
            24
                             “... acting in pursuance of its general statutory duty to maintain an
                             adequate and efficient police force for its area, the police authority has
            27               discretion to meet expenditure incurred by officers in all kinds of legal
                             proceedings where the officers have acted in good faith in pursuance of
                             their duties, or the interests of the force as a whole are involved...
                             [Then under the heading “Private Prosecutions”]
                             A police officer should be able to carry out his duties in the confidence that,
                             if he acts in good faith and exercises his judgment reasonably, his police
            33               authority will support him. If, in a case where a member of the public
                             brings a prosecution against an officer, the authority is satisfied that the
                             officer has acted in this way, the authority should provide or fund legal
            36               advice and/or representation.”

                    On 17 February 1998 Home Office Circular 4/1998 was published. Unlike its
            39   predecessor it sits on the fence as regards the power of a police authority to fund
                  defences to private prosecutions. It has no persuasive effect one way or the other upon
                  the issues in these proceedings. The earlier Circular, though obviously not a source of
            42   law, may possibly possess some force as regards the purposes to be fulfilled by
                  s.6 (l) ’s predecessor in s.4(l) of the Police Act 1964: see per Scarman LJ as he then
                  was in Bristol DC v Clark [1975] 3 AER 976, referred to in Wilson. But there are
            45   great dangers in treating government pronouncements, however helpful, as an aid to
                  statutory construction. I would prefer to base my conclusion, that s. 111(1) in principle
                                                                    -   26-
                 Draft 3 0 M arch 1 9 9 9 12: 55
♦   :   ‘   j


                    Judgment: Approved bv the Court for handing down                             Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield
                                                                                   R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
                    (subject to editorial corrections)
                                                                                       Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



                    empowers the SYPA to support D and M’s defence (and their participation in the
                    judicial review against the DPP), upon those considerations touching the correct
            3       construction of the material statutory provisions which I have already set out.

                                    If my Lords agree with this conclusion, it is enough to dispose of the
                6   case in the applicants’ favour. However we heard much argument on the question
                    whether s.6 (l) conferred on the police authority any power, in any circumstances, to
                    take action not otherwise expressly authorised. This engages Miss Baxendale’s
                9   proposition (a) as I have described it, and her reliance on the expressio unius est
                     exclusio alterius doctrine. It only has relevance if I am wrong to hold, as I have done,
                     that s. 111(1) in principle enables the SYPA to fund D and M even if s.6 (l) does not
            12      itself empower the authority to do anything. In this context I will deal only (and that
                     shortly) with s.88(4) of the Act of 1996, which as I have said is the high water-mark of
                     this part of Miss Baxendale’s argument.
            15
                                   S .88 contains a comprehensive scheme as to liability on the part of the
                     police for torts. By ss.(l) the chief officer of police for a police area is liable in
            18       respect of torts committed by constables under his direction and control in the
                     performance or purported performance of their functions. Without this provision there
                     would be no such liability because police officers are not servants but office-holders.
            21       Ss.(2) provides in part:

                                 “There shall be paid out of the police fund -
            24
                                               (a) any damages or costs awarded against the chief officer of police
                                               in any proceedings brought against him by virtue of this section and
            27                                 any costs incurred by him in any such proceedings so far as not
                                               recovered by him in the proceedings...”

            30       Ss. (4) provides: -
                             “A police authority may, in such cases and to such extent as appear to it to
                             be appropriate, pay out of the police fund -
            33
                                               (a) any damages or costs awarded against a person to whom this
                                               subsection applies in proceedings for a tort committed by that
            36                                 person,

                                               (b) any costs incurred and not recovered by such a person in such
            39                                 proceedings, and

                                               (c) any sum required in connection with the settlement of a claim
            42                                 that has or might have given rise to such proceedings.”

                      In my judgment this provision offers no support for Miss Baxendale’s reliance on the
            45        exclusio alterius rule. S.88 is self-standing. It has no implications for the general reach
                      of the police authority’s functions. And once s.88(4) was to allow the police authority
                                                                         -27 -
                      Draft 3 0 Mar ch 1 9 9 9 1 2 :55
          h.Hnmpnt: Approved bv the Court for handing down                        Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield
         (subject to editorial florrections)                        R v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
                                                                        Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



         to cover damages awarded against an officer in a tort action, it is no surprise that it
         covers costs as well. If it did not, there might well be an argument - based on the
    3     exclusio alterius rule - that costs were deliberately excluded.


    6                   In all these circumstances I do not think it necessary to go into the
         legislative history of s.6 (l), or to canvass the arguments which were addressed to us as
         to the construction or effect of its predecessor, s.4(l) of the Police Act 1964. In the
    9    end there are two possibilities: s.6 (l) empowers the police authority to do things, or it
          does not. I have so far proceeded on the assumption asserted by Miss Baxendale that it
          does not; but given that assumption, nevertheless for reasons I have sought to explain
    12    the SYPA possesses in principle the legal power to fund D and M.

i                      In fact I think the better view is that s.6 (l) enables the police authority to
     5   do things which reasonably support the function which s.6 (l) confers. Such a power is
#         by no means open-ended. It would not allow the authority to invade the provinces of
          the Chief Constable or the Secretary of State; and this is an important and
    18    considerable constraint.

                          In the course of argument some time was spent, in fairness at the
    21   encouragement of the court, in seeing whether the specific provisions in the Act of
          1996 or the local government legislation, conferring specific powers on the police
          authority, left gaps which only s.6 (l) could fill. Points were made about lower ranks’
    24   rights of representation in legal proceedings, which are covered as appropriate by the
         Police Federation; and about the representation of higher ranks in various forms of
         legal proceedings. But the answer to the question we must decide, whether the power
    27   to fund D and M in principle lies in the hands of the SYPA, cannot in my judgment
         depend on a trawl through all the things a police authority is expressly empowered to
         do. The provisions which expressly confer and impose powers and duties on police
^S O     authorities do not constitute an independent code. The police authority’s functions are,
™        to use a questionable modernism, symbiotic with those of the Chief Constable and the
          Secretary of State. So judged, and for the reasons I have given, they allow the use of
    33   s. 111 ( 1) to fund officers in the defence of private prosecutions and in judicial review
         proceedings.

    36                  I would allow this application. It will be appropriate to hear counsel as
         to relief, and costs.

    39   MR JUSTICE CRESSWELL

         I agree.
    42
          MR JUSTICE LATHAM

    45   I also agree.

                                                             -28-
          Draft 3 0 March 1 9 9 9 12:55
