07/01 '00   -6:32 FAX 01904 5455W::^:; V ^ C P S   CASEWORK DIR    $ 002/040




                                   .   I




                      THE HILLSBOROPGH FOOTBALL STADIUM DISASTER




                                           JOINT OPINION




                                                      .■■v




                                Crown Prosecution Service
                                     Headquarters
                                4/12 Queen Annes Gate
                                 •     London
07/01   ’00 16:32 FAX 01904 545501              CFS CASEWORK DIR                          $003/040
                                     '.v* ;          :;\>l




             I                                JOINT OPINION
                                               *V,''  I.'


        Introduction
        1.       On 15th April 1989 the w o r s t disaster in British football

        history occurred inside the H i l l s b o r o u g h Stadium at Sheffield

        wheire Liverpool were playing Nottingham Forest in the FA Cup

        semi-final. 95 people .di&d and                      400 were injured as a

        result of gross overcrowding and crushing in the two pens

        immediately behind the goal at the western (Leppings Lane) end

        of the ground.

                  We are instructed to advise /whether there exists

        sufficient evidence to justify bringing criminal proceedings

        against any of the organisations or individuals concerned.



        2. ! We have been provided with the Interim Report of the

        Inquiry headed by Lord Justice Tsiylor published in August 1989

        ("the Taylor Report") and. the report to the Director of Public

        Prosecutions of th$ criminal investigation carried out by the

        West Midlands Police ("the West Midlands Report").
             I

        3-!       Our views were sought at an early stage on the scope of

        the investigation and the format of the report, and the

        material which has been placed before us is very extensive.                  In

        addition to the reports mentioned, we have been provided with

        the bulk of the documentation placed before Lord Justice

        Taylor's Inquiry, t h d .full transcript of the evidence given at

        the Inquiry,       and a large quantity of visual evidence in the

        form of photographs and video film.
07/01   '00 16:33 FAX 01904 545501            CPS CASEWORK DIR                      l^] 004/04 0




               we have also vi s i ted Hi11sbdrough stadium and have had

        the opportunity of seeing, for ourselves the physical

        characteristics of the ground which played such an important

        part in the disaster -                     '' ;•



        4.    Throughout o u r *o^s^fe^fatico^f this case we have kept

        constantly in mind "the appallin&:|scale of the tragedy for the

        bereaved and, those injured, some; o£ whom suffered devastating

         psychological injuries from which they are unlikely to

         recover. We have borne in mind, too, the strong feelings of

         anger and bitterness-which the disaster has provoked within

         the Liverpool community arid elsewhere, and the important role

         in the pursuit of justice which criminal proceedings are

         perceived to have by those aggrieved.



         5.   In the light of the prominent part played by the South

         Yorkshire Police in the disaster, we have reminded ourselves

         in particular that police officers are in no different

         category to     o t h e r s   in a criminal investigation, we should say

         that we are fully satisfied that that has-been the approach of

         the West Midlands Police, who have conducted a meticulous

         investigation in which no stone;has been left unturned.



         6.   Given the serious nature of the criminal liability under

         consideration, however, it is essential that the available

         material should be examined in an entirely dispassionate

         manner. This we have tried to do.
07- 01   '00 16:33 FAX 01904 545501   •   .CPS CASEWORK DIR                          \£\ 005/040




         The facts
         7.      A notable feature of the disaster is the absence of

         conflict of fact as to what happened at Hillsborough. This

         consistency of evidence was remarked on by the Taylor inquiry

         (see the Taylor Report'•para 113). Further, the criminal

         investigation,      for all' i-ts thoroughness, has not significantly

         added to or c o n t r a 4 i | ^ | | | t d Justice Taylor's findings.   In

         our judgment, therefore, the Taylor analysis of the facts is

         as firm a base as any from which!to approach the question of

         criminal liability and where necessary we shall make reference

         in this Opinion to the Report arik;.its Appendices.



         S n n rn ia T -y                        \

         8.       At 2.52 pm on 15th April 19819 one of the exit gates at the

         Leppings Lane end of the Hillsborough Stadium was opened on

         the instruction of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, the

         Commander responsible for policing the match. The purpose was

         to relieve unprecedented, overcr&yfding and crushing at the

         turnstiles caused by a build up of supporters arriving after

         2.30 pm for the semi-final due to kick off at 3 pm. in the

         ensuing 5 minutes, some 2,000 supporters passed through the

         gate and entered the tunnel under the West stand giving access

         to the central pens of the terrace. Those pens were already

         overfull because of the physical layout of the terrace and the

          uncontrolled way in which supporters were allowed to enter

          them. Gross overcrowding and crushing occurred. Moreover, the

          intense pressure exerted by the additional influx caused the

          collapse of a crush.barrier situated near the front of pen 3.


                                ■■ :n'
■01 '00 16:33 FAX 01904 54550.1' •   v   CPS CASEWORK DIR
 A



     Supporters were hurled dojim into ithe front: of the pen and

     crushed up against the. low wall arid the perimeter wire fence

     above it- Many died-:^|jOttt^:
                                  tlf;focat^bn and crushing injuries;

     some were trampled on. The crushing was not immediately

     recognised,    partly because those trampled upon were not

     visible behind the wall, partly because police operational

     orders prohibited officers.on the. perimeter track from opening

     the perimeter gates without permission from a senior officer,

     and partly because the crushing and distress was not expected -

     The response of the police was therefore slow. Even when the

     nature and extent of the emergency was             appreciated and the

     perimeter gates were opened,           the -small number of gates and the

     height of the fence itself made rescue and evacuation a

     hopelessly difficult .task.                ->

            The build up outside the ground which led to the opening

     of the exit gate was;,,due-,to the layout, numbers, designation

     and marking of                         entrances at the Leppings Lane

     end,   and to a loss of police         control of the crowd as

     supporters became desperate to get in before the kick-off.



     9.     It will be cleesr from the above summary that the disaster

     had three separate causative elements which need to be

     examined: the layout of the ground; the opening of the exit

     gate; and the build up outside the ground.
07/01   '00 16:34 FAX 01904 545501 7 V   CPS CASEWORK DIR




        The layout of the oroand

        10.   Sheffield Wednesday                      ("the Club") was formed

        in 1867 and moved to the ,;Hi,llsboiroiigh ground in 1899. In the

        90 years that elapsed before the disaster it was successfully

        used for numerous sportirigf events,, including FA Cup semi­

        finals,   international matches and 3 World Cup matches. Very

        large crowds were apQ^iutn^^ed,            record being over 72,000

        in 1934. Significant changes were made to the layout of the

        ground over the years and these need to be understood.



        11.   The present South stand was built in 1913, the Spion Kop

        (at the Eastern end) tyas added in 1914, and the West stand was

        built in 1965. Before then the Leppings Lane end was entirely

        terraced. Until fair ly recently, not only were there no

        perimeter fences between the terraces and the pitch, there

        were relatively few crush barriers on the terraces themselves.

        The plan at Appendix 4 to the Taylor Report shows the

        arrangement of the barriers at the? Leppings Lane end.



        12.   Before 1979 there were continuous barriers along the

        front, with two intermittent rows of barriers behind (coloured

        black on the plan).There. were no "radial" barriers,        that is

        fences running at right angles to the crush barriers from back

        to front of the terrace so as to form pens. The perimeter

        fences were installed in 1977 as a response to the hooliganism

        and pitch invasions of the 1970s.
°7/0l _ ’°° 10:34 FAX 01904 545501               ,    CPS CASEWORK DIR               '.(F;00H n in




        13.    in 1978 Dr Eastwood; a highly experienced civil and

        structural engineer and a principal of the firm of Eastwood

        and Partners who had been advising the Club on minor matters

        since the 1950s, was formally retained to act on the Club's

        behalf in its dealings with the locaL authority, then the

        South Yorkshire Cci^.i^^:x^^?cil^§%it which later became the

        Sheffield City CoiihG^t £*$he Copfijpil" ). The Safety of Sports

       Ground Act 1975 had recently been passed and it was necessary

        for the Club to take expert advice if it was to receive a

       Safety Certificate under.the Act from the Council. Dr Eastwood

       advised that further barriers should be installed in order to

       c o m p l y with the Home Office "Green Guide" then in force and

       the additional barriers shown and' marked blue on the plan at

       Appendix 4 were installed in 1979.



       14.    The Council set up an Officer Working Party consisting of

       representatives of the police, the fire services, and the

       Council's building;                             ' division and legal and

       administration department and, as a result of inspections and

       consultations with the Club and Dr Eastwood, a Safety

       Certificate was issued for the ground in 1979.



       15.    In 1981, on th e .occasion of,the semi-final between

       Tottenham Hotspur and Wolverhampton Wanderers,                    a serious

       crushing incident at the Leppings Lane end led to further

       changes to the layout of the terrace. Late arrivals who surged

       forward w h e n a goal was scored at the Kop end caused t h e

       crushing of several supporters at the front of- the terrace

                                     ■   -   ‘V - *         •               ‘
°7’"i'-N 00 16:34 FAX 01904 5 •IS5o.l   .   CPS CASEWORK DIR               [^1009 ■'04f)




       There were injuries but no death^* This incident, the further

       significance of which will be returned to, prompted the police

       to suggest that it had been caused by the sideways movement,

       of supporters to positions behind the goal, and that the

       installation of radial fences would prevent such movement as

       well as providing segregation of.Supporters of opposing teams

       who could thus be accommodated on the same terrace.

                                                   !
       16*    The police view was accepted by the Club and the Officer

       Working Party, and the two radial:fences shown pale green in

       Appendix 4 were installed in 1981; The terrace was thereby

       divided into three p e n s , W i t h neither forward nor sideways

       movement by supporters being possible once a pen became full.

       The fences had gates at the top end to be locked once the pens

       had filled up.



       17.    Further changes to the 1ayout in 1985 and 1986 resulted

       in the addition of two more radial fences, the consequential

       removal of some posts and rails, and the removal of a barrier

       at the top of the terrace near the entrance tunnel. Barrier

       144. The result of the addition of the central radial fence

      was to divide the pen immediately behind the goal into the two

      pens 3 and 4. These were to be the scene of the disaster in
      April 1989.



      18.     All these changes were discussed between the police, the

      Club and Dr Eastwood, and the Officer Working Party approved

      the removal of Barrier 144 in August 1986, by which time Mr


                                               7
07/0!   '00 16:35 FAX 01904 5455#lV^.   .   ""CPS CASEWORK DIR
                                                                                     ©010/040




         Bownes had become the Li-cfensing Officer responsible for the

         Safety Certificate on behalf of Ithe Council.



         19.   Alterations                              and concourse of the

         Leppings Lane e n t r a n t WSMfe also made at this time in the

         interests of segregation';. To t^&|- end Dr Eastwood had

         suggested a plan for separate access to the North stand, to

         each end of the West stand, and to each of the three central

         pens by means of separate b a n k s o f turnstiles. This plan was

         not adopted for financial reasons, but it seems that separate

         entrances would have enabled the numbers of supporters

         entering each of the peins. to be monitored by mechanical or

         computerised counting at the turnstiles. As it was, there was

         no numerical monitoring or other means of limiting the numbers

         of supporters entering, the penned areas, including the popular

         pens 3 and 4 immediately, behind! the goal.



         20.    The effect was. that these areas were likely to attract

         more than their proper share of the 10,100 supporters allowed

         into the Leppings Lane end unde* the Safety Certificate and

         there was no physical way of preventing this. All had to be

         left to visual monitoring by the police and the Club stewards

         as the supporters took their places inside the ground.



         21.   The police had requested the removal of Barrier 144 in

         pen 3 for two reasons: ..first, to assist the flow of supporters

         into the pens and; secondly, to assist eivacuation through the

         tunnel in an emergency. Unhappily, as later events showed,            the


                                                   8
07/01   '00 16:35 FAX 01904 545501         CASEWORK DIR
                                                                             0011/040




        first purpose was all too: successfully achieved. A further

        consequence, howey©35^::;^i^^reci'ai;©4 at the time, was to

        increase the capacity.of.,:gen 3.

                                     '/v

        22.    The Safety Certificate should have been amended to take

         account of these changes> which the Club notified to the

        Council in accordance with its statutory obligations. Equally

         importantly,     it should have contained maximum figures for

         individual pens.



         23.   The Certificate was not amended and maximum figures were

         not inserted partly because Mr Bownes, as Chief Licensing

         Officer responsible for 32 other licensing systems, was

         overworked,    and partly because Dr Eastwood thought that the

        maximum stated capacity for th e .Leppings Lane end need not be

         altered providing -the police cotlild ensure even distribution of

         the supporters throughout the terrace by leaving the radial

         gates open. The Taylor Report found that the insertion of

         proper maximum figures into the Safety Certificate might have

         prompted the Club and the police to find some way of limiting

         the numbers entering pens 3 and 4. One way would have been the

         adoption of Dr Eastwood’s plan Sfor separate turnstile

         entrances mentioned above.



         24.   The Taylor Report conclude^ that the fact that the Safety

         Certificate was not amended and-individual pen capacities not

         reviewed could not be laid solely at Dr Eastwood's door. The

         Council was ultimately responsible for the Certificate.
07/01   '00 16:36 FAX 01904 545501     CPS CASEWORK DIR                      '4:01 2 (140
                                             I




        25.     Entry to pens         4 was .yia the tunnel running from

        the concourse area btehih$^turnstiles A-G, underneath the West

        stand and out into the terrace (see Appendices 1 and 3 to the

        Taylor Report). The effect of the changes to the layout of the

         Leppings Lane terrace, all- of which were purportedly licensed

        under the Safety Certificate, was that the only means of

        controlling the numbiers entering those pens was by cordoning

        off the tunnel access.



         26-   Moreover,    it was the policy of the police at semi-finals

         (but not at League matches) to allow free movement of

        supporters between pens prior to the kick off, when the radial

        gates would be closed arid locked. Unless steps were taken to

        control the number's entering the tunnel access, therefore,

        pens 3 and 4 were liable"to become grossly overcrowded at all

        times. The police-.had accepted de facto responsibility for

        monitoring the pens .and "their policy of "letting the fans find

        their own level", was severely criticised in the Taylor Report

         (see paras 172 to 183).



        The opening of the exit gate

        27.     As already stated, the exit gate (Gate C) was opened at

        2.52 pm on the day of the disaster following an instruction

        from Mr Duckenfield.. Gate C is situated almost immediately

        opposite the tunnel (see! Appendkx 1 to the Taylor Report) and

        no steps had been taken to cordbn off the tunnel or to divert

        the influx away to the sides of- the West stand. The result was
'00 16:36 FAX 01904 545501                    CPS CASEWORK DIR
                             ■ '• ...' ■■■:-•'■
                                              '       ■




that the supporters effectively had nowhere to go but the

already overcrowded pens 3 and 4.



28.    As the supporters entered the tunnel some were swept off

their feet, accelerated by a 1 i n :6 downward gradient in the

tunnel itself. A h^^ttl^^'^builplup in pens 3 and 4 and some

supporters tried t ^ t ^ ' j l h e pitch. Others climbed
                                i
over the radial fences to the side pens where, ironically,

there was still plenty of room. Later some began to be hauled

up out of the pens to safety in the west stand.



29.     The match kicked off just before 3 pm. The evidence

before the Taylor inquiry satisfied that tribunal that it was

the near goal for Liverpool at 3.04 pm that caused a powerful

surge forward in pen 3, the force of which caused a crush

barrier at the front of the pen,, barrier 124A, to collapse.

This in turn hurled supporters down against the wall and to

their deaths,     putting yet more pressure on those already

suffocating at the perimeter wire at the front. The collapse

of this barrier appears to have been a major factor in the

deaths,    since there were far fewer deaths in pen 4 where no

barrier collapsed.



30.    The Taylor Report found that a further contributory cause

of the collapse of barrier 124A was the removal of barrier 144

in 1986 already referred to. The absence of the latter

barrier,    in the exceptional conditions prevailing, meant that

the supporters met no. retarding, structure as they emerged from
07^   '00 16:36 FAX 01904 545501 . \       CPS CASEWORK DIR
                                                                                 ® 014/040




        the tunnel into pen 3, and that'there was unbroken diagonal

        pressure from the mouth Of the tunnel down to barrier 124A.

       Further,     as the plan.at Appendix.4 to the Taylor Report shows,

       barrier 124A was vulnerable to downward pressure as a result

       of the removal of               hairier %«|ijediately above it - one of

       the alterations                         to' the installation of the two

       additional radial fence^' The Taylor Report's conclusions are

       supported on this point by the evidence of Inspector Bullas
                                      I
       (see para 234) and by a concession made by Dr Eastwood,



       31.    The Taylor Report»s r - . findings on the timing of the

       collapse of barrier 124A; and its probable cause and effects

       are supported by the BBC, video tape and the evidence of the

       supporters near to the barrier itself. They are reinforced by

       the probability that, had the barrier collapsed earlier, the
                         ■V' '■        ■‘V;
       police on the track .would have appreciated that this

       catastrophe had occurred and woyld have taken rescue action
       much earlier.



       32.   we have viewed, the evidence and we are impressed by it.

      With respect, we shate the opinion of the Taylor Report that

      this is what occurred. The collapse of barrier 124A was, of

      course,    a major factor in the causation of the deaths.



      33.    The Taylor Report also found, on the basis of expert

      evidence which is before us, that barrier 124A, although

      corroded, had been tested by Dr Eastwood in July 1988 and had

      passed the loading t^st$ speci£*£d in the Green Guide.
00 16:36 FAX 01904 545501       "      CPS CASEWORK DIR




 Although the corrosion played a part in the c o l l a p s e ,         the

 effective cause, the Report found, w a s the excessive a n d

 unanticipated pressure td- which it was exposed at the time of

 the forward surge; mentxonfed above. The Green Guide made no

 specific reference -to testing for corrosion as a cause of

 deterioration.             '       Vy '•



 34.   The crushing in pens 3 ancj 4 was not recognised either b y
                                             .1
 the police o f f i c e ^ ^ £ . ^ $ ^ ' c o ^ ^ o l box in the South West

 corner of the ground-(see Apperxd’
                                  ix 1), or by the officers

 detailed to the perimeter track, for several minutes after the

 first signs of distress appeared, resulting in time being lost

 before rescue efforts began. It; is plain also,             from our

 reading of the statements', that the crushing and distress was

 not recognised by nearby civilians, by many (but not all) of

 the broadcasters and press, noij by stewards of the Club.

Having seen the video evidence, we can readily understand how

this situation arose. The truth is that no-one was expecting

to happen what in fact happened.



35.     There was no, effective leadership until the arrival of

Chief Superintendent Nesbit just after 3pm and it was not

until 3.06pm that Mr Duckenfield appreciated that there had

been a major disaster rather than the pitch invasion that he

had assumed. The amijulance service was called at 3.06pm but no

request for cutting -gear or the fire brigade was made until

3.13pm. The Taylor Report concluded, however, that it is
'00 16:37 FAX 01904 54 5501      • CPS CASEWORK DIR
                                         ' ■I   ■   .



                                         .   p.
                              r''..-          -i.
                                                ■

 unlikely (although possible) that these services could have

 saved lives had they.,.been called .promptly. We agree.

                         •  v;:
                     c'^v-■        ;
 36.   The evacuation of the supporters and those injured was

 achieved mainly through the perimeter gates. These were not

 designed as exits and those to peris 3 and 4 were narrower than

 provided by the Grfeen guide. The Taylor report concluded,

 however, that even if their width had complied with the Green

 Guide, the gates would have been wholly inadequate to relieve

 the pressure and release-spectators swiftly. The Guide was

 silent as to any recommended number of such gates and it is

 clear that their use for large scale evacuation w a s not

 intended or anticipated-



 37.   The opening of gate C, which precipitated the disaster,

 was made necessary by the massive build up of supporters at

 the Leppings Lane turnstiles between 2.30 and 2.50 pm. The

 perimeter gates to t?ie ground (See Appendix 1) were open from

 the outset, and severe congestion and crushing developed at

 the turnstiles, the number and capacity of which were

 inadequate to cope in time with the large numbers. The

crushing worsened as kick-off time approached and supporters

 realised they would be late into, the ground. The police lost

control of the crowd and the crush became unmanageable and

dangerous, with many fearing fo r .their lives. The kick-off was

not postponed because it had been agreed with the Club that

this course would only be taken if there was a major cause of

delay such as an accident on the motorway or fog. Mr
 •
07/01 '00 16:37 FAX 01904 545501    CPS CASEWORK DIR                       ® 017/040

                                           ■




       Duckenfield gave ipc'0nsistent evidence to the Inquiry about

       his decision on this jpoifltt and       Report concluded that the

       kick-off could and should have been postponed.



       38.   The request to open gate C was made by Superintendent

       Marshall, the Commander .‘
                                in' Leppings Lane, who told Mr

       Duckenfield by radij.O^that- someofr^would be killed if the gate

       was not opened. There is a very considerable body of evidence

       to show that Mr Marshall’s view was correct and that M r

      Duckenfield had no alternative but to agree to the opening of

       the gate.



      39.    However, neither Mr Duckenfield nor any other police

      officer took any steps to deal with the consequences of the

      opening of the gate. In particular, the tunxiel was not closed

      off. This action, wftich had been taken in 1988 by serial

      police officers apparent 1# on their own initiative, could and

      should have been carried out by a; small number of police

      forming a cordon and directing supporters to the unfilled wing

      pens. Mr Duckenfield did order fiolice serials to go to the

      concourse to monitor an influx when another gate, gate A, was

      opened a little earlier, because he feared a pitch Invasion

      from the North stand.whets, there was no perimeter fence.



      40.    The Taylor Report concluded; that Mr Duckenfield's failure

      to give a similar order on the opening of gate C was "a

      blunder of the first magnitude". Plainly, this error was the

      immediate, or proximate,,;cause of the crushing in pens 3 and 4
07/01   '00 16:38 FAX 01904 545501                                   CPS CASEWORK DIR
                                                                                                           © 018 0 4 0




           and the pressure which led to the collapse of the barrier in
           pen 3-



          41.    But it was not Of course the sole cause, in addition to

          the layout                                                   of the terrace described earlier,

          the other main cause M$fc"\the bg|ld up outside the ground which

          led to the need to opart;-the gate. This itself was due to a

          combination of factors to which reference must now be made.



          The build up outside the ground

          42.    The first factor contributing to the build up outside the

          ground was the layout Of the Leppings Lane turnstiles and the

          narrowness of the neck or forecourt at the bend in the Lane

          itself where, coming from the North, it turns to the South-

          West and crosses the river (se^ Appendix 1). Not only were the

          turnstiles not                                                 line, affording adequate space

          for the formation of orderly queues, therefore, but the

          waiting area itself was extremely confined. Next, there was

          the designation and marking of the turnstiles, with the 10,100

          ticket-holders for the west terrace all being required to

          enter through turnstile^ A-G at-entrance ”B", although the

          three blocks of |utfts£|ileB serving the Leppings Lane entrance

         were confusingly lettered "A,C,BM. in addition, the colour

         coding on the turnstile: walls was too low to be seen through a

         crowd. The Taylor Report found these to be factors

         contributing to the delay in the turnstile operation.

                              ;‘V- ■ .iS'V.A* -■   '\;A   V AV : ,


                              : -

                                       . v ■.      >'•




                                                                          ie
U//U1   uu I d :o a FAX 01904 545501 V;   CPS CASEWORK DIR                  0 019/040




         43.     However, the turnstile operation itself was slow because

         there were only seven turnstiles to admit the 10,100 ticket -

         holders, an average of 1450 through each. This is to be

         compared with the 60-turnstiles at the Fenistone Road end

         which served 29,800; a little under 500 per stile. The Green

         Guide provided that in general no more than 750 could be

         admitted in one hour. The Club, taking into account that it

         was an all-ticket match with no cash passing, reckoned this

         could be increased to .1,0.00 per hqur. However, as Lord Justice

         Taylor observed, even at this higher rate it would have taken

         almost 1% hours to admit all those with terrace tickets; at

        750 per hour it wouid h^ye taken 2 hours- The Taylor Report

        concluded that the police and the Club should have foreseen

        that the turnstiles and t:he waiting area would be under strain

        to admit all the Liverpool supporters in time.



        44.    Many supporters arrived after 2.30 pm, the request on the

        ticket being simply "to take up position 15 minutes before

        kick off". Some arrived without tickets and tried to get in by

        paying cash, others by trying to go over or under the paddle

        of the turnstile or by sliding through with a ticket-holder.

        All these activities slowed the admission rate and contributed

        to the frustration of the crowd as kick-off approached.



        45.     There is no question on the evidence that many of the

        supporters had been :<}rinking and some were abusive as a

        result. Probably few offered violence and the Taylor Report

        acquitted the majority of being 1affected by drink,   finding


                                             17
07/01   '00 16:38 FAX 01904 545501 -    CPS CASEWORK DIR
                                                                                  ©020/040




           that some police hail overestimated this factor in their

           evidence. Having read »the r e l s j ^ t statements. it seems to us

           that drink and                of ttje: supporters certainly

          contributed to the .pushing fronjithe back and            a factor in

          making supporter* S i s ^ n a b a g t o police requests to move

          back. In some c a s ® 0 d r u n k ^ u p p o r t e r s tried to force
          themselves in at ^ . t l ^ t i l ^ caug .„g f,g w ...g ^         ^

          supporters and scuffles with tlje, police trying to prevent

          their entry. T h i s - m ^ t t y contributed to the loss of control
          Of   the crowd by police in our view.



         46.    Nevertheless, ; * h e ^ n factor in this loss of control was
         a failure of police, strategy i ^ o t planning properly for the

         crush likely to be # U ?*a, by a -large concentration of arrivals
         from 2.30 pm onwards. arid in failing to stem the flow of

         supporters or f llte^th**- towarks the turnstiles from some

         position outside the perimeteriftaites. Such action had been

         successfully carried.out m       igflfe as numerous witnesses have

         confirmed. The Taylor Report colluded that a combination of

        controlled filtering and.a postponed kick-off would probably
        haver obviated the n«ed to open -the gate.



        ApBgrtignment Qf responsibility

        47.    The layout of the ground 3| it stood on the day of the

        disaster was the responsibility of four organisations, and

        some Of the individuals:feting.tin their behalf, namely the

        Club, Eastwood and Partners, th6»;Council and the police.

        However, none of thorn foresnw tait the progressive alterations
07/01   '00 16:39 FAX 01904 545501 ..V.   J; CPS CASEWORK DIR                      \j




          made to the ground *rom>,about 4 7 7 onward, in the interests of

          safety and good otaefe >®t&a ,:0me to constitute, in effect, a

          death trap for supporter* entering pens 3 and 4. This „as

          principally because no-one foresaw that up to 2000 supporters

          would be allowed to ,ente*;thesaf ens at a time when they were

          already overcrowded, and when spreading out to the side to

          absorb the extra *umBei« .would;# impossible. P l a i n l y ,   no-one

          foresaw any circumstances akin Ito the opening of gate c, nor

         the unprecedentedSCTBsttiBB o u t s M e the ground which made that
         action necessary on the day of the disaster. That said, all

         four organisations share some responsibility for the lack of

         safe maximum capacities, the lack of controlled entry to the

         pens and the absence of any proper system of monitoring, as

         they must for the departures from the Green Guide and the

         inadequacy of the Safety; Certificate. The police must take the
         main r e s p o n s i b l y for. the policy of letting the fans find

         their own level althouSh, as the .lengthy exploration of the

         borders of their duties at the inquiry demonstrates, the Club

        must share some responsibility for the way in which supporters

        were allowed to fill .the, .pens at semi-final matches.



        48.    it may be argued that the 4 ^ 1 crushing incident already

        mentioned ought to h,ve alerted the police and the Club to the

        dangers of adrn tting large numbers of supporters via the

        tunnel access to t h r e a t terracie, where they were capable of

        being crushed against the perimeter fence, and that knowledge

        Of this incident incjjeasssd, the responsibility on the police

        and the Club for affording safe Recess to the West terrace. We
07/01   '00 16:39 FAX 01904 545501 v . .   -CPS CASEWORK DIR
                                                                           1^1 0 2 2 / 0 4 0




          consider that this is not so, because the response of the

          police in 1981, accepted by the'other parties involved, was to

          instal the radial fences with the aim of preventing the

          inwards movement of supporters to the area behind the goal,

         and until the disaster it was assumed that this was a correct

         response. Whether i t ,was. correct or not, the incident in our

         V i e w has no direct bearing on the disaster eight years later

         and does not add to the potential criminal responsibility of
         the police and the Club.



         49.   The opening of gate C was the responsibility of Mr

         Duckenfield and, as already noted, his decision was correct in

         the circumstances.. However, the failure to give a n y order to

         accommodate the influx was a serious error which must in our

         view be Mr Duckenfield’s responsibility and his alone. Mr

         Duckenfield had been ;promoted to Chief Superintendent of f

         Division only three.weeks before the match, and it is

        reasonable to ask whether he was competent to take charge of a

        match of this importance. Howeve'r, there is no evidence to

        suggest that those responsible for his promotion so erred in

        appointing him as to share responsibility f o r errors made by
        him on the day.



        50'        fact that the tunnel was cordoned off in 1988 by a

        handful of junior police officerp apparently on their own

        initiative - an aotion that almost certainly would have

        averted the disaster a year later - is one of the most

        unfortunate aspects of the caseJ and at first sight the


                                              2-Oj
°7/5i    00 16:39 FAX 01904 545501 '         CPS CASJB^ORK DIR                  121023/040
  (m3



          operational organisation:of the ipolice might seem responsible

          for failing to incorporate this tactic in i ts match planning.

          However, M r Duckenfifld^. dispatch of a serial to deal with

          the opening of gate A demonstrates to our mind that it was

         within his power to .;a:cGo#iodate rthe opening of gate C, and t h e

         blame for his not doing* ao canndt in our view be laid
         elsewhere.               .■
                                   ’ :;V •



         51. The build up outside the ground was again the

         responsibility of the four organisations identified a b o v e .

         Given the restrictions of space attendant on the geography of

         Leppings Lane itself, the layout of the turnstiles and their

         numbers, designation and marking was primarily a matter for

         the police and t h ^ c ^ ^ g p ^ . the Council was also partly

         responsible for ensuring ,that there was safe ingress to the
        ground (see Chapter 5 of the Green Guide).



        52.   Allowing for the policing difficulties to which the

        layout and slow admission rate of the turnstiles gave rise,

        the loss of police control, and ii^ particular the failure to

        follow the filtering tactics employed in 1988, was solely a

        police responsibility. The responsibility was, however,       a

        collective one and cannot be attributed to a n y individual
        officer.                                     i
                                                 •   j




        Criminal OffenrA.c    .




                                               21!       .
07/0 ^ 00 16:40 FAX 01904 545501 ' '   CPS CASEWORK DIR                   1^1024/040




       53.    We turn to consider whether any criminal offence is

      disclosed against any'of .the organisations or individuals

      identified or referred to.above.



       (1)   Manslaughter

      54. The police authority;-'.the Club and the Council are in law

      all corporations of oWe kind or.;^|other (see Halsbury•s Laws

      of England,     4th ed, Vol 9 at paras 1201-3) so an important

      first question is whether, a corporation can be indicted for

      manslaughter.



      55.    This question was considered at length by Professor J.C.

      Smith in relation to the shipping company’s liability for the

      sinking of the Herald of Free Enterprise in an Opinion dated

      25th November 1987. We have had -the advantage of seeing that

      Opinion, which concluded that the company in that case could

      be properly indicted for manslaughter by gross negligence or

      recklessness r assuming it could be proved that one or more of

      the directing minds Of the company caused the deaths, and did

      so with the fault required by the definition of manslaughter.

      In due course proceedings were begun against the company and

      others and on 5th June 1990 Turner J, sitting at the Central

      Criminal Court, dismissed a motion to quash the indictment

      against the company, holding that both on the authorities and

      on principle a corporation is capable of committing

      manslaughter. We have seen a note of the Reserved Judgment,

      which includes a full consideration of the authorities,    and in

      our respectful view it represents a correct view of the law.


                                          22
 00 16:40 FAX 01904 545501          CPS CASEWORK DIR                       ^




                             '\v,




  56.    we accordingly: -adv4.se that each of the corporations

  mentioned above c ^ t i ^ e r l y : ; l g indicted for manslaughter if

  it could be p r o v e d ^ ^ e       or .more of the directing minds of

  the corporation concerned.committed manslaughter as that
  offence is currently; defined.          :'T



 (2) Definition of manslaughter !"■
                                 I
 57.  involuntary manslaughter is. committed when a person

 causes the death of another either (1) intending to do an act

 which, whether he knows it or not, is unlawful and dangerous

 m    that it is likely to.cause direct personal injury ("an

 unlawful and dangerous act"), or (2) intending to do an act

 which creates an obvious and serious risk of causing personal

 injury (a) not giving thought to the possibility of SUch risk,

 or (b) having recognised.that there was some risk involved,

nonetheless going :0^ tq jt4ke i t ,("recklessness” as defined by
Lord Diplock In R v law^enc^                    AC 510).



58.     To amount to manslaughter a person's conduct need not be

the only cause of the death, but it must be a substantial

cause in that it contributed significantly to the result.

Whether it did so                     is .generally a question of fact
for the jury: Pagett (1983) 76 Cr App Rep 279, 287-91.



59-     It may also be that manslaughter is committed if the

person causing Che death intends to do an act, or omits to do

an act where there is a duty to jdo so, being grossly negligent
07/01   00 16:40 FAX 01904 545501   . CPS CASEWORK DIR                      f,




         whether death or serious personal injury results ("gross

         negligence"): soft eg Smith and Hogan, Criminal Law, 6th ed

         (1988) at p 345. The law is at present uncertain whether gross

         negligence still exists as a separate head of liability, two

         recent authorities having: held that the earlier cases where

         manslaughter is defined in terms of negligence should not be

         followed and that Lord Diplock's teat should be applied
         universally.                       |



         60.   in Seymour. (1993) 7.6 Cr App Rep 211 r Watkins LJ, giving

        the judgment of the Court of Appeal in a reckless driving
        c a s e , said:

                * ■ * are of the view that it is no longer necessary or

               helpful to make reference to compensation and negligence.

               The Lawrence direction on recklessness is comprehensive

               and of general.application to all offences, including

               manslaughter involving the driving of motor vehicles

               recklessly and should be given to juries without in any­

               way being diluted. Whether a driver at the material time

               was conscious of the risk he was running or gave no

               thought to its existence, is a matter which affects,

               punishment for w;hich purposes the judge will have to

               decide, if he can, giving the benefit of doubt to the
                              '. '       i
               convicted person, in which state of mind that person had

               driven at the material time.”




                                          2'4
_    07/01« * 00 16:41 FAX 01904 545501      ,    CPS CASEW.ORK DIR                        0   027/040




.1


J            61■     In Kong C h e u k .Kyan V R (19850 82 Cr App RGp 18 Lord

             Roskill, giving t.he opinion of the Privy council,            said at p


]            25:

                     Their Lordships are of the view that the present state

J                   of the r ele varvtr •1       >in England and Wales... is clear   The

                    model direction'suggested in Lawrence and held m            Seymour
]                   equally applicable. ,to cases of motor manslaughter

j                  requires,    first, that the vehicle was in fact being

                    driven in such a: mailer as to create an obvious and

j                   serious risk of causing physical injury to another and

                    secondly that the defendant so drove either without

]                  having given any. thought to. the possibility of there


]                   being such a risk or- having recognised that there was

                    such a risk nevertheless took it.

J                         In principle their Lor'dships see no reason why a

                   comparable direction should not have been given in the

                   present case as regards thap part of the case which

                   concerned the alleged navigation of the Flvinrr r^idfinch

                   by Kong and indeed as regards the alleged navigation of

                   the £lyinq                      the other two defendants. Did

                   their respective acts of navigation create an obvious and

                   serious risk of causing physical damage to some other

                   ship and thus to other persons who might have been

                   travelling in the area of the collision at the material

                   time? if so did any of the defendants... so navigate

                   either without haying given any thought to the

                   possibility of that risk or, while recognising that the
                   risk existed, take that risk?"


                                                     25
074 M   '00 16:41 FAX 01904 5455(il             CASEWORK DIR
                                                                                             0 028/0 40




          At p 26, Lord Roski.i-I said:           (if
                 "Their L o r d s h i p ® . r e s p e c t i v e l y agree with the comment
                 made by Watkins LJ... in Sevmonr."



          62.    However,                       b^Smith ana Hogan (6th ed (1988)
          at p 353), while the niaar implication from Kong chm.i,                        ls

          that there is no i 0 g e ,§jfey separate test of gross negligence

          in manslaughter, it may b9 that the courts would not be

          prepared to exclude;it ^ t o g e t h e r In an appropriate case. Some
         support for this view is found in Goodfellow (1986) 83 Cr App

         Rep 23, where Lord iane^IXJ said that the question in Kong

         — euk Kgaa was                      defenflant was "guilty of
         recklessness (or gross negligence)".



         63.    We consider it right in the circumstances of Hillsborough

         to approach the evidence, on the-basis that the gross

         negligence test is sufficient; to establish the offence of

         manslaughter and                    to advise accordingly.



         (3 ) Neglect bv nol frua

        64.     When gross neglige^e or manslaughter by neglect is

        alleged against the police, however, authority indicates a

        more detailed tes^            il^Uity.:::in R ^ W ^ s t _ L o n d ^ ^

                               f1988] QB 467/Ullegations were made against
        Police following the death of a .man while in police custody

        concerning the use Of f ^ c e against him and failure to summon

        an ambulance promptly when he became unconscious. The

        coroner s directions to the jury .as to unlawful killing were
^ 4 07/% , 00 16:41 FAX 01904 545501 :    CPS CASEWORK DIR                             ® 029/040




            quashed by the Divisional Court, which held that a coroner
-3          directing a jury on manslaughter comprising unlawful killing

j           alleged to have occurred because of neglect by police was

            required to direct them, as follows:

                   (1) that they had      be satisfied of four ingredients,

                  namely (a) that the police!,were under a duty to have

                  regard to the health and welfare of the deceased,         (b)

                  that in the circumstances there was a failure to do what
                  should have been done for the health and welfare of the

                  deceased,    (c) that/..the failure amounted to a substantial

                  cause of death,, and (d) ti**| the failure amounted to
                  recklessness?

                  (2) that the test of "recklessness" was whether a police

                 officer, having regard to his duty, was indifferent to           an

                 obvious and serious risk to the health and welfare of the

                 deceased or, recognising that risk to be present,

                 deliberately,chofee;.;to run At by doing nothing about it;

J                (3) that a failure to appreciate that there was such a
                 risk was not by itself sufficient to amount to
|               recklessness; and

                 (4) that the jury could only return a verdict of unlawful

]               killing if they could attribute the          unlawful conduct to a
■               single police officer.



          65.    Plainly those directions are those to be given in any

          criminal prosecution of a police officer where omission to act
          is alleged to hav^.;^ s ^ j p eat:^ g ^ n our view they havfi a




                                             27
        .,07/01   '00 16:42 FAX 01904 545501 ■.   CPS CASEWORK DIR
V                                                                                    :#?]030/0 41)
             w                                         ;

    j

                     direct bearing on o.ir consldaratLnr of the evidence in this
    3               case.


j                   (4 ) Culpable misfeasance

    |               66.     We turn w t    to considm the common law offence of

                    culpable misfeasance or misconduct in public office. We are

    ]               satisfied that this offence exists, and that it is committed

    .              where a public officer, such as a police officer, wilfully

                    neglects to perform a duty which he is bound to perform by

j                  common law or statut* .,But theS&glect has to be wilful, not
                   merely tnadvm tent, and mu3r aa culpable in the sense that it
j                  is without reasonable excuse or Justification. The element of
j                  culpability is not restricted to corruption or dishonesty,
                   however, but must be of "such a degree that the misconduct is
j                 calculated to irjure the public intntM.it: R v n ^ h a. [lg79] 2
                   QB 722.

3

1I
                  -
                  67 ■
                                          lilf t
                          Even if tha wor<Js "ilko-y t o ' are substituted for

                   "calculated" in this definition, as we think they might be, it

J                 is clear that this little, known:offence is a difficult one to
                  prove to the satisfaction of a jury.

1                                       i; : : V 1
                  Evidence to support: manslauahtAr-

                  68.     We consider in turn:the possible liability of (i) the

                  club,    (ii) K-stwood and Partners, ;ii-, the Council and (iv)

                  the police, it will be convenient to consider the aviaence

                  first against the iour organisations, an<J secondly in relation
07/01   00 10:42 FAX 01904 545501   .                    CPS CASEWORK DIR
   0




         to the individuals who acted ori behalf of the organisations
         concerned.                       -



          (i)   The Club

         69.     The C l u b ’s rtes^ortsitoility•:for the crushing and deaths

         lies in its responsibility for (1) the layout of the inside of

         the ground as a result of the alterations to the West terrace

         and (2) the layout, number, designation and marking of the

         turnstiles in Leppings Lane. Whilst, on our factual analysis

         of the disaster, thfese two factors might be regarded as

         substantial causes of the deaths- in that they contributed

         significantly to the result, it is clear not only that they

         were not the sole causes, or even the major causes, but that

         the Club's actions and omissions only partly contributed to

         them. As already observed (see .para 47 above), the layout of

        the ground was t h f | ^ S g | ^ x b i ^ | ^ of the four organisations

        and in varying degrees. The Clufc.not only relied on its own

        consultant engineer Dr Eastwood, but it responded to the

        suggestions and advice of the police in important respects.
        The Council played its part.



        70.     For the purposes qf the crk.mi.nal law, where it is

        axiomatic that a case against each defendant must be given

        totally separate consideration, we consider that there is no

        sufficient evidence to support a prima facie case that the
        Club caused the deaths.

                                        .•v , - - vc.   \'




                                                             29
0 7 0 0     16:42 PAX 01904 545501 .; . ^ ' S C P S CASEWORK DIR                      1^1032/040




          71.   in case we are wrong in that conclusion, we have

          considered whether the requisite intention for manslaughter

          could be proved against the Club, It seems to us, however,

          that the evidence does           not begin to show either recklessness

          or gross negligence•on           its part*



          72*   It follows that there is in our view no sufficient

      evidence to support a charge of manslaughter against either

      the Club or any o£ it's Officials;



          (ii) Eastwood and Partners

      73.       Since Dr Eastwood          was the principal       ofthe firm,it is

      his actions and oinissioris rnlon£^ theft fall to be considered- As

      consultant to the Club he. too was responsible for the layout

      of the inside of the ground and the layout and operation of

      the turnstiles* H<|w^er|^his advice formed part only of the

      sequence of events that led to the structural condition of the

      ground as it was immediately before the disaster and by no

      rational yardstick could his advice be said to have caused the

      deaths- There are;two. farther factors in his case, moreover.

      First, his advice in relation to the forming of separate

      turnstile entrances to the North stand, each end of the West

      stand and each of the cefttral plans, not acted on for

      financial reasons, would if adopted have led to numerical

      monitoring of the central pens, and might well have led to the

      insertion of maximum figures foi? those pens in compliance with

      the Safety certificate. Second, so far as the Safety



                                                   I'
                                                  3ta
07/01    00 16:43 FAX 01904 545501•          CPS CASEWORK DIR
                                                                                         1^] 033/040




          certificate is oonoemea, this „as the ultimate responsibility
          of the Council.               *.
                                                         .C:'"


          74.    There is no e v i d e n ^ / t h a t U r Eastwood caused the deaths.

          Nor is there any                   that :he was either reckless or

          grossly negligent* ^                no C i t a t i o n ,   therefore, in
          concluding that the*e •**. no e v i n c e to support a charge of

         manslaughter against Dr Eastwood or indeed against Eastwood
         and Partners.



         (iii) The Council

         75.      The Council bears responsibility for the Safety

         Certificate, which should,have been amended to provide for the
         alterations and lor ;h® insertion of maximum figures for the

         pens. The council w « also responsible for ensuring compliance

         With the Green Ouide in the respects detailed above,                  as well

         as in some other respects:;There wore departures from the

        Green Guide, kotc more important then others, of course, it

        does not follow that, the disaster would not have happened even
        if the Safety Certificate -..had been amended, since compliance

        depended on the                      Eastwood. In common with the Club
        and Dr Eastwood, however, the Council's errors only partly

        contributed to the; grbung conditions identified above as

        causes of the d e a t h ^ d ; 0n any view ware too remote to amount

        to a prima f,c:e ca*« of mar..,,aughtnr. There is no evidence of
        recklessness or gross negligence dn their part.



                                                   I
                                -V'.:
                                                   I ;   1
                                               m
r x 07/0^-v 00 16:43 FAX 01904 545501   '   CPS CASEWORK DIR
                                                                                     1^1 034/04 0




             76.    There as accordingly no evidence to support a charge of
            manslaughter against Mr,;Bownes-



            77.      it is unnecessary to consider the liability of the

            Sheffield District Council for; the errors of its predecessor,
            the south Y o r K s h i ^ S o u * * * Couft|il. though we would assume

            such liability to have’liJsen iftjp-itea on the reorganisation.


            (i v ) The police

If        78 •     The main re® W S i « i W t y ft* the disaster at Hillsborough
           rests on the police in the respects identified above and

J         clearly set out ip the Taylor Report. As an organisation they

           were partly responsible for the layout of the inside of the

           ground. They were responsible for the policy, heavily

           criticised in the Taylor Report, whereby supporters were left
3
           "to find their own level" and nqt monitored as they entered

           the pens in s e m i f i n a l matches. They were also partly

           responsible for the ;Laj>pings i^rfe turnstiles and, together

          with the Club, should have foreseen the difficulties of

          admission of such larg?lumbers. There was a serious failure

          of policing in Loppings Lane, due in part to a failure to

          follow filtering tactics used effective’.y in 1968.



          79.      These errors,tpo. ftpWever. can oniy be vieusd as part Qf

          a complex sequence of evonts. many of which were outside the

         control of the police. |he layout of the ground, both inside

         and out, was the main responsibility of the club as advised by

         Dr Eastwood, with thfe Council a** the Officer Working Party
'00 16:43 FAX 01904 545501   .   -    CPS CASEWORK DIR
                                                                               ® 0




   superintending The alterations to the West terrace. Likewise.
   the contents of t h e / S ^ y Certificate were not the main

  responsibility of the ponce. The diffiouitles inherent in the

  policing Of Leppingjs Lane, whii^ were partly geographical, and
  the arrival of supports^, in                   large number3 after 2 3Q pm

  were not and c o u M not Be undefeiolice control. Finally, the
  unruly behaviour C £ a Biriority ^            them, although no doubt
  foreseeable,     created added difficulties.
                                     I
                                     I


  80.   Once responsibility for the failure to postpone the kick-
 off and to cordon, ®f.f             access tunnel is confined to Mr

 Duckenfield, as w e ^ o ^ i a e r it'should be (see para 48 a b o v e ! . " ’

 the conclusion becomes inescapable in our view t h a V t h e police

 as an orqani Hat< on cannot be said to have caused the deaths by
 their strategy and operational errors.



 81.    we have examined the structure of the police command,

 both on the day of the disaster itself and in previous years.

We have considered the operational orders for 1988 and 1989

and police practice at Hillsborough, inside and outside the

ground, as detailed in the Taylor Report. We have also

considered the interviews of Mr Marshall and Mr Murray.

However,    there seems to us to ^ n o           evidence that in making

what were undoubtedly errors of judgment and practice,              the

police organisation, or any individual within it, acted

recklessly or in                     negligent manner either on the day
of the disaster or 1
’00 16:44 FAX 01904 545501   .    CPS CASEWORK DIR
                                                                                C




   82.   we accordingly find no balls on which to advise a ohargg

   Of corporate manslaughter against any directing mind within
   the police organisation.



   Chief Super!ni-Pndet\t Dunkenf 1 * 1

   83.   Mr Ducksnfiiliiva^te.vily criticised in the Taylor
  Report for failing;,*, ;i|tdon off the access tunnel, and his

  decision not to postpone the kick-off was regarded as a bad

  error of judgment. We think both „f these criticisms are

  entirely r-^-.ifted. Moreover,       as the operational commander of

  the match, he was ultinatrCy responsible fo r the policing both

  Within and outside the ground. He w a s personally slow to

  recognise the crushing or signs .of distress in the central

 pens which were going ??V before; his ^ s .          He failed to notice

 the gross ir**lance of filling 0*.tween those pens and the

 outer wings which the video shows so clearly. His

 preoccupation with -the possibility of a pitch invasion caused

 him to delay putting the Major sisasrer Plan into operation.



            Mr Duckenfield had under his command officers with

 considerable e x p e ^ c e ^ f p o l l i n g the match and the ground

Who also made o p e r a t i o ^ e r r o r f a o r failed to react as they

should have done. It is -Unnecessary to set out here the chain

Of police command; suffice it to say that in the senior

positions were officers who had successfully policed

Hillsborough in previous, y e a r s . ^ a r t i c u ^ r l y in 1988, when the

operation was regarded as su-cesslul. under them were other

experienced i n s p ^ C o r s and sector commanders.     If the
/04^'°° 16:44 FAX 01904 545501     " V ^ C P S CASEWORK DIR                         ^




          operational orders or po-.tce i n t ^ l i ^ e e „as madeguete.       as

          seems likely, i t # : « | J the              of Mr Duckenfield who

          inherited a ready made ma ,oh plan compiled by others and tried

          to follow it. The■dloWFifess Of his response to the disaster,

          While much to be ;regretted, „ as doubtless d u e in p a r t t o h 's

          lack of experience of this particular match.



          as.     Mr Duckenfield, who deciined to be interviewed for the

      purposes of the criminal invesJisation. would no doubt argue

      that none of these errors caused the deaths because of the

      interposition of .he Tarty other factors already rehearsed               It

      seems to us that that ^ u m e n t would be likely to succeed in

      relation to many of ;^ c r i t i c i s m s . However, there is a case

      to be made in                       his.lfailure both to postpone the

      kick-off and to t a k & ^ t i o n ^ o close the t u ™ i        after the

     opening of gate 0 was a substantial cause of the deaths, in

     that it Significantly contributed to the crowd pressure which
     led to the r.ru.iii-.ng and the collapse of barrier 124A.



     86   .     If that is so, it is necessary to consider whether there

     13    evidence         Hr Duckenfieldijwhen failing so to act. had

    the requisite intention to support, a charge of manslaughter.



    37.         Clearly there was no unlawful and dangerous act on his

    part cr intended by him which wou.d found the first head of

    liability m        invoiu^a^.manslaiighter. But i n f a i l i n g to
   postpone the kick-off          or to o r d p r fha 7
                                  ?r..to order the closure of the tunnel
   after the opening of gate;®, or both, did he Intend an act
07/01
         00 16:44 FAX 01904 545501          :CPS CASEWORK DIR                                   1^ 038/040




            which cr83t6d                    anw      ,
                                            /and ^ i o u s      risk of can,,-^
                                     :v ;                          causing personal
            injury, either                    a-.ougt,, to the possibility of such

           risk, or having r*coyn isK, that.there was some rlsk involved
           nonetheless go on to take it?
                                                     I



           88.    We c o n s i d e r ^ ^        are^difficulties in proving ;.kat
           he intended to do an a « .whic^reated a„                             ^

          risk of causing personal injury . In the first ^                          ^       ^

                 act" as such, bwt w        omissi£w or omlssions to a<_t

          contributed to a « p , d ly developing state of affairs ending ±n
          serious risk of injury.;Sut „as it an obvious ^                       ^       ^

          time? Me think n o t ^ h ^ p l e ^ y               of the             as ^

          kn0“n "    thOSS “ h° *“" »                    ^   i J L h l n d ^ h t demonstrates
         that there must be grave doubt „                 to whether the omissions
         created a risk which -was ohwinif®
                                                             anyone at the time. The
         considerations here aro-
                        here are, of C O * * . ,             wholly different from the
         driving cases or the collision at                        4-v,
                               oixxsion at sea m                  the Kong^cheuk Kuan
         case.



         89.     we conclude, therefore, that there is insufficient

        evidence on which, t o ; ^          a charge of recklessness a g a i n s t M r

        Duckenfield. Nor is ther^ evidence that he was grossly

        negligent in                 jo^act as Mentioned above. we bear in

        "ind p a r t i c u l a r l y j ^ e n t c *       the Divisional Court in the

        w-t    London c o r p n ^ ^ j        ,93Si,h„ requirements of which are
        not in our view satisfied.




                                               36
                                               -UI '
■01   00 16:45 FAX 01904 545501,.          . CPS CASEWORK DIR
                                                                                         0039/040




           90.     It                                    to the ciear conciusion

           that there is no e v i n c e        that Mr Duckenfield ^      ^

           neglectful of his duty or was culpable so as to h
                                          ,           S to have committed
           the offence of culpably m isfeasance.



           91.
             We concluded •
                             B P l t ” #1°                  evidence of any
        criminal of'£c,r.r:.T. it8vin„ been           „
                                            cammitted by Mr Duckenfield.


        Police Constables Smith. anH

        92.       we note ,h„ complaints ra8de against these two officers
        »ho were stationed., on <*. per^             ter track at gates 3 ^       +

                        ely and we hays considered the interviews of both.

       There i s c o n f l i c t * ^ J ^ e n c e 1 „ the case of each as to how he

       reacted and w h e n . e a c h ^ e waS :opened (see the West Midlands
       report Part vix at, pp ?52 to 259 ) and in ^              case ^       ^

       there is substantial doubt as to whether he pushed spectators

       including the c         o   ^   ^    Hen#e| „I;d a„ unidentlfied boy       back

       «to       the crowd and if ,so                 .hether before or after he

      had appreciated the true, nature of the disaster.



                 There is no evidence before us that either of these

      officers was guilty of m a n s l a ^ t e r or culpable misfeasance

      -0    we advise thafe|h<*# 1 ega t ^ s          made against the, ,,

      investigated further a n ^ i f appropriate pursued in
      discipiinary proceedings.
_07/01    00 16:45 FAX 01904 545501        CPS CASEWORK DIR
                                                                                       0 040/040
         • o                                       ■



                94.   The balance of^ allegations against the other officers

                mentioned in -he Wen.. Mtdian.is Report. must U k a„ise be a

                matter for disciplinary proceedings -



               95.    We therefore £:ind;,no suffieent evidence to support

               criminal proceedings 6 * .any kind against those persons

               mentioned in t h e . W ^ t # i d l ands,Report whom we have not found
               it necessary to identify in this Opinion.




               Farrar's Building,
               Temple EC4Y 7BD
                                                                    PS
                                                    GARETH WILLIAMS nr

           (q August 1990                           PETER BIRTfi nr>
                                                       pc Mr Parkinson
C W P Newell
Director, C asew ork
                                                       : Mr Enzor                          CPS
                                                       ;; For information.
                                                                                           Headquarters
                                                       £   CWPN                            50 Ludgate Hill
                                                           1 0 .1 . 0 0                    London EC4M 7EK

                                                                               Direct Line: 0207 796 S553
                                                                               Siurichbofrfd: 0207 7QS SOOO
 r                                                 1                              Facsimile: 0207 796 8SS0
     The Honourable Mr Jus tic*                                                   DX N(k 300850 Ludgate BC4
     Royal Courts o f Justice
     Strand
     London
     W C2A 2LL


 L                                                 J                      10 January 2000




     R v DUCKENFIELD A N D M U R R A Y

     In response to the letter o f 7 January 2000 from Mr James Lewis, I enclose a copy o f the Joint
     Opinion o f Mr Gareth Williams QG (as he then was) and Mr Peter Bins QC, dated 6 August
     1990, concerning the Hillsborough Football Stadium disaster. On behalf o f the Crown
     Prosecution Service, I am content to waive any privilege that attaches to the Joint Opinion, to
     enable you to disclose it to the parties in the current prosecution o f Messrs Duckenfield m d
     Murray under such conditions as you may think appropriate.

     I note from Mr L ew is’ letter that you may wish to redact the Joint Opinion. I do not make
     any proposals in this context; save only to suggest that you may care to refer in particular to
     paragraphs 69-77 inclusive and 92-94 inclusive.

     I have consulted Lord Williams QC about my intention to disclose the Joint Opinion to you
     and he is content with that course o f action. For the avoidance o f any doubt, I should
     emphasise that I consulted Lord Williams in his capacity as a member o f the Bar and joint
     author o f the Opinion, rather than in his present capacity as HM Attorney General. As a
     matter o f courtesy, I shall also ensure that Mr Peter Birts QC is informed o f the disclosure.

     1 have n0t written separately to Mr Lewis, nor to those representing Messrs Duckenfield and
     Murray.




     C W P NEWELL
                                                                          L
                  1 - ^ 0 0 , {'D.L\

                                                               :c Mr P arkinson                      m
    W P New ell

O
         Casework
                                                                  Mr   nzor                          CPS
D                                               ■A. -J J   I
                                                                 For information.
                                                                                                     Headquarters
                                                                 CWPN                                50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                 1 0 .1 . 0 0                        London EC4M 7EX
                          M            ll'vi>
                                                                                       Direct Line   0207 796 8553
                               SP                                                                    0207 796 8000
r                                                          1
                                                                                       Switchboard
                                                                                         Facsimile   0207 796 8680
     The Honourable Mr Justice Hooper                                                      DX No     300850 Ludgate EC4
     Royal Courts o f Justice
     Strand
     London
     WC2A 2LL


L                                                                                 10 January 2000
                                                           J




     i
     )
    R v D U C K EN FIELD AND M U R R A Y

    In response to the letter o f 7 January 2000 from Mr James Lewis, I enclose a copy o f the Joint
    Opinion o f Mr Gareth Williams QC (as he then was) and Mr Peter Birts QC, dated 6 August
    1990, concerning the Hillsborough Football Stadium disaster. On behalf o f the Crown
    Prosecution Service, I am content to waive any privilege that attaches to the Joint Opinion, to
    ciiaoie you to uiscioss u io tuc paiiics in tnc current prosecution o f Messrs Duckcnfield arid
    Murray under such conditions as you may think appropriate.

    I note from Mr L ew is’ letter that you may wish to redact the Joint Opinion. I do not make
    any proposals in this context, save only to suggest that you may care to refer in particular to
    paragraphs 69-77 inclusive and 92-94 inclusive.

    I have consulted Lord Williams QC about my intention to disclose the Joint Opinion to you
    and he is content with that course o f action. For the avoidance o f any doubt, I should
    emphasise that I consulted Lord Williams in his capacity as a member o f the Bar and joint
    author o f the Opinion, rather than in his present capacity as HM Attorney General. As a
    matter o f courtesy, I shall also ensure that Mr Peter Birts QC is informed o f the disclosure.

    I have not written separately to Mr Lewis, nor to those representing Messrs Duckenfield and
    Murray.




    C W P NEWELL
                                                    THE LEG AL SECRETARIAT TO THE L A W OFFICERS

                                                                ATTO R N E Y G E N E R AL'S C HAM BER S

                                                                              9 B U C K IN G H A M GATE

                                                                                 LO N D O N SW 1E 6JP
G e n e ra l e n q u irie s   0207-271 24 00
D irect line                  0 5 K J 7 1 2403
              Fax No:         0171-271 2 4 »



              C Newell Esq
              Director, Casework
              Crown Prosecution Service
              50 Ludgate Hill
              London EC4M 7EX

                                                                        10 January 2 000




             R v DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

             Thank you for your letter of 7 January to Lord Williams.

             Lord Williams h as asked me to inform you that he is content for the
             advice he gave as a m em ber of the Bar to be disclosed.




            STEPHEN PARKINSON




                                                                    10JAN2000.DUCKENFIELD. CN
 Attorney General’s Chambers
 9 Buckingham Gate
 London SW 1E6JP
                                                                              Legal Secretariat
                                                                         to the Law Officers
 Return Fax: 0171 271 2433




 To:      C. Newell_____________                         From:     Stephen Parkinson

 Fax:     0207 796 8650                                  Pages:         (inc. cover sheet)

 Phone: 0171 271 2403                                    Date:     10/01/00

 Re:                                                     CC:


□ Urgent         □   For R eview       □ Please Comment           □ Please Reply             □ Please Recycle




• Com m ents:




This Fax transm ission is intended only fo r the use o f the recipient named above. It contains confidential
inform ation which is legally privileged. If you are not the intended recipient, you are hereby notified that
you have received th is document in error and that any copying, disclosure, distribution or other use o f the
inform ation contained in this Fax is strictly prohibited. If you have received th is Fax in error, please notify
us immediately by telephone so that we can make arrangements fo r the return o f the documents to us.
Your co-operation is appreciated.



                                       Please call 0171 271 2404 if you have any problems receiving this fax.
1 0 - JAN. ' 00 (MON)         0 9 =24    ATTORNEY   GENERAL                               TE L =01 71   828   059 3            P. 00 1




 TRANSACTION            REPORT




 Transm ission
 T r a n s a c t 1o n ( s )    completed.




   No.      DATE/TIME                DESTINATION'                              DURATION         PGS.          RESULT   MODE


   938      JAN. 10           9:23                   +44   0207   796   8650   0» 0 0 ’ 5 2 "   002           OK       N ECM
      he
     A TTO R N E Y GENERAL



       b)ll'L£               li


jf)                                 ^

                          jlcnVY'aJ

                               Ay       ^

                  ^          tfa.   c PS

      rvy> o^sJ        /v
       - /
/                     ^             yr\,-uru..</y,'


 f                    L\e^
U//U1        uu 17:23 FAX +44 0207 796 -*650
                                                                                                                       [^002



        C W P N e w e ll
        Director, Casework
                                                                                                            CPS
                                                                                                            Headquarters
                                                                                                            50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                            London EC4M 7EX

                                                                                            Direct Line:    0207 796 8553
         r                                                     i                            SwiichbootvL'   0207 796 8000
             Lord Williams o f Mostyn QC                                                      Facsimile:    0207 796 8680
                                                                                                 DX No;     300850 Ludgate EC4
             HM Attorney General
             Attorney General’s Chambers .
             9 Buckingham Gate
             London                   V
             SW 1E6JP
        L                                                   J                      7 January;
                                                                                          ry200f- \/\r




                                                                                                            /o-t



          R v DUCKENFIELD AND M U R R A Y

          For the avoidance o f any dbubt, H f o u ld state- at oncc that I am writing to vou m vo,„
          personal capacity, as a member o f the Bar f t a e r l y instructed by the C ro™ P r o s e c u te
                        than ln y°TO ^ a o r t y as Attorney General. This explains my style o f address.

         I enclose a copy o f a letter ;th4t I have received today from James Lewis, junior counsel for the
         proseomon m the current trocWdfflgs hro«ghi by Ms Arm A d lin g ii on S                 f If S

         S o u * ^ o ^ S o U                  ^ ^ f ^      ^       SIS DUCkenfcId “ >              fe™ ^ ly o f the


         w v i w 6' ? “ “ * *                 y o r n e lf irom m y involvement with the current proceeding



         ss;£r-“
        James L ew is’ letter is self-explanatory. I have not fnllnwpH                  „


        onward disclosure to the p a x t it     -              ® ° P m m ' * * lmn t0 cmsldCT appropriate


        Assuming that legal professiqnal privilege attaches to advice provided bv rn.m.Pi    *,
        Crown Prosecution ServiceYftom time tn firm* fk** ,*.,** i u  t_          counsel to the
        the Crown Prosecution                                                     * W0^ d be for
        which 1 consider                                                                      “
        and to invite any comments on my proposed course o f action.                                         counsel
On the basis o f James                    contaite o f which have been expressly approved by
f te Judge, I would be minded to w sivc any p n S leg e and disclose the Joint Opmion In so
doing, I might draw to the Judge’s attention any passages that I think should be redacted- but I
should be content to leave,tho finaldecision on that to him. Before disclosing the document
however, I should w elcom e any comment that you might care to make.

As is clear, the Opinion w a si^ e         Opinion o f you and your junior, Peter Birts (now Peter
B u is QC). Not least b e c a u ^ ' o f ^ W g e n ^ the Judge’s request, I have decided not to
approach Peter Birts se p a r a t^ forliis co m m e n t Subject to your views, and should the Joint
Opinion in due course be disclosed*.I should aitange for him to be informed as a matter o f
courtesy.

I look forward to hearing from you as soon as is convenient. I am, o f course, available on
Monday, should you wish to discuss the matter. If tine Joint Opinion is to be disclosed I can
arrange for a copy to be deli vered to the Judge at the Royal Courts o f Justice on Monday




C W P NEWELL                >A1'
U//U1   ..Hi 15:50 FAX + 44 0207
                                                                                                                             ® 003

  ztry iuioi
                                                 Presiding Judge N orth Eastern Circuit




                                                                                          R O Y A L C O U R T S O F J U S T IC E

                                                                                          S T R A N D , L O N D O N , W C 2 A 2LL




                     7 January, 2000     ■   ^

                     Mr, Christooher Newell;                   :
                     Office o f th e Director o f Public Prosecutions
                     50, Ludgate Hill,                                '
                     LONDON, EC1


                                         g v puckettfteM antfMurrav, Leeds crown court
                 Dear Mr. Newell,                   :




                                                                                              * * * c * o n t he oasis




                JSSSSr®
                the intention » “ 2         S
                case, it is agreed between the
                                                  S       ?       2     S    ?     to his Lordship. ,t is
                                                            fhat- n r ! ^ +h- Pm,on t0 atl part,es in thls
                parties Mr Justice Hooper mav r e d S S ^ n fn iA n     *     onward transmission to the
                to tne criminality of any other persons if Such is disclose?6*   Derhaps witn reference


                should LTeatS rh o u ^ T r S i< e anv                    h3S fnaiC3te0 that the P ^ c u t io n
                hour,                                                                     3nd the d6fe"<* «
                timetable as in any . ^ e n i Mr y u S 'w               ^ d       K        T - ™ * Upon this
                representations with him       Friday t h e # tS ^ J ^ S S o                ° Pin'° n and the
                      . .              , frftU.Ju^                              '               aJ-QL, &c<T -
                    opinion should be t o e ^ s o o n a ^ s i B i e to the clerk to Mr justice H o o p a ^ .
               Yours sincerely,




                                                                                                   ■J
               COyNSEL FOR THE PROSECUTION

               CX’       Geor9e Boston, Prosecution Team Leader, CPS Headquarters, York
uu 16)32 FAX 01904 545501                  CPS CASEWORK DIR
                                                                                                              ® 001/040




                                                    Grown Prosecution Service
                                                                        Casework D irecto ra te: York Division

                                    •                                  United                         H ome

                                ,                                                                   Piccadilly

                                                                                               York YOl



                                                                                  Direct line: 01904-545502
                                                                                 Switchboard: 01904-545400

                                                                                  Facsimile: 01904-545501

 Attention of:   STEPHEN PARKINSON              .                                         ^           r°rk 6

Address: LSLO

Fax No: 0171-271-2433

From: Christopher H. Enzor

Date: 7 January 2000                      Time: ) S - 2 3

This fax transmission consists o f this page pl.u$$? others

Please acknowledge receipt:



If transmission is not properly , received please call 01904-545502



I have spoken to Chris Newell and include a copy of Lord Williams’s opinion.
