Commissioner o f Police for the Metropolis v Hurst [2005] EWCA Civ 890 (21 July 2... Page 1 o f 16


 ^           [Home] [Databases] [World Law] [Search] [Help] [Feedback]

       England and Wales Court of Appeal
 ba,l» (Qyii Division) Decisions
You are here: B A IL II» Databases » England and Wales Court o f Appeal (Civil Division) Decisions »
Commissioner o f Police for the Metropolis v Hurst [2005] EWCA Civ 890 (21 July 2005)




[Database Home Page] [Database Search] [Database Case Name Search] [Recent Decisions]
[Download RTF] [Help]



                                                   Neutral Citation Number: [2005] EWCA Civ 890
                                                                                        Case No: C1/2005/0572

IN THE SUPREME COURT OF JUDICATURE
COURT OF APPEAL (CIVIL DIVISION)
ON APPEAL FROM THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION
DIVISIONAL COURT
Lord Justice Rose and Mr Justice Henriques
CO/989/2003
[2003] EWHC 1721 Admin

                                                                                        Royal Courts of Justice
                                                                                    Strand, London, WC2A 2LL
                                                                                                  21 July 2005

                                                  Before:

                                          LORD JUSTICE BUXTON
                                          LORD JUSTICE SEDLEY
                                                  and
                                           SIR MARTIN NOURSE


                                                   Between:
                       THE COMMISSIONER OF POLICE FOR THE
                                  METROPOLIS              Appellant
                                     - and -
                                CHRISTINE HURST           Respondent



                              (Transcript of the Handed Down Judgment of
                             Smith Bernal Wordwave Limited, 190 Fleet Street
                                            London EC4A 2AG
                              Tel No: 020 7421 4040, Fax No: 020 7831 8838
                                 Official Shorthand Writers to the Court)




       Ms Anne Studd (instructed by The Solicitor to the Metropolitan Police) for the Appellant




http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/2005/890.html                                                  24/10/2005
Commissioner o f Police for the Metropolis v Hurst [2005] EWCA Civ 890 (21 July 2... Page 2 o f 16


       Mr Keir Starmer QC and Mr Stephen Cragg (instructed by Bhatt Murphy) for the Respondent


                                        HTML VERSION OF JUDGMENT


                                                Crown Copyright ©

       Lord Justice Buxton :


       Background

  1.   On 25 May 2000 Mr Troy Hurst, the son of the applicant before the Divisional Court, Mrs Christine
       Hurst, was killed by a violent stabbing attack perpetrated by a neighbour, Mr Albert Reid. An inquest
       into Mr Hurst's death was opened very shortly thereafter, but immediately adjourned under the
       provisions of section 16(1) of the Coroners Act 1988 [the 1988 Act] because Mr Reid had been
       charged with murder. He was eventually convicted of manslaughter on 16 July 2001. The Coroner
       accordingly had to decide whether there was "sufficient cause" to re-open the inquest under section 16
       (3) of the 1988 Act.

  2.   The Coroner had been strongly pressed by Mrs Hurst and those advising her to re-open the inquest:
       not to ascertain the cause and immediate circumstances of the death, which were unfortunately plain
       enough and had in any event been determined in the criminal trial, but to explore further what Mrs
       Hurst considered had been the many failings of various public authorities in giving her son sufficient
       protection from the known hostility and propensity to violence of Mr Reid. The concerns asserted by
       Mrs Hurst included failure by Barnet Council, Mr Reid's landlords, to take sufficient steps to evict Mr
       Reid in the light of threatening and violent behaviour towards neighbours, including Mr Hurst and his
       father; failure by Barnet Health Authority adequately to respond to Mr Hurst's personality disorder; and
       failure by the Metropolitan Police to act upon previous incidents of violence on the part of Mr Reid and,
       in particular, failure to treat with sufficient seriousness a series of reports of violent and erratic
       behaviour on the day of the death itself. A further theme of particular concern was the apparent failure
       of these three authorities to share the information that they had about Mr Reid with each other, and
       indeed within the police force itself, with the result that, for instance, the officers who attended to deal
       with the various incidents on the day of the death were not sufficiently briefed about Mr Reid's very
       violent history.

  3.   By a substantial letter dated 19 November 2002 the Coroner declined to re-open the inquest. He
       considered, simply applying the wording of section 16(3) of the 1998 Act, that all the matters required
       to be ascertained at an inquest had been ascertained in the criminal trial; and then held that the
       decision not to re-open the inquest was compatible with his and the United Kingdom's obligations
       under article 2 of the European Convention on Human Rights [ECHR]. The latter conclusion was
       challenged in the Divisional Court, in judicial review proceedings from which the present appeal is
       brought.

        The decision o f the Divisional Court

  4.   The Divisional Court held, deciding between conflicting first instance decisions, that the duty under
       article 2 to investigate unexplained deaths applied to the Coroner's exercise of his statutory discretion
       even though the death occurred before the coming into force of the Human Rights Act 1998 [the HRA].
       They found that duty to be as stated by the ECtHR in Osman v United Kingdom 29 EHRR 245 [116], in
       terms adopted and approved by this court in R(A) v Lord Saville o f Newdigate [2002] 1 WLR 1249 at
       paragraphs 12 and 28:

                     "It must be established...that the authorities knew or ought to have known
                      at the time of the existence of a real and immediate risk to the life of an
                      identified individual or individuals from the criminal acts of a third party and
                     that they failed to take measures within the scope of their powers which,
                     judged reasonably, might have been expected to avoid that risk ”

              After an extensive review of the available evidence the Divisional Court, although
              recognising the stringency of that test, concluded that the Coroner's decision had not




http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/2005/890.html                                                    24/10/2005
Commissioner o f Police for the Metropolis v Hurst [2005] EWCA Civ 890 (21 July 2... Page 3 o f 16


              been in compliance with article 2. Rose LJ said in paragraphs 110 and 111:

                     "Our task is to decide whether, when the Coroner refused to resume the
                     inquest, the material then before him, and now before us, gave rise,
                     arguably, to a breach of Article 2 by either [the Metropolitan Police or Barnet
                     Council], In my view, it did, and however inadequate a remedy the holding
                     of an inquest in such circumstances may be, the Coroner's refusal to
                     resume it was in my judgment fatally flawed ...and breached his obligation
                     under the Human Rights Act to act compatibly with the Convention.

  5.   It is not necessary to go further into the detail of the Divisional Court's reasons for that conclusion,
       because the Metropolitan Police, the only appellant before us, does not contest the proposition that if
       the Divisional Court was right to consider that article 2 applied to the Coroner's decision, then it was
       open to it to find on the material before it that the duty imposed by that article had not been fulfilled. Nor
       is it in issue whether a Coroner's inquest is the most efficacious medium through which to investigate
       the matters that call for enquiry in this case: a question on which I for my part share the doubts that
       were plainly entertained by Rose LJ. Granted that the resumption of the inquest is the only available
       step forward in the investigation, the contest before us is as to whether the decision as to that
       resumption is governed by article 2.

              Events after the decision o f the Divisional Court

  6.   The Divisional Court directed the coroner to resume the inquest. Because of perceived practical
       difficulties, that step was not put in hand by the coroner before the House of Lords delivered judgment
       in In Re McKerr [2004] 1 WLR 807 [McKerr] on11 March 2004. It will be necessary to come back to
       that case in much greater detail. For the moment, it suffices to note that the House held, contrary to the
       view of the Divisional Court set out in paragraph 4 above, that the duty to investigate unexplained
       deaths imposed by article 2 only applied to deaths occurring after 2 October 2000, the commencement
       date of the operation of the HRA; the HRA was not, at least in this respect, retrospective; and the
       investigatory duty that forms part of article 2 was not "free-standing", but only adjectively linked to the
       duty to protect life. Since the state had no article 2 duty to avoid Mr McKerr's death before 2 October
       2000, equally it had no article 2 duty to investigate that death if it occurred before 1 October 2000, even
       though the issue as to that investigation arose after 1 October 2000. And further, at paragraph 25 of his
       speech in McKerr Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead specifically stated, in terms to which we will again have
       to return, that the Divisional Court in our case had fallen into error by finding a duty of investigation in
       respect of a death that occurred on 25 May 2000.

  7.   Those observations necessarily do not disturb the actual order of the Divisional Court; and in these
       proceedings one of the interested parties in the court below, the Metropolitan Police, appeals against
       that order, relying principally on McKerr. The other interested parties, the local authority and the health
       authority, support the appeal but have taken no active part in it. Nor has the coroner taken an active
       part in the appeal, his position very properly being that he will abide by the order of the court.

  8.   The appeal is strenuously resisted by Mrs Hurst, who seeks to uphold the Divisional Court's order on
       grounds that were neither before that court nor before the House of Lords in McKerr. No objection has
       been taken to that course, though it has meant that this appeal has turned into an enquiry wholly
       different from that in the Divisional Court. The route by which we are invited to uphold the Divisional
       Court's order is one of some complexity. We have been assisted in pursuing that route by the
       admirable arguments of Mr Starmer QC for Mrs Hurst and of Miss Studd for the police: whilst being all
       the while very conscious that we are being asked to uphold an order that has already been
       characterised as erroneous in the House of Lords.

  9.   That has also meant that before us the proceedings took the form of Mrs Hurst, albeit technically the
       respondent, presenting her new case in support of the Divisional Court's order, which case was then
       answered by the appellant. That form is reflected in the form of the judgment that follows. However,
       before setting out the issues as reflected in the respondent's argument it is necessary to summarise
       the coroner's statutory duties.

       The coroner's duties

 10.   By section 11 (5)(b)(ii) of the 1988 Act, the coroner's inquisition returned at the end of the inquest shall
       set out, insofar as it has been proved, "how, when and where the deceased came by his death". The
       Coroner's Rules 1984, made under the authority of a provision consolidated in the 1988 Act, provide by



http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/2005/890.html                                                  24/10/2005
Commissioner o f Police for the Metropolis v Hurst [2005] EWCA Civ 890 (21 July 2... Page 4 o f 16


       rule 36 that the proceedings and evidence at an inquest shall be directed solely to answering that
       question; and in particular that no verdict shall be framed so as to appear to determine any question of
       criminal liability of a named person, or any question of civil liability.

 11.   The relevant parts of section 16(3) of the 1988 Act, already referred to in paragraph 1 above, need to
       be set out verbatim:

                     "After the conclusion of the relevant criminal proceedings... the coroner
                     may... resume the adjourned inquest if in his opinion there is sufficient
                     cause to do so."

       The respondent's arguments

 12.   The arguments advanced on behalf of Mrs Hurst can be divided into three categories. First, reliance is
       placed in a number of ways on the effect in domestic law of the ECHR before the HRA. To quote Lord
       Bingham of Cornhill in R v Lyons 12003] 1 AC 976[13]:

                     "Even before the Human Rights Act 1998 the Convention exerted a
                     persuasive and pervasive influence on judicial decision-making in this
                     country, affecting the interpretation of ambiguous statutory provisions,
                     guiding the exercise of discretions, bearing on the development of the
                     common law"

              It was therefore argued that even if, because of the date of the death, the coroner was to
              be regarded as exercising a discretion governed purely by domestic law, innocent of the
              HRA, that discretion had to be illuminated by, and exercised in the light of, the United
              Kingdom's international obligations springing from this country's adherence to the ECHR.

 13.   Second, section 11 (5)(b)(ii) of the 1988 Act had been authoritatively interpreted by the House of Lords
       in R(Middleton) v West Somerset Coroner 12004] 2 AC 182 [Middleton], which case concerned a death
       occurring before the implementation of the HRA, although the timing point that prevailed in McKerr was
       not taken. That interpretation was said now to bind the coroner, and should drive him to resume the
       inquest.

 14.   Third, strong reliance was placed on section 3 of the HRA, which reads:

                     "So far as it is possible to do so, primary legislation and subordinate
                     legislation must be read and given effect in a way which is compatible with
                     the Convention rights"

 15.   By section 3(2) of the HRA, that provision applies to all legislation, whenever it was enacted. It
       therefore applied to the 1988 Act; and in that context section 3 should be read as operating
       "retrospectively", in the sense that the coroner's duty set out in the 1988 Act should be interpreted
       compatibly with article 2 even where, following the decision in McKerr, the death to which that duty
       related was not covered by the provisions of the Convention.

 16.   As already observed, none of these arguments were placed before the Divisional Court. None of them
       featured in McKerr. And it may also be convenient to emphasise that none of them assert in any way
       the "overriding common law right" that was very firmly rejected in McKerr. I deal with the arguments in
       turn, but as a preliminary to that must set out the interpretation placed in domestic law before the HRA
       on section 11 (5) of the 1988 Act.

       Section 11(5) o f the 1988 Act before the HRA

 17.   R v HM Coroner for North Humberside ex p Jamieson [1995] QB 1 [Jamieson] concerned a death in
       prison, the deceased's relatives challenging the refusal of the coroner to permit the jury to return a
       verdict in which lack of care on the part of the prison authorities in guarding against suicide played a
       part. This court, in a judgment delivered by Sir Thomas Bingham MR (as he then was), held, at p 24A,
       that

                     "Both in section 11 (5)(b)(ii) of the Act of 1988 and in rule 36(1 )(b) of the




http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/2005/890.html                                                 24/10/2005
Commissioner o f Police for the Metropolis v Hurst [2005] EWCA Civ 890 (21 July 2... Page 5 o f 16


                     Rules of 1984, 'how' is to be understood as meaning 'by what means'. It is
                     noteworthy that the task is not to ascertain how the deceased died, which
                     might raise general and far-reaching issues, but 'how...the deceased came
                     by his death', a more limited question directed to the means by which the
                     deceased came by his death"

              It therefore followed [at p26A] that

                     "Neither neglect nor self-neglect should ever form any part of any verdict
                     unless a clear and direct causal connection is established between the
                     conduct so described and the cause of death"

 18.   Jamieson was a case about the form of the verdict rather than the scope of the enquiry. Nonetheless,
       the view taken by this court of the limited permissible range of that verdict makes it inevitable that the
       enquiry at the inquest should be equally limited to events having "a clear and direct causal connection"
       with the death. That would only rarely encompass cases of lack of vigilance. It plainly would not extend
       to the present case, where any direct causal connection between the failings of the police and the
       death was broken by the violent intervention of Mr Reid.

 19.   Less than two months after Jamieson this court heard and decided R v West London Coroner ex p
       Dallaglio [1994] 4 All ER 139 [Dallaglio], which concerned (amongst other questions) the refusal of the
       coroner to exercise his power under section 16(3) to resume the inquests into the deaths that occurred
       in the Marchioness disaster on the termination of the criminal proceedings that resulted from that
       disaster. Counsel for the coroner relied on the Jamieson explication of "by what means" to argue that a
       resumed inquest would not assist the families, since it would not and could not investigate the lack of
       care that had led to the fatal collision, that collision being plainly the cause of the deaths. However, in
       the leading judgment Simon Brown LJ, at p 154f, drew attention to section 8(3)(d) of the 1988 Act,
       which provides that the coroner must sit with a jury

                     "If it appears to a coroner     that there is reason to suspect...that the death
                     occurred in circumstances the continuance or possible recurrence of which
                     is prejudicial to the health or safety of the public or any section of the public"

              That appeared to be difficult to reconcile with the limited view of the coroner's powers
              taken in Jamieson. And Simon Brown LJ went on to the further obligation of the coroner
              recognised at p26B of Jamieson to be vigilant to ensure that the relevant facts are
              exposed to public scrutiny. That scrutiny might have been thought to be restricted to the
              facts to which Jamieson had restricted the enquiry, but Simon Brown LJ drew from that
              passage the conclusion, at p155b, that

                     "It is, in short, for the individual coroner to recognise and resolve the tension
                     existing between ss 8(3) and 11 (5)(b) of the 1988 Act and r36. The inquiry
                     is almost bound to stretch wider than strictly required for the purposes of a
                     verdict. How much wider is pre-eminently a matter for the coroner whose
                     rulings upon the question will only exceptionally be susceptible to judicial
                     review"

 20.   Sir Thomas Bingham MR, at p 164f, also addressed Jamieson:

                     "Jamieson's case was specifically directed to the verdict of lack of care in
                     the context of deaths in custody, but the court's ruling was of wider
                     application and it is true that if these inquests were to be resumed the
                     verdicts which the coroner could properly leave open to the jury at the end
                     would be both limited and predictable. The court did not, however, rule that
                     the investigation into the means by which the deceased came by his death
                     should be limited to the last link in the chain of causation. That would not be
                     consistent with the court's conclusion in [Jamieson at p 26B] which
                     emphasised the need for full, fair and fearless investigation and the
                     exposure of relevant facts to public scrutiny, and it would defeat the
                     purpose of holding inquests at all if the inquiry were to be circumscribed in
                     the manner suggested. It is for the coroner conducting an inquest to decide,
                     on the facts of a given case, at what point the chain of causation becomes
                     too remote to form a proper part of his investigation. That question,



http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/2005/890.html                                                     24/10/2005
Commissioner o f Police for the Metropolis v Hurst [2005] EWCA Civ 890 (21 July 2... Page 6 o f 16


                     potentially a very difficult question, is for him"

              In our case, the coroner did not ask himself that question, or at least not in that precise
              form. As I have already ventured to suggest, had he posed that question, and if the
              reference in Dallaglio to the "chain of causation" bears the usual legal meaning of that
              expression, then the question could only have been answered in one way.

 21.   Lord Bingham of Cornhill, delivering the opinion of the Appellate Committee, reverted to Jamieson at
       paragraph 28 of Middleton. In that case, as will be described below, the House held itself obliged, in
       the light of article 2, to read section 11(5)(b)(ii) significantly more widely than had this court in
       Jamieson; and thus to place upon the coroner obligations as to investigation of allegations of lack of
       care in prison deaths that had been repudiated in Jamieson. Lord Bingham said:

                     "Remarkably, as it now seems, the Court of Appeal made no reference to
                     the European Convention in [Jamieson], and the report does not suggest
                     that counsel referred to it either. Counsel for Mrs Middleton criticised the
                     reasoning of that decision, but it appears to the committee to have been an
                     orthodox analysis of the Act and Rules and an accurate, if uncritical,
                     compilation of judicial authority as it then stood."

              The House then set out a summary of the findings in Jamieson, including those described
              above, without further comment. Dallaglio was not cited to the House and not mentioned
              in the opinion, though Lord Bingham can scarcely have been unaware of that case.

 22.   The treatment of the case in Middleton unavoidably confirms that the Jamieson view, that "how" in
       section 11(5)(b)(ii) means "by what means", and no more, was the law of England until the coming into
       operation of the HRA. If this court in Dallaglio placed a gloss on that formulation, unperceived by the
       House in Middleton, for the reason set out at the end of paragraph 20 above that gloss cannot assist
       Mrs Hurst.

       Reconsideration of section 11(5)(b)(ii) in the light o f ECHR jurisprudence?

 23.   Mrs Hurst argued that even without reference to the HRA the interpretation of section 11 (5)(b)(ii)
       adopted in Jamieson should be revisited in the light of this country's obligation to conform its domestic
       law to its international obligations as found in the ECHR. Reference is made to the observations of
       Lord Bingham quoted in paragraph 12 above, and also to what was said in that same case by Lord
       Hoffmann, [200311 AC 976122]:

                     "There is a strong presumption in favour of interpreting English law (whether
                     common law or statute) in a way that does not place the United Kingdom in
                     breach of an international obligation"

             Mrs Hurst contends that the jurisprudence of the ECtHR imposing the duty under article 2
             of effective investigation, conveniently listed by Lord Bingham in paragraph 2 of the report
             of the Appellate Committee in Middleton, largely or entirely post-dated Jamieson. Had it
             been available to this court in that case, and more particularly to counsel appearing in
             that case, the outcome might have been different. Or, alternatively, Jamieson should
             simply be reconsidered as being inconsistent with the jurisprudence of the ECtHR. We
             were shown a case in the Court of Appeal in Northern Ireland, Jordan [20041 NICA 29, in
             which Nicholson LJ expressed support for both of those views.

 24.   None of this was addressed in Middleton. That is more than merely a passing observation, because if
       this issue were being considered at the level of the House of Lords it would, whether right or wrong, at
       least not face the objections in terms of stare decisis that in my view makes the argument unavailable
       in this court.

 25.   In Leeds City Council v Price [2005] 1 WLR 1825 this court had to consider whether it was bound to
       follow a decision of the House of Lords that was said to conflict with a subsequent decision of the
       ECtHR. This court held that the principles of stare decisis required it to follow the House of Lords
       decision, as a binding precedent in the domestic hierarchy. The court cited a ruling, prior to the
       implementation of the HRA, by Judge LJ in the Divisional Court in R(Bright) v Central Criminal Court
       [2001] 1 WLR 662 at p682:




http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/2005/890.html                                                 24/10/2005
Commissioner o f Police for the Metropolis v Hurst [2005] EWCA Civ 890 (21 July 2... Page 7 o f 16


                     "We are not permitted to re-examine decisions of the European court in
                     order to ascertain whether the conclusion of the House of Lords or Court of
                     Appeal may be inconsistent with those decisions, or susceptible to a
                     continuing gloss. The principle of stare decisis cannot be circumvented or
                     disapplied in this way"

              The constitution of this court that decided Price does not appear to have been told that
              the observations of Judge LJ were approved generally by this court, and applied in the
              post-HRA world, in Kaya v Haringey London Borough Council (2001) 34 HLR 1 [36]-[37];
              see also R(Williamson) v Secretary o f State for Education f20031 QB 1300f41 ]. And that
              must logically be the case: we are bound by this court as much as we are by the House
              of Lords.

 26.   Jamieson is thus binding authority on the meaning of section 11 (5)(b)(ii), authority that cannot be
       displaced by resort to subsequent jurisprudence of the ECtHR. The case could therefore be
       undermined only if it could be said to have been decided perincuriam of the Convention jurisprudence.
       But that argument cannot run in a pre-HRA case. The interpretative obligation of the court in pre-HRA
       cases was that enunciated by Lord Bridge in R v Secretary of State for the Home Department ex parte
       Brind [1991] 1 AC 696 at pp 747 and following. Neither the comparatively cautious approach in that
       case, nor the underlying Convention jurisprudence, can be characterised as a statute or a rule having
       statutory effect such as to bring the case within the third rule in Young v Bristol Aeroplane Co.

 27.   I accordingly find myself obliged to conclude that without the assistance of the HRA the interpretation
       of section 11 (5)(d)(ii) remains as laid down in Jamieson.

       Reconsideration of the section 16(3) duty in the light of the Convention jurisprudence?

 28.   When the coroner gave his decision he did so under section 16(3) of the 1998 Act: see paragraphs 3
       and 11 above. In the course of that decision he addressed his responsibilities under article 2. His
       conclusion that article 2 did not compel a resumption of the inquest was held by the Divisional Court to
       have been incorrect, a conclusion that is not contested before us: see paragraphs 4 and 5 above.

 29.   The present point is a short one, but in my view it is compelling. Even before the HRA domestic
       tribunals were bound to give full weight to the United Kingdom's international obligations to be found in
       the ECHR: see the summary by Lord Bingham of Cornhill, cited in paragraph 12 above. That duty
       should in particular guide the exercise of discretions. When, absent the HRA, the coroner came to
       exercise his discretion under section 16(3), he had to take those international obligations into account
       in deciding whether there was sufficient cause to resume the inquest. Not only were the international
       obligations sufficient, they were, as the Divisional Court found, compelling. I would hold that it was not
       open to the coroner in terms of rationality as a matter of English domestic law to conclude otherwise
       than that the article 2 obligation required the resumption of the inquest.

 30.   It may be prudent to note in this connexion that, in contrast to the argument based on the interpretation
       of section 11 (5)(b)(ii), this argument is not vulnerable to the rule of stare decisis. That is simply
       because section 11 (5)(b)(ii) has been interpreted in authority binding on this court, whereas section 16
       (3) has not. Nor is the argument undermined by McKerr, which is concerned with the application of the
       obligations in English domestic law created by the HRA, and not with the pre-existing obligations of the
       United Kingdom in international law.

 31.   I would therefore uphold the conclusion reached by the Divisional Court on the ground indicated in
       paragraph 29 above.

 32.   Somewhat allied to this point, though different from it, is an argument that attracted Rose LJ, based on
       observations of Lord Hope of Craighead in R v Home Secretary ex p Launder \1997] 1 WLR 839 at p
       867. There the Secretary of State, in dealing with an extradition request, had purported to apply to it
       the requirements of the ECHR. Lord Hope held that in those circumstances it was no sufficient answer
       to complaints that he had not performed that task adequately to say that the ECHR did not bind the
       executive. Put shortly, and not in the terms used by Lord Hope, if the Secretary of State undertook to
       apply the ECHR, even if at that date not obliged to do so by the HRA, he must get that application right.
       So, in our case, the coroner had volunteered to consider the ECHR, and equally must apply it correctly.

 33.   I would hesitate to adopt that argument, at least in the terms that it was put to us. If a given chapter of




http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/2005/890.html                                                 24/10/2005
Commissioner o f Police for the Metropolis v Hurst [2005] EWCA Civ 890 (21 July 2... Page 8 o f 16


       the law is irrelevant to a judicial or administrative decision, it is difficult to see that the decision-maker
       acts irrationally, in the sense of making a decision that has to be quashed, if he forms an incorrect
       judgement about that chapter of the law. There is no jurisprudence developing Lord Hope's approach,
        no doubt because it became redundant at least in relation to Convention questions, once the HRA did
        make the executive bound by the ECHR as a matter of English domestic law. And it was probably
        redundant in most cases, and certainly in cases such as the present, even before the HRA, once the
       approach referred to in paragraph 29 above was properly understood: an approach that does not seem
       to have been put to the House of Lords in Launder, where the ECHR points in any event only arose
       very late in the day.

 34.   In so saying, I am conscious that a view similar to that of Lord Hope was expressed, obiter, by Lord
       Phillips of Worth Matravers MR in R(Mahmood) v Home Secretary [2001] 1 WLR 840[36l. However,
       the point seems neither to have been argued before that court nor developed by it, and had it been I
       would respectfully suggest that the point would not have withstood the objections to it suggested in
       paragraph 33 above. It is not necessary to investigate these essentially historical issues further,
       because the appellant succeeds in any event on the basis set out in paragraph 29 above.

       Middleton as binding authority on the interpretation of section 11 (5)(b)(ii)?

 35.   This argument has already been outlined in paragraph 13 above. Addressing the impact of article 2 on
       the legislation as to the duties of coroners, the Appellate Committee said at paragraphs 34 and 35 of
       Middleton:

                     "It is correct that the scheme enacted by and under the authority of
                     Parliament should be respected save to the extent that a change of
                     interpretation (authorised by section 3 of the Human Rights Act 1998) is
                     required to honour the international obligations of the United Kingdom
                     expressed in the Convention. [35] Only one change is in our opinion
                     needed: to interpret 'how' in section 11 (5)(b)(ii) of the Act and rule 36(1 )(b)
                     of the Rules in the broader sense previously rejected, namely as meaning
                     not simply 'by what means' but 'by what means and in what circumstances'".

              That enabled coroner's juries in want of care cases to express, in an appropriate case, an
              opinion on events leading up to the death: ibid, paragraphs 31-32.

              The same view was expressed by the House, per Lord Hope of Craighead, in a case
              heard by the same constitution at the same time as Middleton, R(Sacker) v West
              Yorkshire Coroner [2004] 1 WLR 796 [Sacker]. Lord Hope, at paragraph 27, referred to
              what had been said by Lord Bingham in Middleton, and continued:

                     "The word ’how’ in section 11 (5)(b)(ii) of the 1988 A ct... .is open to the
                     interpretation that ifcmeans not simply 'by what means’ but rather 'by what
                     means and in what circumstances'. The provisions of section 3 of the
                     Human Rights Act 1998 indicate that it should now be given the broader
                     meaning."

 36.   Mrs Hurst argued that Middleton bound all subsequent courts, including this court in this case, to
       interpret section 11 in those terms. Therefore, even though McKerr precluded the direct application of
       article 2 to the present case, the coroner should have applied section 11 in the meaning now placed on
       it by the House of Lords. This, it is fair to say the leading argument advanced on Mrs Hurst’s behalf,
       would, if correct, determine the case in her favour. It is however vulnerable to a series of substantial
       objections.

 37.    First, appreciating that the death in Middleton had occurred before the implementation of the 1998 Act,
        Lord Bingham, at paragraph 50, was careful to say that nothing in Middleton should be understood to
       throw doubt on the conclusion of the House in McKerr. One is obliged to observe that Mrs Hurst's
       argument uses Middleton for exactly that purpose. Second, if Lord Bingham had intended that his
       interpretation should apply in pre-HRA cases such as that of Mrs Hurst, it would have been impossible
       for him to express himself about the pre-HRA law in the terms that he adopted in Middleton: see
        paragraphs 21-22 above. And it is quite clear in any event from both Middleton and Sacker that neither
       judgment was intended to say anything about pre-HRA cases.




http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/2005/890.html                                                    24/10/2005
Commissioner o f Police for the Metropolis v Hurst [2005] EWCA Civ 890 (21 July 2... Page 9 o f 16


 38.   It will have been seen from the passages quoted above that both Lord Bingham and Lord Hope found
       authority for the new interpretation that they adopted in section 3 of the HRA. The extent to which
       section 3 is "retrospective" is a matter of acute controversy in the present case, to which I shall have to
       return at length. But it is quite clear that Lord Bingham and Lord Hope had no such thought in mind
       when they referred to section 3. They plainly did so because (the point that arose in McKerr not having
       been taken before them) they saw themselves as freed in HRA cases to apply the liberty granted to the
       courts by section 3. What they said as to the meaning and application of section 11 of the 1988 Act
       therefore went no further than to determine its meaning and application in cases governed by the HRA.

 39.   Mr Starmer said that to limit Middleton in that way produced a striking and unusual result, that section
       11 meant different things according to whether it was applied to pre-HRA or post-HRA cases. I
       acknowledge the forensic force of that observation, but that force is much reduced when one considers
       the singular nature of section 3, and the nature of the exercise that it requires of the courts. Although
       when explaining the effect of section 3 it is natural to speak of the resulting "meaning" of the legislation,
       as did Lords Bingham and Hope in the cases just considered, in truth the exercise mandated by
       section 3 is different from that of finding simply the verbal meaning of the words used in legislation. The
       draftsman of section 3 was careful to speak not in terms of elucidation of the meaning of words, but
       rather of the active duty of the court to read and give effect to those words in a way which is compatible
       with the Convention rights. As Lord Steyn points out in his exposition of section 3's origin and purpose
       in paragraphs 40-50 of his speech in Ghaidan v Godin-Mendoza [2004] 2 AC 557. an exposition that I
       would respectfully adopt, section 3's technique has its origin in the Marleasing rule in Community law, a
       rule very different from an ordinary English rule of interpretation; and thus goes well beyond the rules of
       interpretation previously used to give effect to the ECHR, as for instance is found in Brind. Accordingly,
       not only should one not be surprised if the application of section 3 produces a result different from that
       which English law would reach without the benefit of section 3; but also section 3’s particular nature
       means that careful consideration has to be given to the standing of the ECHR in any case to which it is
       sought to apply the section.

 40.   For these reasons, therefore, it is not possible to rely on the fact that section 3 was used in Middleton
       to put a particular construction on section 11 of the 1988 Act to assert that Middleton is authority for the
       application of the section 3 reading of section 11 in every case. But if section 3 cannot be deployed
       through the medium of Middleton, may it nonetheless be applied directly to the present case, to require
       the coroner and this court to read and apply section 11 in a way which is compatible with the
       Convention rights even though the facts on which the Convention right is based occurred before the
       HRA? This is a completely new issue, not addressed in any of Middleton-, McKerr; or this case in the
       Divisional Court. A series of difficult issues arise: the meaning of "the Convention rights” in section 3;
       whether section 3 should in this case be applied "retrospectively", in which connexion close attention
       has to be paid to the speeches in the House of Lords in Wilson v First County Trust(No2) [2004J_1_AC
       816 [Wilson]\ and the effect of McKerr on this issue. I deal with these in turn.

       "The Convention rights"

 41.   Miss Studd submitted that the attempted application of section 3 to Mrs Hurst’s case fell at the first
       hurdle. What section 3 required was the giving of effect to legislation in a way which was compatible
       with Convention rights. That meant, rights arising under the 1998 Act. But, as McKerr showed, Mrs
       Hurst had no such rights. Even if section 3 could in principle be applied to her case, it would not help
       her.

 42.   Counsel for Mrs Hurst submitted a reply which argued that section 3 had been applied by the English
       courts in cases such as Ghaidan v Godin-Mendoza [2004] 2 AC 557 and X v Y [20041 EWCA Civ 662.
       where, because the respondent was not a public authority, the rights relied on were not directly
       enforceable in domestic law. The rights used in the section 3 exercise must therefore have been the
       rights held by the claimants against the United Kingdom in international law, by virtue of the United
       Kingdom’s adoption of the ECHR many decades before the HRA. It was those rights that Mrs Hurst
       sought to assert through the medium of section 3.

 43.   That argument has to be approached with considerable caution. Both in Ghaidan and in X v Y the
       article of the ECHR relied on was article 8. Since the early days of ECHR jurisprudence that article has
       been recognised as placing upon the state not merely a negative obligation of non-interference with
       family life, but a further positive obligation, for that reason unusual in ECHR terms, to further family and
       private life even in the sphere of relations of individuals between themselves: see for instance Marckx v
       Belgium (1979) 2 EHRR 330[31 ] and X a n d Y v Netherlands (1985) 8 EHRR 235[23]. It is that state
       obligation that overlays cases, or at least overlays cases where the interpretation of legislation is
       involved, that seek to assert article 8 values in private law litigation.



http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/2005/890.html                                                 24/10/2005
Commissioner o f Police for the Metropolis v Hurst [2005] EWCA Civ 890 (21 July...                  Page 10 o f 16


 44.   But there is a more direct reason why international obligations, as opposed to the obligations created
       by the HRA, are to be relied on in the application of section 3. Section 1(1) provides that in the HRA,
       and thus in section 3, ’’the Convention rights” means the rights and fundamental freedoms set out in
       [various articles of] the Convention: meaning thereby the ECHR. Those obligations exist and have
       force because of the United Kingdom’s adherence to the ECHR rather than because of the passage of
       the HRA; and it is the jurisprudence of article 2 in that sense that Mrs Hurst says should direct the
       court's reading of section 11 of the 1988 Act.

 45.   This distinction is, with respect, illuminated by the analysis of Lord Hoffmann in paragraph 63 of
       McKerr. Lord Hoffmann said:

                     "Although people sometimes speak of the Convention having been
                     incorporated into domestic law, that is a misleading metaphor. What the Act
                     has done is to create domestic rights expressed in the same terms as those
                     contained in the Convention, But they are domestic rights, not international
                     rights. Their source is the statute, not the Convention.”

              What McKerr holds is that Mrs Hurst does not have the right in domestic law created by
              section 7 of the HRA to claim that the coroner has acted unlawfully under section 6 of the
              HRA by not respecting her article 2 right to a proper investigation into her son's death.
              But that says nothing about her rights against the state in international law created by the
              United Kingdom’s adoption of the ECHR: and it is to those rights that section 3 relates.

              Can section 3 be applied retrospectively?

 46. McKerr held that the obligation under the HRA to carry out an article 2 enquiry did not apply in respect
     of a death that occurred before 2 October 2000, the date of implementation of the HRA. That it was the
     HRA rights that were under consideration, and not the rights in international law, is plain throughout,
     illustrated for instance by Lord Steyn’s observation in paragraph 40:

                     "Mr McKerr's case is crucially dependent on the applicability of section 6(1)
                     of the Human Rights Act 1998”

              The outcome of that case was however determined by the holding of the House, albeit
              elucidated principally in the context of section 6, that the [article 2] obligation to hold an
              investigation is an obligation triggered by the occurrence of a violent death: see in
              particular per Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead at paragraph 21. That at its lowest makes an
              assumption about the content in international law of article 2, an assumption by which we
              are bound. To seek to apply section 3 by reference to an obligation that arose before the
              HRA came into operation, because it arose on the date of the death, would therefore be
              to apply section 3 to, or at least in the context of, an event that occurred before the
              section became part of English law.

 47. The principles of ’’retrospectivity”, and the extent to which they apply to section 3, were reviewed in
     Wilson. In the leading speech Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead pointed to the tension between the specific
     provision applying section 3 to legislation whenever enacted; and the general proposition that a statute
     should not render unlawful acts that were lawful at the time when they were done. He continued, at
     paragraph 19:

                     "The answer to this difficulty lies in the principle underlying the presumption
                     against retrospective operation and the similar but rather narrower
                     presumption against interference with vested interests. These are
                     established presumptions but they are vague and imprecise           As always,
                     therefore, the underlying rationale should be sought. This was well identified
                     by Staughton LJ in Secretary o f State for Social Security v Tunnicliffe [1991]
                     2 All ER 712,714:

                            ’the true principle is that Parliament is presumed not to have
                            intended to alter the law applicable to past events and
                            transactions in a manner which is unfair to those concerned in
                            them unless a contrary intention appears. It is not simply a
                            question of classifying an enactment as retrospective or not




http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/2005/890.html                                                  24/10/2005
Commissioner o f Police for the Metropolis v Hurst [2005] EWCA Civ 890 (21 July...                Page 11 o f 16


                            retrospective-rather it may well be a matter of degree-the
                            greater the unfairness, the more it is to be expected that
                            Parliament will make it clear if that is intended'.

                    Thus the appropriate approach is to identify the intention of Parliament in
                    respect of the relevant statutory provision in accordance with this statement
                    of principle.

                    [21] I emphasise that this conclusion does not mean that section 3 never
                    applies to pre-Act events. Whether section 3 applies to pre-Act events
                    depends upon the application of the principle identified by Staughton LJ in
                    the context of the particular issue before the court. To give one important
                    instance: different considerations apply to post-Act criminal trials in respect
                    of pre-Act happenings. The prosecution does not have an accrued or
                    vested right in any relevant sense."

 48.   Lord Hope of Craighead also examined the issue at some length. He said, at paragraphs 98-99:

                    "Then there is the general presumption that legislation is not intended to
                    operate retrospectively. That presumption is based on concepts of fairness
                    and legal certainty. These concepts require that accrued rights and the legal
                    effects of past acts should not be altered by subsequent legislation. But the
                    mere fact that a statute depends for its application in the future on events
                    that have happened in the past does not offend against the
                    presumption....there is an important distinction to be made between
                    legislation which affects transactions that have created rights and
                    obligations which the parties seek to enforce against each other and
                    legislation which affects transactions that have resulted in the bringing of
                    proceedings in the public interest by a public authority. The concepts of
                    fairness and legal certainty carry much greater weight when it is being
                    suggested that rights or obligations which were acquired or entered into
                    before 2 October 2000 should be altered retrospectively        [99] To restrict
                    the application of the interpretative obligation, without exception, to 'events’
                    that happened or 'transactions' entered into on or after 2 October 2000
                    would be to introduce a restriction which is not stated expressly anywhere in
                    the 1998 Act. A restriction in such absolute and all-embracing terms would
                    seem to be contrary to the intention of the legislation and incapable of being
                    read in to it by necessary implication."

 49.   By contrast, however, Miss Studd particularly relied on the speech of Lord Rodger, because he
       concluded in terms, at paragraph 212, and under a heading "The 1998 Act, including section 3, not
       retroactive" that none of the operative provisions of the HRA, including section 3, is retroactive. That
       conclusion must, however, be subject to a number of qualifications. First, Lord Rodger made clear, in
       his paragraph 202, that his speech was confined to the effect of section 3 in civil proceedings, to which
       the reiterated language of vested rights and pending actions is most suited, and which, as Lord Rodger
       pointed out in his paragraph 215, was the subject-matter of Wilson itself. Second, in his paragraph 210
       Lord Rodger specifically reserved his opinion on whether, in view of "the overwhelming importance and
       absolute nature" of articles 2,3 and 4, Parliament might have intended them to have a more general
       effect than he discerned in the rest of the Convention.

 50. Miss Studd also relied on two other elements in Wilson. First, the observation of Lord Scott of Foscote
     at paragraph 160 that the specific reference to retrospectivity in section 7(1 )(b) of the HRA indicates
     that the Act was not intended to have retrospective effect in any other respect. It should however be
     noted that Lord Hope of Craighead gives what is, with great respect, a cogent explanation in his
     paragraph 90 of why that specific provision was inserted. He did not think, nor did other of their
     Lordships, that it concluded the case against section 3 operating retrospectively in some cases.
     Second, Lord Rodger pointed, in his paragraphs 206-207, to the oddity if section 6 and section 3
     produced different results when applied to events occurring before the HRA, granted that they were
     directed at broadly the same aims. There is, with great respect, force in that observation, but the fact
     that section 6 has been decided not to operate retrospectively was not seen by the House as erecting
     an absolute barrier to section 3 operating retrospectively in all cases.

 51. I venture to draw that latter conclusion because the observations of Lord Nicholls and Lord Hope, cited




http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/2005/890.html                                                  24/10/2005
Commissioner o f Police for the Metropolis v Hurst [2005] EWCA Civ 890 (21 July...                 Page 12 o f 16


       in paragraphs 47 and 48 above, clearly leave open the possibility of retrospective operation; neither of
       Lord Scott or Lord Rodger expressed dissent from, in particular, the analysis of Lord Hope in his
       paragraph 99; and both of Lord Scott and Lord Rodger to a greater or lesser extent reserved the
       position outside the specific area of civil litigation.

 52.   We already know, from the analysis of Lord Bingham in Middleton, how section 11 (5)(b)(ii) would be
       read and given effect were section 3 to be applied to it. If, therefore, there is applied to this case the
       approach of Lord Nicholls and Lord Hope, the first question must be whether to require the coroner
       now to apply section 11 in that sense would interfere with vested rights or interests, or operate unfairly
       in the sense stated by Staughton LJ in Tunnicliffe. Miss Studd valiantly sought to argue that indeed that
       would be the effect, but she had an uphill task. The vested rights suggested were those of the police
       and other public authorities, who either had been entitled to assume that only an investigation in
       Jamieson terms would take place; or who were entitled now to assume that the hour for any
       investigation had passed. These were not attractive propositions, quite apart from being inconsistent
       with the approach of Lord Nicholls in his paragraph 21, cited in paragraph 46 above. All that this
       demonstrated was that the language and tests set out in Wilson are grounded in the law of private
       rights, and apply in only a limited way to the obligations of public bodies.

 53.   Those obligations are contained in the ECHR, and there are no good reasons for holding that in an
       appropriate case a question that now arises as to the application of those rights to the interpretation of
       English legislation should not be answered by the application of the principles of article 2, even though
       the article 2 obligation rested upon the public authorities before 2 October 2 0 0 0 .1would respectfully
       pray in aid in that connexion the observations of Lord Hope in paragraph 99 of his speech in Wilson,
       cited in paragraph 46 above. And the issue of whether this is an appropriate case for an article 2
       investigation has been answered in the judgments of the Divisional Court, in terms that are not
       appealed. It is true that Miss Studd pointed to some issues of policy that had not been before the
       Divisional Court, principally the disruption caused to public services by enquiries that might relate to
       deaths that occurred many years ago. But where the obligation is to submit to an enquiry, lapse of time
       will be a legitimate reason for contending, in an appropriate case, that the enquiry is impracticable.
       That possibility is not a reason for rejecting the availability of such enquiries in principle.

 54.   It is in my respectful view clear from Wilson that the House did not hold that in no case could section 3
       be applied to circumstances existing before the implementation of the HRA. In the present case there
       are, as the Divisional Court held, very strong reasons of general public policy, as well as reasons
       relating to this country's obligations under the ECHR, why an enquiry of the kind mandated by article 2
       should take place. No unfairness will be caused to any individual by the holding of such an inquiry,
       even though it relates to a death the occurred before the HRA came into operation. I would therefore
       conclude in principle that there is every reason for giving section 3 a limited retrospective application in
       order to bring about the resumption of the inquest. That immediately raises the issue of whether that
       conclusion can stand in the light of McKerr.

       Section 3 and McKerr

 55.   McKerr is unfortunately only reported in the first volume of the Weekly Law Reports, and thus we do
       not have the benefit of the report of the arguments that would be found in the Appeal Cases.
       Nonetheless, from the content of their Lordships' speeches one can say with some confidence that the
       arguments put before us did not feature in that case. Nor could they have done. The relief sought in
       McKerr was judicial review of the failure of the Secretary of State to arrange an enquiry, by whatever
       means, that was article 2-compliant. That failure was justiciable only under section 6 of the HRA, as
       was accepted throughout; see paragraph 40 above. Since it was by then settled by Lambert [2002] 2
       AC 545 and Kansal(No 2) [20021 2 AC 69. and accepted in Wilson, that section 6 was not
       retrospective, the decision turned on whether the investigative duty under article 2 was conditioned on
       the article 2 duty to protect life, or was in some way separate from that duty, so as to apply even in the
       case of a death to which the duty to protect life did not apply. Unsurprisingly, the House could find no
       way in which such a duty could be found within the confines of section 6. Section 6 applied only to
       obligations imposed by the HRA, and the article 2 obligations that the HRA imposed took effect only
       from 2 October 2000.

 56.   It is important for our purposes to note why the House found unacceptable the assertion by Mr McKerr
       of a free-standing duty outside the confines of the HRA. I have already, in paragraph 45 above, drawn
       respectful attention to the distinction stressed by Lord Hoffmann between domestic rights created by
       the HRA and rights and obligations, even if in the same terms, existing in international law. The error of
       Mr McKerr’s argument was that it relied on the latter obligation, which, as Lord Hoffmann pointed out at
       paragraph 67, was irrelevant in creating a section 6 duty. The obligation in international law was not



http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/2005/890.html                                                 24/10/2005
    Commissioner o f Police for the Metropolis v Hurst [2005] EWCA Civ 890 (21 July...                  Page 13 o f 16
r




           limited by time; the obligation in the same terms under the HRA, which is what Mr McKerr did rely on
           and had to rely on, only came into existence with the HRA on 2 October 2000.

     57.   This distinction was stressed by other of their Lordships: by Lord Steyn at paragraph 48; by Lord
           Rodger of Earlsferry at paragraph 80; and by Lord Brown of Eaton-under-Heywood at paragraph 90.
           And of particular importance in the present connexion are the observations of Lord Nicholls at
           paragraph 25:

                         "I respectfully consider that some of these courts, including the Divisional
                         Court in Hurst's case....fell into error by failing to keep clearly in mind the
                         distinction between (1) rights arising under the Convention and (2) rights
                         created by the 1998 Act by reference to the Convention. These two sets of
                         rights now exist side by side. But there are significant differences between
                         them. The former existed before the enactment of the 1998 Act and they
                         continue to exist. They are not as such part of this country's law because
                         the Convention does not form part of this country's law. That is still the
                         position. These rights, arising under the Convention, are to be contrasted
                         with rights created by the 1998 Act. The latter came into existence for the
                         first time on 2 October 2000. They are part of this country's law. The extent
                         of these rights, created as they were by the 1998 Act, depends on the
                         proper interpretation of that Act."

     58.   The right asserted by Mr McKerr, limited as it was to a claim as to the Secretary of State's obligation
           under section 6, was necessarily limited to the domestic obligation created by section 6. But the
           application of section 3, which is what our case is concerned with, is completely different. We have
           already seen, in paragraph 44 above, how it is the international obligations of the state that section 3
           requires to be used in reading and giving effect to legislation. As Lord Nicholls stresses, those
           obligations pre-date the HRA and are not affected in any way by the terms of the HRA. The short point,
           therefore, is that McKerr simply does not address a case formulated, as our case now is formulated, in
           terms of section 3; and, further, that the very strong distinction drawn by the House between rights
           created by the HRA and rights pre-existing in international law goes a good way to reinforcing the
           contention that the date of implementation of the HRA cannot be dispositive in determining whether
           article 2 obligations of the state in international law are potentially available to be taken into account in
           interpreting legislation that bears on those obligations.

     59.   It was however suggested to us that McKerr was relevant to this case in a more indirect way. We have
           seen the caution that is exercised before any legislation is applied retrospectively, a caution that is
           stressed in Wilson in respect of section 3. Should the refusal in McKerr to order an enquiry into a pre-
           HRA death as it were tip the balance in determining whether Parliament can be taken to have intended
           section 3 of that same Act to be deployed in the case of a pre-HRA death? This is not a straightforward
           question, and it is not made any easier for this court by not being addressed at all in any of Middleton;
           Sacker, McKerr, and Wilson\ all of which are binding on us for what they decide. I would however
           venture the following observations.

     60.   First, I see no sign of any view in McKerr that investigation of deaths occurring before 2 October 2000
           was necessarily to be avoided. The case turned more technically on the unavailability of the particular
           remedy sought to promote that end, namely the obligation and correlative right created on that date by
           the HRA. Second, the duty created by section 3 appeals to obligations that were accepted, indeed
           stressed, in McKerr to be binding upon the United Kingdom. And it is a duty that is of overwhelming
           importance and absolute in its nature, as for instance Lord Rodger stressed in Wilson: see paragraph
           48 above. Leaving aside the issue of retrospectivity, there would be no good reason for article 2 not to
           be applied in the present case, and many good reasons why it should be. Third, therefore, are those
           conclusions to be dislodged by the fact that that result cannot be achieved without applying section 3 to
           events that occurred before it was enacted?

     61.   That turns on what are to be taken to have been the intentions of Parliament in formulating section 3.
           Parliament could have drawn section 3 tightly together with the rest of the HRA by providing that the
           interpretative obligation only applied in respect of rights recognised under the HRA. That would have
           concluded this case in favour of the appellants, because then the claim based on section 3 would have
           had to march with the claim based on section 6; which latter McKerr establishes is not available. But
           that is what Parliament did not do. Parliament deliberately took what the speeches in McKerr confirm to
           have been a much more expansive view, by imposing on the courts, by section 3, an obligation to give
           effect to this country's international obligations, and not merely to its domestic obligations as created by
           the HRA. In a case in which, as I have found, there are good reasons for giving section 3’s reliance on



    http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/2005/890.html                                                  24/10/2005
Commissioner o f Police for the Metropolis v Hurst [2005] EWCA Civ 890 (21 July...                 Page 14 o f 16


       international obligations retrospective effect, it would in my view be inconsistent with Parliament's
       intention in drafting section 3 to hold that that conclusion was not available just because the domestic
       rights created by the HRA were not available.

 62.   I would therefore hold that by the operation of section 3 of the HRA section 11 (5)(b)(ii) of the 1988 Act
       is to be read and given effect in a way that is compatible with the United Kingdom’s international duty
       under article 2 of the ECHR. The reading of section 11 thus produced is that formulated by Lord
       Bingham of Cornhill speaking for the Appellate Committee in Middleton. Applying that reading I would
       order the coroner to resume the inquest.

 63.   I am conscious that this conclusion differs from that of the Divisional Court in Pearson v HM Coroner
       [2005] EWHC 833 (Admin), which did hold that the conclusion in McKerr inexorably prevented the
       application of section 3 in the case of a death that occurred before 2 October 2 0 0 0 .1would say no
       more than that it is clear that the Divisional Court did not have the benefit of the detailed argument that
       has been deployed before us; and that for the reasons set out above I am unable to agree with their
       conclusion.

       Disposal

 64.   I would dismiss this appeal, and not disturb the order of the Divisional Court that the coroner should
       resume the inquest. My reasons for so doing are not those of the Divisional Court, but the two separate
       and distinct conclusions set out in paragraphs 31 and 62 above.

       Lord Justice Sedley:

 65.   The requirement of section 3 of the Human Rights Act 1998 to read and give effect to all legislation, so
       far as possible, in a way which is compatible with the rights scheduled to the Act is expressly applied to
       legislation "whenever enacted". If this means that it operates either generally or on the facts of this
       case without limit of time, its effect on ss.11 and 16 of the Coroners Act 1988 is, as is conceded, to
       require the coroner in the present case to implement the state’s positive obligation under article 2 by
       resuming the inquest on Troy Hurst.

 66.   It is the decision of the House of Lords in McKerr which has prompted this appeal and made it
       arguable, in the face of the apparent purpose of s.3, that the Convention rights do not reach a death
       occurring before 2 October 2000. The decision in McKerr, however, did not involve s.3. It was
       concerned with the possibility of applying s.6 to a death occurring before (as it happened, almost two
       decades before) the entry into force of the Human Rights Act. Its essential conclusion was that the
       remedy under s.7(1) for an act made unlawful by s.6(1) was not available because, save as expressly
       provided by s.22(4), the Act was not generally retrospective.

 67.   The situation in McKerr was that the inquest had been formally abandoned in 1994, with the result that
       no proceedings at all were extant. If there was to be a human rights challenge, it had to be a challenge
       to the refusal of the state to open a fresh inquiry into the death. Hence the reliance on s.6 alone. Hence
       too the unspoken but self-evident policy consideration that if the McKerr inquest had to be reopened in
       order to comply with art.2, so would countless others, reaching back indefinitely.

 68.   In the present case, by contrast, the inquest stands adjourned, and the coroner has to decide
       according to law whether to resume it. His obligation to decide is present and inescapable, and the law
       which governs his decision is now required by s.3 to be read through the prism of Convention rights,
       with consequences which are not in dispute. This situation, as it seems to me, bears no element of
       retrospectivity on its face. The latent element of retrospectivity lies in the fact that the inquest is
       concerned with a death that occurred just over four months before the Human Rights Act was due to
       come into effect, and it is upon this single fact that the appeal turns.

 69.   The strongest apparent support for the Commissioner’s contention that this is enough to shut out any
       Convention rights is probably Lord Brown's acceptance at §89-90 of McKerr of the argument that "The
       duty to investigate is ... necessarily linked to the death itself and cannot arise in domestic law save in
       respect of a death occurring at a time when article 2 rights were enforceable under domestic law." One
       sees from §88, however, that the argument had been predicated entirely on the negative domestic
       obligation created by s.6 and enforced through s.7, which was of course not present in domestic law at
       the time of Mr McKerr’s death. It was for that reason that art.2 - the duty to investigate - could not now
       be relied on.




http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/2005/890.html                                                 24/10/2005
Commissioner o f Police for the Metropolis v Hurst [2005] EWCA Civ 890 (21 July...                  Page 15 o f 16


 70.   I do not think, with great respect, that the proposition which I have quoted, or the similar passages in
       the other speeches (§21 per Lord Nicholls, §40, 48 per Lord Steyn, §62, 66 per Lord Hoffmann, §75,
       81 per Lord Rodger), were intended to deal with more than the situation before the House and others
       which might replicate it. The present case does not replicate it. Because it concerns a post-October
       2000 statutory decision-making process, it differs importantly from McKerr. Lord Nicholls at §28 of
       McKerr noted this exact distinction:

                     "In these proceedings Mr McKerr is not challenging any decision of the
                     Armagh coroner. ... Nor is Mr McKerr asking the House to interpret the
                     statutory provisions relating to coroners in a way which would make them
                     compliant with the investigative requirements of article 2."

              Lord Hope in Wilson (below) at §95 made the same point from the opposite perspective:

                     "...a person who claims that a court or tribunal has failed to fulfil the
                     interpretative obligation laid down by s.3(1) has no need to go to s.7(1)(a)
                     for his remedy."

 71.   Lord Nicholls in McKerr (§25) was critical of the Divisional Court in the present case for having lost
       sight of the distinction between rights arising under the Convention and rights created by the Human
       Rights Act by reference to it. I hope that the foregoing reasoning respects the distinction, and that in
       doing so it respects what Lord Nicholls subsequently said in Ghaidan v Godin-Mendoza [20041 UKHL
       30, §23: that the compatibility of legislation with the Convention rights falls to be assessed under the
       Human Rights Act "when the issue arises for determination": that is, in my understanding, now.

 72. If I am right so far, there is no true issue of retrospectivity: s.3 has since 2 October 2000 required
      coroners' decisions, including the one we are considering, to be Convention-compliant except where
     the contrary is dictated by or under statute. But if I am wrong, I do not consider that such retrospectivity
      as is involved in the respondent's case is sufficient to defeat it.

 73. Retrospectivity is not a simple or clear-cut concept. The problems it throws up are compounded by the
     fact that in this single respect, and perhaps deliberately in view of the drafter's wise refusal to attempt
     to solve all potential problems, this elegant piece of legislation leaves major questions of retrospectivity
     unanswered save in the instance covered by s.22(4) - and, I would respectfully add, in the applicability
     of s.3 to all legislation "whenever enacted". But, as Lord Nicholls remarked in McKerr (§ 16), the
     proposition that the Human Rights Act is otherwise not retrospective raises almost as many questions
     as it answers. Past events, as he pointed out, and as the present case illustrates, have continuing
     effects.

 74.   It is not in McKerr but in Wilson [20031 UKHL 40 that this arguably retroactive impact of s.3 of the
       Human Rights Act is addressed. Wilson was a case where "the agreement was made pre-Act, and the
       Court of Appeal was interpreting the legislation post-Act" (§16), putting it on a broad par with the
       present case. The House dealt with the potential unfairness of doctrinally letting s.3 operate in such a
       situation by recognising that, although the section on its face has no limitation of time, it is capable of
       working injustice if indiscriminately applied to past events. The common law afforded a solution in the
       principle of construction that the more unfair it is to let a statute reach back in time, the more resistant
       the court must be to letting it do so: see Lord Nicholls at §20-22, Lord Hope at §98-99, Lord Hobhouse
       at §128; Lord Rodger passim; cf Lord Scott at §153, 160-161.

 75.   I respectfully agree with Buxton LJ that one can discern in the present case almost none of the features
       which ordinarily bring the principle of resistance to retrospectivity into play. We are concerned not with
       a step which will undo or undermine vested rights or settled interests, but with a decision which, if
       made in conformity with art. 2, will reopen and reconfigure a public inquiry which would otherwise be
       abandoned. I do not doubt that this will be stressful for some of the officers and officials involved, the
       more so because of the lapse of time, and possibly costly for the authorities, but I cannot accept that
       this is capable of defeating an obligation resting upon the state, and since 2 October 2000 justiciable in
       domestic law, to hold a proper inquiry into Mr Hurst's death.

 76.   For these reasons, as well as for those set out by Buxton LJ, I would dismiss this appeal.

       Sir Martin Nourse:




http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/2005/890.html                                                  24/10/2005
Commissioner o f Police for the Metropolis v Hurst [2005] EWCA Civ 890 (21 July...              Page 16 o f 16


  77.    I have had the advantage of reading in draft the judgments of Lords Justices Buxton and Sedley. I
         agree with them and cannot usefully add anything of my own.


BAILII: Copyright Policy | Disclaimers | Privacy Policy | Feedback | Donate to BAILII
URL: http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/2005/890.html




http://www.bailii.org/ew/cases/EWCA/Civ/2005/890.html                                              24/10/2005
