                                             THE LEGAL SECRETARIAT TO THE LAW OFFICERS

                                                         ATTORNEY GENERAL'S CHAMBERS

                                                                   9 BUCKINGHAM GATE

                                                                      LONDON SW1E 6JP
General enquiries 0 7 1 -8 2 8 7155
D irect line        0 7 1 -8 2 8      1721




        Mr John Glover.                                     Our ref: INQ/4/92



                                                                  11 July 1994



        Dear Mr Glover,

        The Attorney General has asked me to thank you for ydur letter
        of 9 June 1994 and to reply.      He once again expresses his
        sincere condolences at your tragic loss.

        It is not clear from your letter whether you are inviting the
        Attorney General to reconsider his decision not to authorise an
        application to the High Court under section 13 of the Coroners
        Act 1988 seeking a direction that there be a fresh inquest or you
        are inviting the Attorney General to set up some other form of
        independent inquiry.      The latter is not a matter for the
        Attorney General.    It was the Home Secretary who appointed Sir
        Peter Taylor (as he then was, now the Lord Chief Justice) to
        conduct the original public inquiry.   Any question of a further
        independent inquiry would also be a matter for the Home
        Secretary.

        As to an application for a fresh inquest, the Attorney General
        declined in 1992     to authorise   anapplication to the High Court
        because he   had concluded that it would have no reasonable
        prospect of establishing that it was necessary or desirable in
        the interests of justice for a fresh inquest to be held.  He has
        since seen the judgment of Lord Justice McCowan when the
        Divisional Court refused an application for judicial review
        relating to the inquest.     The Divisional Court took the same
        view as the Attorney General on the central issues.          The
        Divisional Court also appears to have had before it all the
        material referred to in your letter including that which
        specifically related to law i.e. the further statement from the
        South Yorkshire Police and the comments of Dr Ian West.      The
        Divisional Cojurt made it clear that neither affected its
        unfavourable view of the merits of the case.
It is clear from that judgment that only the most cogent and
persuasive fresh arguments would now be likely to result in an
order by the High Court that there should be a fresh inquest.
Moreover, the court would not have regard to the "Cook Report"
itself but would wish to see the underlying evidence carefully
marshalled and in proper form.    The position of the Attorney
General on this issue is therefore that he does not at present
believe there is any basis for an application to the High Court
and would not encourage you to embark upon a course likely to
prove unfruitful.  He does however remain willing, and it is his
duty, objectively to consider any further application under
section 13 supported by evidence in proper and admissible form.

I am sorry that I cannot be of more assistance.

Yours sincerely,




S. J. WOOLER
