                     The City of Liverpool
                     C hief Executive
                     Peter Bounds
                     PO Box 88, Municipal Buildings, Dale Street, Liverpool L69 2DH.
                     Tel: 051 -225 2334/5 Fax: 051 -225 2924




Our Ref:   CE/AA/LF
Date:      28 June 1994
                                                                            (TUTtO—     1

                                                                                65585

Rt. Hon Sir Nicholas Lyall Q.C.           M.P.
Attorney General
9 Buckingham Gate
London
SW1E 6JP




Dear Sir Nicholas,

Re:   Hillsborough Disaster


I understand that many local M.P.s have written to you in relation
to a recent television documentary "The Cook Report" concerning
the Hillsborough disaster. As a result of that programme an
extraordinary meeting of the City Council was held on 24th June.
I enclose for your consideration a copy of the minutes of that
meeting.   In particular, I would draw your attention to paragraph
Al and paragraph C of the Motion detailed therein.

In accordance with the terms of the Motion which was carried
unanimously, I would request that a cross party delegation of City
Councillors with the support of Merseyside M.P.s meet with you in
order to press the Council's case for an independent inquiry. It
would be of great benefit to all concerned if the meeting could be
held within the next seven days.

I look forward to hearing from you in respect of a suitable date
for the meeting as a matter or urgency.


Yours sincerely,




CHIEF EXECUTIVE
t




    *H


                           CITY OF LIVERPOOL



                             24th June,   1994



         At an Extraordinary Meeting of the City Council held

    on 24th June, 1994 at 3.00 p.m. in the Town Hall.




    al/cttee/cc/finalmin/Z240694
                                                       24th June,    1994

                                     - 47 -

*p                              PRESENT

                            THE LORD MAYOR
                      (Councillor Roger Johnston)

      COUNCILLORS: Alderson, Allen, Anderson, Bann, Ben-Tovim,
      Vera Best, Bolland, Dawn Booth, Bostock, Brennan,   Bullock,
      Cardwell, Carrick, Chinn, M.B.E., Margaret Clarke,   Janet
      Clein, Paul Clein, Flora Clucas, Concepcion, Rosemary
      Cooper, Coventry, Coyne, Curtis, Dean, Eileen Devaney, Joe
      Devaney, Downham, Ellison, Marilyn Fielding, Fitzsimmons,
      Beatrice Fraenkel, Dorothy Gavin, Gibbons,     Hackett,
      Hanratty, Ian Harvey, Phillip Harvey, Herrity,
      Ann Hines, Mary Johnston, Lady Doreen Jones, Ann Keenan,
      Kenny, Frances Kidd, Knibb, Joan Lang, Joe Lang,
      Petrona Lashley, Livingston, Jacqueline McCarthy, McCauley,
      Marie McGiveron, Pauline McKibbin, Millea, Murphy, Nelson,
      Sarah Norman, Owen, Phillips, Prendergast, Quinn, Radford,
      Richard Roberts, Scott, Smith, Spriggs, Stanley, Stewart,
      Storey, O.B.E., Elizabeth Thomas, Tyrer, and Woodruff.



*N    Apologies for absence were submitted from Councillors
      J. Backhouse, E.M. Clein, C. Curry, Julie Gosling,
      Theresa Griffin, Cathy Hancox, R. Kemp, L. Hughes, Elaine
      Kinahan, R. Lancaster, Erica Plant, H. Rimmer C.B.E. and
      P. Tyrrell.



                         COUNCIL MINUTES

      The minutes of the Annual Meeting of the City Council held
      on the 17th May, 1994 were submitted and signed by the Lord
      May or .

                         HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

      By permission of the Council Ms. Sheila Colman, a
      researcher who has worked extensively with families
      affected by the Hillsborough tragedy and Phil Hammond,
      Secretary of the Hillsborough Families Support Group
      addressed the meeting.



      Motion by Councillor J. Spriggs,
           seconded by Councillor Peter Millea,




     al/cttee/cc/finalmin/Z24 0694
•   .
        24th June,   1994

                                        - 48 -

          That -

          (A) In view of the disturbing evidence first disclosed by
              the Hillsborough Disaster Working Party in February
              1992 and referred to in the "Cook Report" Television
              Programme broadcast on Independent Television on 2nd
              June, 1994, concerning the circumstances surrounding
              the deaths of several of the victims of the
              Hillsborough disaster, and particularly in relation to
              the death there of Kevin Williams this City Council -

              (1) Demands that the Attorney General Orders a fresh
                  and scrupulously independent inquiry to investigate
                  this evidence and related matters as soon as
                  possible;

              (2) Calls on:-

                       (i) The City's M.P.'s in particular;

                     (ii)   Any other M.P.'s whose constituents were
                            directly affected by this disaster;

                     (iii) The Home Affairs Spokespersons of the Labour
                           and Liberal Democrat Parties; and

                      (iv) The Association of Metropolitan Authorities;

                     to fully support this demand.

               (3) Calls on the Trustees of the Hillsborough Disaster
                   Trust Fund, which was set up by the City Council,
                   to meet with the Chair and Opposition Spokesperson
                   of the Hillsborough Disaster Working Party to
                   investigate the possibility of those funds
                   remaining in the Trust Fund being used to help
                   finance the fight of the victims families to
                   establish the truth of exactly what did happen at
                   Hillsborough on April 15th 1989; and

           (B) This Council deplores recent news coverage in the
               United States, and in particular the Broadcast by CBS
               News on 31st May, 1994, which in reporting on
               preparations for the World Cup, has implied that the
               Hillsborough Disaster was caused by Hooligan behaviour.

          Amendment by Councillor G. Knibb,
              duly seconded,

          That the Motion be varied by the addition of the following
          paragraph:-

               (C) A cross party delegation lobby Westminster with the
                   support of Merseyside M.P.'s to meet with the
                   Attorney General and the Home Secretary to press
                   for an inquiry.


        al/cttee/cc/finalmin/Z240694
*                                                     24th June,   1994

                                   - 49 -



     During the course of the debate the Amendment was accepted
     and became the Substantive Motion.

     The Substantive Motion was carried unanimously and it was
     resolved accordingly.


     The Council then rose.




    al/cttee/cc/finalmin/Z240694
