ATTORNEY GENERAL                                             cc:    Private Office



THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

Please see (Flag A) a letter from th e Home Secretary to yourself outlining h is
view th a t public concern about th e H illsborough stadium d isaster will not be
allayed w ith an assu ran ce from th e Home Office (or any other public body) th a t
there is no new evidence. He considers th a t th e issu e should be th e subject
of an independent exam ination of alleged new evidence w ith a view to
determ ining w hether any further steps m ay be justified.

The present position is th a t there is no pending application to LSLO u n d er
Section 13 of th e Coroners Act 1988. We have tak en th e view th a t none of th e
alleged fresh m aterial would have m aterially affected th e consideration of th e
applications w hich were m ade having regard to th e basis on w hich they were
m ade. So far as th e DPP is concerned, th e fu rth e r "new evidence" does not
ju stify asking th e Chief Constable of South Y orkshire Police to initiate a fu rth er
crim inal investigation. She h as not yet announced th a t decision because it will
 need to be qualified, assum ing th a t th e Home Secretary announces some form
 of fu rth er enquiry, by reference to th e fact th a t th e issue will be fu rth er
 considered in th e light of any fresh evidence emerging.

Both th e CPS an d LSLO have su b stan tial difficulty w ith th e proposed Term s
of Reference. The difficulty is th a t in each case th e Term s of Reference invite
not m erely a fact finding exercise b u t for th e public enquiry to express a view
as to w hether grounds exist for "considering" a n application to th e High C ourt
or prosecution. The difficulty is th a t th e subtlety of th e wording "to consider
w hether su ch steps should be taken" will be lost. The fact th a t a public
enquiry refers th e m atter back to th e DPP or yourself w ith a view to crim inal
proceedings/application to quash th e inquest verdict, will raise expectations
to a point w hich m ight effectively m ake it im possible to decline. In th e case of
prosecution, th e views expressed by th e public enquiry could them selves be
dam aging to potential defendants.

All th is points to Term s of Reference w hich distinguish betw een th e question
relating to a public enquiry - w here a recom m endation would be justifiable -
an d th e issu es relating to p ro secution/inquest w here th e fu rth er exam ination
ought to be confined to ascertaining w hether th ere is any fresh evidence w hich
h a s not previously been considered by th e D PP/A ttorney G eneral as
appropriate. It would then be for th e D PP/yourself to consider w hat, if any,
step s needed to be taken.


SW /0906/fi
Please see a draft letter to th e Home Secretary attached opposite, together w ith
suggested revised Term s of Reference.




S J WOOLER
9 J u n e 1997




 S W /0906/6
0 9 ■■ 015 - 9 7   09:22   FAX 0171 219 4711                                                   --   ATTORNEY GENERAL           E jd iil   iio2



                            F r o m T h e R j g h t H o n o u r a b l e T h e L o r d I r v in e o f L a ir g




                                                                                                    H o u s e of L o r d s .

                                                                                                         L o n d o n s w i a opw




          The Right Honourable Jack Straw MP
          Secretary o f State for the Home Department
          H om e Office
          50 Queen Anne's Gate
          London S W 1 H 9 A T

                                                                                                                k   June 19 ° 7




                                  THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

           I have seen your Private Secretary’s letter to my Private Secretary o f 29 May 1997 about the
           possibility that you may wish to establish some form o f further judicial examination o f the
           Hillsborough Stadium disaster in 1989. I agree in principle that, if you do decidc to'proceed in
           that way, it would be a suitable task for a High Court Judge.

           I consider that in terms both o f his ability and standing. Mr Justice Collins would be well abic
           to carry out this task. However, m y own feeling, and my advice, is that the fact that Collins J
           was Counsel to the Taylor Inquiry makes it preferable for the task to be given to another
           Judge, almost certainly from a Q ueen’s Bench Division background.

           There is, however, a more fundamental point. Although the terms o f reference do not in any
           way suggest that ihe Inquiry may result in any criticism or questioning o f his findings in iJv
           Taylor Report, that could arise or be thought to have arisen. It is therefore my view, and the
           view' o f the Lord Chief Justice, that it would be appropriate for this task to be entrusted to a
           senior Lord Justice o f the Court o f Appeal.

           I took the view after our discussion about this after Cabinet yesterday, that the quickest wav
           through was for me to have a direct word with the Lord Chief Justice. He and I agree that
           Lord Justice Stuart-Srmth is the best choice. He is 69 and approaching retirement and in tiri-i
           class intellectual order. He also has the requisite experience; his public presence is impressive:
           and if the Inquiry were to result in a Public Inquiry (which 1 appreciate may well be imlikelv i.
           it will be no disadvantage for him to carry on as Chairman o f that Public Inquirv in retirement.
           I believe that he may become Treasurer o f Gray’s Inn next year but that merely adds in his
           status and in no way diminishes his capacity to undertake the             task. I therefore stronyK
           recommend him to you, with the support o f the Lord Chief Justice.
0 9 ( 1 6 - ' f)7   09:22   FAX 0171 219 4711                                             ATTORNEY GENERAL   ® m.)




          The Lord C hief Justice is talcing steps to confirm that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith will be
          willing to accept this task but is reasonably confident that he will be. It would be helpful if
          you could let me know as soon as possible;


                    (a) whether you wish Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to undertake this task and,

                    (b) your decision on whether tirere is to be another judicial examination o f
                    Hillsborough


          In v iew o f your letter o f 5 June, I am copying this letter to John Morris.


                                                          Yours           t
0 5 /0 6 /9 7         0 9 :1 6   THE HOME S E ^ E W f r S - ’SfSF ICE ■» ATTORNEY GEN            NO. 286




  #                itcier.

                                                                      >UEEN ANNE’S GATE LONDON SWlH 9AT




                The Rt Hon John Morris QC MP
                The Attorney General
                70 Whitehall
                London
                SW 1A 2 AS




                THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

                As you know, I have been considering the representations which have been
                made about the Hillsborough Stadium disaster on 15 April 1989. The disaster
                was of course fully investigated by the late Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor, but
                concern has been raised about a number of features of the case and material
                considered by some to represent new evidence has been brought to our
                attention. These and related matters were raised in the Granada Television
                documentary drama "Hillsborough’' last December.

                My officials have thoroughly examined the alleged new evidence and the
                allegations made in the Granada television programme and have concluded that
                there are no grounds for establishing a new public enquiry. The material has
                also been considered by the Attorney General's Office and the DPP's Office.
                None of those who have examined the material consider that there is evidence
                to justify a new public enquiry, a re-opening of the inquest, or the prosecution of
                individuals. But I am certain that continuing public concern will not be allayed
                with a reassurance from the Home Office that there is no new evidence. I
                therefore propose that there should be an independent examination of the
                alleged new evidence by a senior legal figure - a respected judge (serving or
                recently retired), or perhaps a senior Counsel. It will be important to ensure that
                whoever undertakes the task is sufficiently senior and respected to command
                public confidence. My personal preference would be for a judge. The proposed
                terms of reference are:
0 5 /0 6 / 9 ?        0 9 :1 6      THE HOME SECRETARY’ S OFFICE + ATTORNEY GEN                      NO. 2 36   CP02




                 "To carry out an independent examination and advise whether there is new
                 evidence relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989
                 which provides sufficient grounds for:

                       i.        the Secretary of State for the Home Department to establish a
                                  further public inquiry;

                       ii.       the Attorney-Generai to consider applying to the High Court under
                                  Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 for another inquest;

                       iti.      The Director of Public Prosecutions to consider bringing criminal
                                 charges against any person;

                       iv.       The relevant Chief Police Officer to consider taking disciplinary
                                  action against any police officer.

                 Or whether there is any other action which should be taken in the public
                 interest.'

                 There wili neea to be a public announcement of the establishment of the
                 independent examination. This will require careful handling. I am sure that the
                 announcement will have to be made in the House. But I shall want to make sure
                 that the ground is properly prepared before the announcem ent is made with
                 those outside Government with a close interest in the Hillsborough disaster
                 including the Hillsborough Family Support Group.

                 I should be grateful for the Lord Chancellor's advice on a suitable figure to lead
                 the independent examination, and for your comments and those of copy
                 recipients on the proposed terms of reference by 12 June.

                 Copies of this letxer go to the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, the
                 Lord Chancellor, the President of the Council, the Minister Without Portfolio, the
                 Secretary of State for National Heritage, the Director of Public Prosecutions and
                 Sir Robin Butler.




                                                       JACK STRAW
»
DRAFT LETTER FROM THE ATTORNEY GENERAL TO:

The Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
Secretary of State for the Home Department
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
LONDON SW1H9AT

       June 1997




THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER


Thank you for your letter of 5 June 1997 outlining the considerations which
    have led you to conclude that we should initiate an independent examination
of the alleged new evidence because this appears to be the only way to allay
public concern.


    I have no difficulty in principle with your approach. There undoubtedly
remains deep routed dissatisfaction amongst the relatives of those who died as
well as some of the survivors and their relatives about the manner in which the
public authorities conducted themselves at the material time. They have
manifested themselves in calls for official action which, even if acceded to.
would in all probability not then address the concerns. For example, a further
inquest - which can only be ordered by the High Court - would have to
    consider the statutory issues prescribed by the Coroners Act 1988 and could
    not properly become a wide ranging or generalised enquiiy.




AG /()!)()« / 1
#


    Against this background. I do have difficulty with the draft Terms of Reference.
    They do not distinguish adequately between the question of a further public
    enquiry which is largely a matter of discretion and judgment and the question
    of a further inquest or possible prosecution. In relation to these, we start from
    a position where there is nothing to suggest that the Director of Public
    Prosecutions and my predecessor have failed properly to consider, in
    accordance with the relevant tests, all the evidence which has been made
    available to them. The sole issue therefore in relation to questions about
    further in quests or prosecution is whether there is any evidence which has
    not already been considered. Moreover, consideration of that further evidence
    would be a matter for the DPP or myself as appropriate. It would in my view
    be wrong for a public enquiry to express a view, for example, on possible
    criminal charges.


    In these circumstances. I enclose a suggested revised wording for the Terms
    of Reference. If you are intending to proceed as envisaged. I would be content
    for Lord Justice Stewart Smith to be appointed.
^^SUGGESTED TERMS OF REFERENCE


  To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
  Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:


  (a)          to the inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or


  (b)           to the Director of Public Prosecution or the Attorney General for the
               purpose of discharging their respective statutory responsibilities;


  (c)          to the chief officer of the South Yorkshire Police in relation to police
               discipline matter;


  and in relation to (a) above to advise whether any evidence not previously
  available is of such significance as to justify establishment of a further public
  inquiry and, in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to their attention any evidence
  not previously considered by them which may be relevant to their respective
  duties.




  S W /0 9 0 fi/5
