NOTE OF A MEETING BETWEEN GEORGE HOWARTH MP AND THE ATTORNEY
GENERAL, 17 DECEMBER HOUSE OF COMMONS

Those p resen t were:               The A ttorney General
                                    George Howarth MP
                                    Michael Irvine MP
                                    Stephen Parkinson



Mr Howarth explained th at he had received representations from a large number
of families b u t he was concerned in p articu lar with the case of Mr and Mr& J u l i e s .
They had lost th e ir son b u t, tragically, had also lost another son the year before
in an industrial accident.

T heir feeling was th at the whole process following the d isaster had been
pro tracted . He handed the A ttorney General a timetable of events and a le tte r
th at had been given to him b y the Hillsborough Steering Committee. These
documents dem onstrated how fru stra tin g the whole process had been fo r families
of the relatives th at had died.

Some relatives wanted to draw a veil over the whole trag ed y and do th e ir b est to
fo rg et, b u t not Mrs Joynes. She made daily trip s to the in q u est. The family was
not without means b u t felt nevertheless th at the odds were against them given
th at each interested group was separatly rep resen ted . They themselves had
made a £2,000 contribution to a legal fund, as had some fo rty other families.

Four points caused them p articu lar concern :

1.     They felt th at the many hearings conducted b y the coroner had been a
       farce. In each case alcohol levels had been given fo r those th at had died
       b u t not of any fo r the su rv iv o rs. This has been extrem ely d istressin g .
2.    It was felt th at the Chief Constable of South Y orkshire should not have had
      a discretion as to who to appoint to conduct the inquiry into his police
      fo rce.

3.    It was felt th at the im partiality of Mr Popper (the coroner) was
      questionable: he was indirectly employed by Sheffield City Council.

4.    There was disappointment with the establishm ent. The A ttorney General
      had been criticised, b u t prim arily it was felt th at the DPP had not lived up
      to expectations. There was an element of fru stratio n and dissatisfaction.

The A ttorney General stated th at all these concerns were understandable. He
was well aware of the feelings of bereaved people, having received now a number
of representations in respect of allegedly unduly lenient sentences. People who
suffer bereavem ent felt strong emotions. He told Mr Howarth th at he could tell
his constituents the following :

1.    That he had had a meeting with the A ttorney General and made him aware
      of his constituents concerns.

2.    That he himself was an MP and understood th eir emotions which were human
      and natural.

3.    That there was a distinction between an inquest and criminal proceedings.
      Coroners are independent; they are indeed a law unto them selves. The
      timetable fo r proceedings has the feature th at criminal proceedings have
      to take p rio rity , and because an inquest could be prejudiced by criminal
      proceedings the DPP always asks a coroner to adjourn an inquest once
      formal evidence of identification has been taken until the DPP has taken a
      decision. The purpose of an inquest is to establish how why and when a
      person met his death. Mr Howath's constituents should not suppose th at
          l A ^ U t-JL-
      the InquiFy was the only in quest. The Taylor rep o rt had been extrem ely
       thorough and did not pull any punches.

For the fu tu re , his constituents should know th at the Taylor rep o rt had led to
recommendations which would be implemented.

The A ttorney General then went on to explain the role of the DPP in relation to
the criminal law. He was obliged to follow the Code for Crown Prosecutors which
provides th at before proceedings may be begun or continued th ere has to be a
realistic prospect of a conviction. Two offences were relevant in this context (1)
m anslaughter - corporate/individual; (2) culpable misfeasance.

The DPP had received the joint opinion of two senior b a rris te rs . T heir conclusion
had been th at th ere was insufficient evidence to ju stify proceedings. It had to
be shown th at th ere was a risk of serious injury and th a t the potential defendant
had not given thought to such risk , o r, recognising th at th ere was some risk
nevertheless went on to take i t . That second limb shows th a t th ere has to be such
a heavy degree of negligence as to constitute reck lessn ess.

H ere, Chief Superintendent Duckenfield was the most obvious candidate for a
prosecution. Lord Justice Taylor described his decision not to close off the
tunnel as a blunder of the firs t m agnitude. But a CPS lawyer had visited the
ground and seen the tunnel. This dips down revealing the green of the field.
This must have been a magnet to su p p o rters. The A ttorney General explained
th at the evidence available to the DPP did not go near to justifying a prosecution.
Mr Duckenfield did his incompetent b e st, b u t he did not see a risk .

Mr Howarth stated th at Mr Eddie Longden had been outside the ground, and was
th ru st into a corner. It was his view th at if the gate had not been opened he
Would have been killed.

In conclusion the A ttorney stated th at the DPP had to take account of his own
Code of Practice. The opinion of counsel supported his own analysis th a t th ere
was insufficient evidence to justify a prosecution. He could not meet th e desires
of Mr Howarth’s constituents without breaching his own d u ty . It was rig h t th at
th ere should be a severe te s t before someone became criminally liable. A v ery
high degree of carelessness was required.

He read out the conclusions of counsel and also showed Mr Howarth a copy of a
le tte r th at he had sen t to the Hillsborough Support Group. He asked Stephen
Parkinson to send Mr Howarth a copy of the le tte r which was done.
                                                                  CORONERS ACT 1988 s 13                    567



  fm (2) contain.provisions formerly in the Coroners (Amendment) Act 1926 s i 5(1). Sub-s (3)
  8'   /   r    jli    , i k/2'1 of that Act (as repealed in part by the Coroners Act 1980, s 1, Sch 2).
  K   n S aj S            rm SdlK .^ce              to an in v e st part of which is held with a jury; see

      for sum m oning another jury. As to the summoning o f juries, etc, see s 8(2) ante and the
 fsRules 1984, SI 1984/552, rr 44-53, Sch 4, Forms 3-5.

                                       Inquests: special cases

 rder to hold inquest
   This section applies w here, on an application by o r under the authority o f the
  ley-General, the H igh C o u rt is satisfied as respects a coroner ( the coroner
  tied”) either—
   (a) that he refuses or neglects to hold an inquest which ought to beheld; or
   (b) where an inquest has been held by him , that (whether by reason o f frau ,
        rejection o f evidence, irregularity o f proceedings, insufficiency o f inquiry the
        discovery o f new facts or evidence or otherwise) it is necessary or desirable in
I      the interests o f justice that another inquest should be held.
I The High Court may—
I (a) order an inquest or, as the case m ay be, another inquest to be held into the
|    death either—
       (i) by the coroner concerned; o r                    . . . .
      (ii) by the coroner for another district in the same administrative area,
  (b) order the coroner concerned to pay such costs o f and incidental to the
      application as to the court m ay appear ju s t; and
  (c) where an inquest has been held, quash the inquisition on that inquest.
5) In relation to an inquest held under subsection (2) (a) (ii) above, the coroner by
jm it is held shall be treated for the purposes o f this A ct as if he w ere the coroner for
district o f the coroner concerned.

TES
Jb-S (1) contains provisions formerly in the Coroners Act 1887, s 6(1), and the Coroners (Amendment)
  926      t u b - s 2 ) contains provisions formerly in s 6(1), (2) of the 1887 Act (as repealed in part, in the
of s 6(2), by^he Local Government Act 1972, s 272(1), Sch 30). Sub-s (3) contains provisions formerly
5(2} of the 1887 Act (as repealed in part as noted above).                                     .  ...
>yor under the authority o f the A ttorney-G eneral. As to the procedure when it is sought to quash
iquisition on certiorari and otherwise than by authority of the Attorney General, see R v Dtrectors of
a Western Rlv Co (1888) 20 QBD 410,52 JP 111.                                                         ,    ...    .
he court is not entitled to use the wide powers contained in this section to quash a coroner s verdict if the
jmev General has refused to make or authorise the application. An inquest is a court, not a tribunal
efore the wide supervisory powers over statutory tribunals are not available and consequently the court
onty orderjudiciaf review £ a n inquest on the g r o u n d s ^ error on the face                         ^     °r * ,
ss or refusal of jurisdiction; see R v Surrey C o r o n e r , e x p C a m p f c W / [1982] QB 6614 982]2 AU ER 545,
 followed in R v Greater Manchester Coroner, exp Tal [1985] QB 67, [1984] 3 All E                               . ,
 " c o u r t ’s power to order judicial review was extended to review of an error of law committed

I f r e r t ^ c ^ t h i f ^ i o r o f the Attorney General may be discharged by the Solicitor General; see the
v Officers Act 1944, s 1, Vol 10, title Constitutional Law (Pt 4).
te fiu ^ o /n e g U c ts .n^person who is unable to do something or has a r e a s o n a b k e x c is e n° l      *
not be said to neglect or refuse to do it; cf, in particular, Re London antTParts Banking Corpn (1875) LR 19
X u M n o l d Gas Co and Richmond (Surrey) Corpn [1893] 1 QB 56 ;                                        o l U9261
351; Re Edwards, Lloyd v Boyes [1910] 1 Ch 541; and Re Qutnttn Dick, Lord Cloncurry v Fenton 11926J

>taoveCT o f new fccts*or evidence. For relevant cases, see R v D ivine,exp          [193()] 2 KB 29,
30] All ER Rep 302, and R v Huntbach, ex p Lockley [1944] KB 606, [1944] 2 All ER 453.
2 t t u h d i e i ^ ^ t i o ^ F o r 'r ^ O T s f o r 3 quashing an inquisition, see 9 Halsbury’s Laws (4th edn) paras
