                                                T H E LEGAL SECRETARIAT TO TH E LAW OFFICERS

                                                             ATTORNEY GENERAL'S CHAMBERS

                                                                        9 BUCKINGHAM GATE

General enquiries 0 1 7 1 -8 2 8 715 5
                                                                           LONDON SW1E 6JP
Oirect line         0 1 7 1 -8 2 8



       Paul Pugh Esq
       Head of Operational Policing Policy Unit
       Room 539
       Home Office
       50 Queen Anne’s Gate
       LONDON SW1H 9AT

        19 June 1997




        HILLSBOROUGH
        You kindly copied to this office an initial draft of the oral statement which
        might be made by the Home Secretary about the Hillsborough case.

        I have discussed the draft with Dru Sharpling because of the CPS interest. We
        are broadly content. I would suggest an additional point being made at
        paragraph 11 and paragraph 16 onwards needs revision to take account of the
        slightly changed approach to the Terms of Reference. I should mention that
        we have informed the Home Secretary’s office that the Attorney General is
        content with the proposal contained in the Home Secretary’s letter of 16 June.
        The Attorney General is not intending to respond to that letter.

        For convenience, I enclose a retyped version of paragraph 16 onwards with our
        proposed amendments in bold type.

        A copy of this letter goes to Dru Sharpling. I leave copying to Home Office
        colleagues to your discretion.

               \0 ^          c~>




        S J WOOLER


        S W / 10 06/ 1
    *
$




        SUGGESTED ADDITIONAL SENTENCE FOR PARAGRAPH 11:


        At the end add:


                   "The court also expressed strong doubts as to whether a further inquest,
                   if ordered, would result in anything further being learned and observed
                   that the process would be a very harrowing one."




        SW /l!«)fi/l
#


16.        I have not so far received any evidence which would lead me to conclude
that a new public inquiry should be established. Similarly, the Director of
Public Prosecutions considers that none of the material which has been made
available would justify fresh criminal investigations. The Attorney General
takes the view on the material so far presented to him that an application
to the High Court for a new inquest would not have any realistic prospect
of succeeding.


17.        However, I want to ensure that no matter of significance is overlooked
and that we do not come to a conclusion without a full and independent
examination of the evidence.


18.       The Attorney General, the Director of Public Prosecutions and I have
therefore agreed that there should be an independent scrutiny to ascertain
whether there now exists any evidence which was not previously available
relating to the disaster. We are therefore appointing Lord Justice Stuart -
Smith, a senior Lord Justice of the Court of Appeal for that purpose. His full
terms of reference are:


19.       We have asked Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to examine all the written and
other evidence which has been submitted. He will also consider any further
material which interested parties wish to submit. There will be an opportunity
for interested parties to make representations to him if he considers that
necessary to enable him to form a view. His task will be twofold: first to
provide me with advice on the basis of his independent consideration of the
evidence whether any evidence not previously available is of such
significance as to justify establishment of a further public inquiry. This
will not itself be a Public Inquiry. However, I undertake to make public the
advice which he gives. Secondly, he will identify for the Attorney General

SW /l!«)fi/l
4


and the DPP any evidence which might be relevant to their decisions
which has not previously been considered.


20.         I hope that this examination will enable us to establish conclusively that
no material evidence has been overlooked in establishing the causes of the
disaster.




S W / l ‘HW/1
