                             DEPARTMENT OF FORENSIC MEDICINE
                                                         GUY'S HOSPITAL
                                                      (UNIVERSITY OF LONDON)

   Dr. I.E. WEST. M.B.. CTxB.. F R C.I'ith.. D M J.                        UNITED MEDICAL AND DENTAL SCHOOLS
   Dr, R T. SHEPHERD B.Sc.. M £ .. B S.. M R C.P«h.. D M.i.                GUY’S AND ST. THOMAS'S HOSPITAL
   Direct Tekphanc Line 071 -107 0378 j 071 -403 11IS)                     LONDON BRIDGE. SEl 9RT
   (F*x: 071-403 7292)                                                     TELEPHONE: 071-955 5000 Ext: 3118/3119




    SCO:21/92/IEW                                                                       20th August 1992


    I have studied the papers that you have submitted to me regarding the
    tragic deaths of these young people.       They include the post mortem
    reports on Paul Carlisle, Gary Church, Ian Glover, Richard Jones, Michael
    David Kelly, Peter Tootle, Kevin Daniel Williams and Philip Hammond.    I
    have also studied the relevant extract from the inquest, the overview
    prepared by Professor Usher, the report prepared by Dr. Burns and the
    grounds on which applications are to be made to set aside the original
    inquest.

    I have experience of a substantial number of deaths from traumatic
    asphyxia, including victims of the claphaK Rail distaster and explosion
    at the Grand Hotel, Brighton.

   It is clear from post mortem appearances that we. are dealing with two
   different patterns of injury, namely a number of victims who shewed the
   classic appearances of traumatic aspjhyxia.and other where ths’ classic
   signs of traumatic asphyxia       were absent or slight.   The difference is,
   I think, relevant in respect of the precise.mechanism by vhich ench
   individual died.   It may v/eli be that soiae confusion has developed over
   the use of the terra traumatic asphyxia..

      In the classic sense traumatic asphyxia is taken to imply injuries caused
^ A by the application of mechanical pressure to the chest and, in sowe
.— ' instances, the abdomen, so that death results from asphyxiation-         The
  f mechanism of asphyxiation in the classic case is thought to be twofold.
  V^First there is a mechanical impedence of the movement of the chest wall
     and diaphragm, thereby severely restricting inspiratory        respix.at.ory
     movements. The second mechanism and one which accounts for the most
        rising findings found in cases of traumatic asphyxiqa is cotnpr^ssion
   fP*. the chest, and: abdomen resulting in direct compression over         the
     superior vena cava thereby causing a sudden and dramatic rise \v. the
     treasure within the superior vena cava resulting in engorgement o f the
     blood vessels in the head and neck.     it is this displacement, of blood
     into the superior vena cava and the failure to drain blood from the
     superior vena cava which accounts for the swelling of the facial features
     and the gross petechial haemorrhages so regularly seen in the face, neck
     and chest above the level of constriction.

  [Where no obstruction to the venous circulation occurs then the usual
   s:y?ns    asphyxia are present but not those of the classic traumatic
   asphyxia1 death. The face may be suffused &na cyanosed and there may be
   fine petechial haemorrhages, m some instances scanty or even absent. The
  -facial features do not appear strikingly sw ollen and the coarse petechial
   haemorrhages are not apparent.
                  £     WED         0 -3 S 2 1          WHI T F I EL D S                                    R. G
                                                                                                               >-•»



                          DEPARTMENT OF FORENSIC MEDICINE
                                                        GUY’S HOSPITAL
                                                 (UNIVERSITY OF LONDON)
    . w
O, i e . WEST. M.B., CUJB.. F.R.C.Pith., D.MJ.                             UNITED MEDICAL AND DENTAL SCHOOl-S
Dr- R.T. SHEPHERD B-Sc,. M-8.. B.S_ M R.C.P«h.. D M X                      GUTS AND ST. THOMAS'S HOSPITAL
                                                                           LONDON BRIDGE. SEl 9RT
Difact Telephone tin e 07M 0 ? 037g /0 7 l-i0 3 1118)
                                                                           TELEPHONE. 011-955 5000 Ext: 3118/3119
(F « : 071-103 7292)




Unfortunately it has become a habit for pathologists to call all such
deaths traumatic asphyxia and it may well be correct in one sense in as
much as trauma to the chest has resulted in the mechanical obstruction
of respiration- In pathological terms there is probably little relevance
in distinguishing between the two mechanisms as the term merely implies
that death has resulted from a mechanical obstruction to respiration
resulting from pressure being applied to the torso.

In clinical terms however there does seem to be a difference in the two
different types of traumatic asphyxia with a much graver prognosis being
 present in those where there has been evidence of a sudden and acute

•
severe rise in the venous pressure in the upper part of the body. In fact
most of the individuals who suffer from this classic form of traumatic
asphyxia do not survive if they are severely affected and not rescued
rapidly.

where the individual suffers primarily an obstruction to his movements
of respiration death will occur as the result of hypoxic damage to the
brain.   This may take a much longer time than in individuals who have J,
}?een crushed so impedence of the venous return to the heart occurred, yi
Indeed    some  individuals  will   survive  but remain permanently r
neurologically damaged as a result of suffering severe anoxic cerebral
injury.

It is probable that a period of at least some 10 minutes or so would be
necessary before one would be able to state categorically that absent .#
respiratory movement would lead to death- Consciousness may be lost quite LJ
rapidly but where the obstruction has not been complete consciousness may /»
take a considerable time to be lost.         I have experience of cases where
individuals have died through anaesthetic accidents whereby no oxygen was
 z i n g supplied to the lungs whilst they were paralysed during surgery,
     two of the cases in e x c e s s of 10 minutes elapsed before the surgeon
noticed that the heart action was in the terminal stages of failure.

It is also known that individuals who have suffered severe hypcxic damage
may not die immediately.       They may be recovered unconscious with an
active circulation but the circulation rapidly fails despite all attempts
at x’esuscitation. This roav well represent concomitant damage to the heart
muscle leading to what is in effect a heart attack (anoxic myocardial
infarction).    severe hypoxia of several minutes duration would be
necessary for this tc occur-     It is therefore possible that a young man
who had been asphyxiated by being crushed, would be capable, after being
removed from danger, of some conscious activity but could still die as
a result of hypoxia in the ensuing minutes.
                      we            ^                r-i   ±   I f- 1 b L JUS
                                                                                                                 R -© 5




                         DEPARTMENT OF FORENSIC MEDICINE
                                  GUY’S HOSPITAL
                                              (UNIVERSITY OF LONDON)


Dr. I.E. WEST, MJB-. O uB.. F R.C.Path.. DJvlJ.                                 UNITED MEDICAL AND DENTAL SCHOOLS
Dr. R.T, SHEPHERD B.Sc.. MJ9-. B-S., M.R.Ci>»ih, D.MJ.                          GUYS AND ST. THOMAS'S HOSPITAL
                                                                                LONDON BRIDGE. SE3 9RT
Direct Telephone Law 071-107 0378 / 071 -403 1118)
                                                                                TELEPHONE; 07t-$55 5000 E *t 3113/311?
(Fax; 071-403 7292)




 Anoxic brain damage could also be aggravated by the failure to maintain
 a patent airway in individuals who were unconscious but still capable of
 respiration when retrieved from the crowd.     The failure to place the
 individual in the recovery position, for instance, could lead to
 subsequent’’
            r espiratory obstruction.

 Experience from a number of instances where individuals have died from
 traumatic asphyxia has also demonstrated that not all individuals appear
 to have been effected at the same time. Some could have been effected by
 movement of the crowd in the minutes after the disaster occurred, others
 could have had only partial or incomplete respiratory obstruction
 initially and then either suffered complete mechanical obstruction of
 respiration or died as the result of prolonged incomplete respiratory
 obstruction. This could take many minutes to cause death and it is
 entirely possible that death would occur more than 15 minutes after the
 incident began-

I have not seen the post mortem photographs and therefore am having to
rely solely on the description provided in the post mortem reports:  I
will deal with each case individually.

 1.     Paul Carlisle   - He was examined by Professor Usher who describes
         suffusion    of the upper body and petechial haemorrhages on the
         forehead,    eyelids and within the conjunctivae. These   would be
         consistent with the classic traumatic asphyxia whereby there has
         been a mechanical obstruction and mechanical interference with the.
         circulation.

2-      Richard Jones    - He was examined by Professor usher w h o again found
         signs which would be consistent with the classic features o f
         traumatic asphyxia.   The petechial h a e m o r r h a g e s noted in his loins
         are probably the result of pressure causing local obstruction to the
         circulation m that area.

3.      Ian Glover -     Again examined b y Professor Usher.        The examination
         revealed changes    of asphyxia/    ie the c y a n o s i s    and visceral
         haemorrhages.    The signs of venous obstruction were relatively
         slight and in the form of small petechial haemorrhages in the upper
         eyelids and conjunctiva of the left eye.           There were scanty
         petechiae also found in the larynx.      in ray opinion he has died
         primarily    as the result of impedence of respiration            and any
         interference with his venous circulation was minimal.

4.      Peter Tootle   - Was examined by Dr. Slater-   Dr. Slater described
        changes in Mr. Tootle which are consistent with a degree of classic
        traumatic asphyxia but I suspect that the main reason for death has
        been compression of the chest resulting in impudence of respiratory
                                                                                                         P. 0 6




                          DEPARTMENT OF FORENSIC MEDICINE
                                                       GUY’S HOSPITAL
                                                (UNIVERSITY OF LONDON)


Dr. I.E. WEST, M-B.. OvB.. FR.C.PaUi.. D.MJ.                            UNITED MEDICAL ANT) DENTAL SCHOOLS
Dr. R.T. SHEPHERD B.Sc., MJ8.. B.S.. M.R.C.Pa(h.. D.MJ.                 GUYS AND ST. THOMAS S HOSPITAL,
                                                                        LONDON BRIDGE. SE1 9RT
Direct Telephone Lme 071 -107 0378 / 071 -,103 1118)
(fix : 071 -103 7292)                                                   TELEPHONE: 071-955 5000 Ext: 3118/3119




          movement. Without the post mortem photographs I am not clear as to
          why Dr. Slater feels that there has been intensive blunt compression
          of the right side of his face.

 5.       Kevin Williams   -   Was examined by Dr. Slater who describes the
          external features of classic traumatic asphyxia with cyanosis of the
          face extending onto the chest with numerous petechial and larger
          haemorrhages on the face and neck. He found bilateral fractures of
          the hyoid bone and of the superior horns of the thyroid cartilage
          on both sides of the larynx.   These appear related to a number of
          linear abrasions over the front of his neck and on the undersurfac®
          of the chin. There appears to have been local pressure to his neck.
          It was possible that when he was crushed in the crowd, the front of
          his neck, vas pushed against some rigid structure.       It is also
          possible that, for instance, he could have been trodden an during
          the panic subsequent to the incident occurring.

        *1 do not believe it is possible to say how long consciousness would
       " have been retained but he^ certainly would noc have become
         unconscious between 3 and 5 seconds of being crushed. Again I would j
         not agree with Dr. Slater in estimating how long the deceased would yj
         have survived. Although he-has suffered injuiies to the neck these
         are by no means invariably fatal and can be seen in those surviving
         strangulation and quite striking signs of classic traumatic asphyxia
         can be seen in individuals who survive crush incidents because they j/<
         are removed frow danger in tiiae to prevent death- As I have already VIJI
         indicated he could veil have survived for a considerable period,/tI
         well beyond 3.15 pm.

         He suffered convulsions as the result of anoxic brain damage.
         Whether Mr. Brooder saw convulsions or twitching is irrelevant.
         A dead body neither convulses or twitches. Dr. Gompert’s point that
         bodies may twitch after brain stem death has taken place is, of
         course, correct and to some degree reflects the dilemma over
         precisely defining death.      One sees it in individuals who are
         maintained on a respirator but whose heart is still functioning.
         One also may see it during the process of dying as the heart is
         stopping and for a very short period after the heart stops.     This
         phenomenon only occurs for a very short, period after death unless
         muscles are electrically stimulated. Twitching movements, however,
         suggest that one is much inore likely to be dealing with a live body
         than with a dead one.

         The evidence of Special Constable Martin is difficult to refute in
         some respects. Whilst it is possible for an individual examining a
         dead body to mistakenly feel an apparent pulse it is usually
         difficult to be mistaken over whether somebody is making breathing
                                                                                                      R -© T




                         DEPARTMENT OF FORENSIC MEDICINE
                                  GUY’S HOSPITAL
                                              (UNIVERSITY OF LONDON)

Dr-f-S-WEST. M.B.. Ch.B.. F.R.C.Paih_ D.MJ.                        UNITED MEDICAL AND DENTAL SCHOOLS
Df. R.T. SHEPHERD B.-Sc. M J , B.S., M.R.C.PsiK D.MJ.              C V Y S AND ST. THOMAS'S HOSPITAL
Dircct Telephone L m c07U 07 0378 / 071-) 03 1118)                 LONDON BRIDGE. SEl 9RT
(Fax: 071-403 7292)                                                TELEPHONE: 071-955 5000 Ext: 3U 8 /3119




         ^ movemen,t!
                    S,J3jt-aQJ5!.- I am, of course, making the assumption here that
         ^ when the term breathing is used that we are referring to movements
           of respiration and not merely sounds.          Sounds frequently emanate
           from the air passages of a recently dead body when it is being
           moved.    v
         S
    6.       Gary Church   -  He was examined by Dr. Slater who found changes
             which would be consistent with classic traumatic asphyxia.    He had
             a dislocated right sternoclavicular joint. T h i s type of injury is
H            most likely to occur as the result of falling.      It would require
             very severe crush injuries to dislocate the sternoclavicular joint
             and the post mortem findings do not appear to reflect severe local
             pressure on the chest or shoulder area.     It is possible that he
             received this injury as the result of falling over in an attempt to
             escape and has suffered pain and discomfort consequent upon this
             injury.

7.           Michael David Kelly - He was examined by Dr. John Clark who found
             non specific signs of asphyxia; the external appearances do not shew
             evidence of classic traumatic asphyxia. The petechial haemorrhages
             on his right arm I am sure reflect a obstruction to the circulation
             in the ara caused by local pressure.      The internal examination
             revealed no other explanation for death other than it. having
             resulted from anoxia and it is probable here that we are dealing
             with a case where there is no evidence whatsoever of obstruction to
             the large veins in the body tut where death has occurred as the
             result cf progressive cerebral anoxia resulting from prolonged and
             severe compression of the chest.

          If Mr Kelly was treated as described by PC Mauahan and apparently
          successfully resuscitated then it is possible that he has died as
          the result of hypoxic damage affecting his heart or as the result
          of seme other forTi o f respiratory obstruction. He appears not to
          have been placed in the recovery position and this may well be
          material. There is nothing to indicate that this man was definitely
          dead by 2,i5pn;     indeed the evidence available to me suggests
          otherwise.

8.        Philip Hammond    - this young boy does not bear the classic signs
          of tramnatic asphyxia although there are generalised asphyxial signs
          and evidence of anoxic damage to che brain.          Dr. Slater who
          performed the post raortem found extensive haemorrhage in both lungs
          and a laceration of the right lung associated with a fracture of the
          right 2nd rib.   1 think the death of this young man is rather more
          complicated than some of the other cases. There is certainly
          evidence that he has suffered from asphyxia and there is evidence
          in his brain of anoxic damage.      However, the primary pathology
                                                                                                                 P- 0 8
                                                 »■«ii i. i r jl tz.I— -A-*




                         DEPARTMENT OF FORENSIC MEDICINE
                                                  GUY'S HOSPITAL
                                              (UNIVERSITY OF LONDON)
    ' W '

Dr. I.E. -WEST. MB..      FR.C.Pwix.. D.M.J.                                  UNITED MEDICAL AND DENTAL SCHOOL
Dr. R.T. SHEPHERD B.Sc., M 3 ., J3.S, M-R.C.Piih-. D.M.J.                     GUYS AND ST, THOMAS'S HOSPITAL
DirectTelephone Line 071-107 03?g /071-103 1118)                              LONDON BRIDGE, SE1 9RT
(Fa*: 071-J03 7292)                                                           TELEPHONE: 071 -955 5000 Ext: 3118 / 3119




         appears to be in his lungs which were bruised with a laceration of
         the right lung associated with a rib injury.      The rib injury a n d
         bruising of the adjacent intercostal spaces suggests a localised
         pressure or impact, in that region of the right chest.   It is likely
         to have Been due to localised pressure, probably on the young m a n ’s
         back, forcing the right side of his chest against an object causing
         the right sided ribs to be forced inwards towards the spine.       If
         this pressure were maintained then death would undoubtedly occur
         very rapidly but I would have expected to have found sorae-evidence
^       of the more classic changes associated with traumatic asphyxia. If,
         however, the pressure is relieved then death from injuries of this
         type may take considerable time to supervene.     Unconsciousness is
         likely to be fairly rapid but death could have taken a substantial
         number of minutes and it would be impossible, from a medical point
         of view, to state that this boy was dead at 3,15 pm.

 In   conclusion there is clear evidence that some of the victims have
 suffered severe traumatic asphyxia in the classic sense in which the term
•is employed'.  Jnconscious:iess is liKely to have occurred quite rapidly,
 in probably somewhere between 15 and 45 seconds but dearh would have been
 delayed for a number cf minutes.   In those who where severely crushed so
 the venous drainage from the head was impeded then it is probable that
 death would have occurred within 10 minutes of sustained pressure
 commencing.    if the pressure was not continuous survival could be for
 a longer period.

In the individuals who have scanty signs or no signs of traumatic
asphyxia it is much more difficult to predict the survival time.       To
re|l’ce the survival time to a very short number of minutes would require
cf^Linuous sustained severe compression of the chest.      Because of the
r ure of the incident it is impossible in many instance to know when
mechanical compression of the chest would have commenced.    I feel it is
impossible to state purely from the medical point of view that a number
of the young men that I have indicated above could not been alive at 3.15
pm. Those dying as the result of anoxic damage consequent to their chests
being crushed could well have survived for a much longer period only to
die subsequently from the effects of irreversible anoxia.




[ain Eric West, M.B., cn.B   F. R. CTPath., D.M.J
Consultant Forensic Pathologist,
iirector, Department of Forensic Medicine,
’nited Medical Schools of Guy's and St. Thomas',
 uy's Hospital,
 ondon, SEl 9RT.
                         DEPARTMENT OF FORENSIC MEDICINE
                                  GUY'S HOSPITAL
                                                (UNIVERSITY OF LONDON)


Dr I.E. WEST,   MJ3..ChJB.,           D .M J.                        UNI FED MEDICAL AND DENTAL SCHOOLS
Dr. R.T. SHEPHERD B.Sc.. MJ3„ B.S„ M.R.C.Path.. D.M.J.               GUTS AND ST. THOMAS'S HOSPITAL
Direct Telephone Line 071 -407 0378                                  LONDON BRIDGE. SEI 9RT
(Fix: 071-403 7292)                                                  TELEPHONE: 071 -955 5000 Ext: 311S / 3119


 SCO:21/92/IEW                                                                   29th October 1993


 I have studied the photographs of Kevin Williams, Michael Kelly, Peter
 Tootle, Ian Glover, Richard Jones and Paul Carlisle. I have reviewed the
 photographs together with the original post mortem reports.

 All photographs are identified on the album covers and there are marks
 of identification on all of the bodies.  Names were inscribed upon the
 right lower limbs.

 The photographs of Paul Carlisle confirm that he has died as a result of
 classic traumatic asphyxia. There are also some abrasions on the forehead
 and chin consistent with being crushed in the incident.

 The photographs of Richard Jones confirm the classic signs of t r a u m a t i c
 asphyxia in the head and neck with evidence of constriction around the
 chest.   They also confirm the presence of inhaled vomit in the airway.

 The photographs of Ian Glover reveal more minor changes of asphyxia with
 cyanosis of the face but no overt swelling. There were abrasions visible
 on the undersurface of the chin and on the left ankle.

 From Professor Usher's report it was clear that vomit was present in the
 deceased's air passages.   inhalation of vomit may occur during life in
 a number of circumstances including compression^ of the chest and/or
 abdomen.   Traces, of vomit may also enter the airway as a result of
 passive regurgitation after death, either as the result of attempts at
 resuscitation or when the body is being moved.

The photographs of Peter Tootle are not particularly helpful^ in that
there is no close view of his face, The photographs reveal abrasions over
the lumbar region- of the back and over the upper chest region adjacent
to the spine.    The facial features, as reviewed in the full length
photograph, do not suggest the classic features of traumatic asphyxia,
nor can I see any evidence of substantial blunt trauma to the face.

 I have seen photographs which, on the cover the album are labelled
 Miohael Kelly, but the indication on the leg of the deceased is Kelly -
 A.P. with the number 17841.   The photographs do not appear to be those
 of the deceased described by Dr. Clark in his post mortem report. The
 photographs of the deceased show a man, 167cm in height, showing moderate
 truncal obesity with heavy tattooing on both arms. The deceased in this
 case also showed signs of severe traumatic asphyxia.     I do not believe
 that I have seen the correct photographs in this case.
                                   FuF.El fSI I MEDIC il'to uu< -■


                      DEPARTMENT OF FORENSIC MEDICINE
                               GUY’S HOSPITAL
                                          (UNIVERSITY OF LONDON)


     WEST, MJB., Ch.B„ F.R.C.P*th„ DW J.                             UNITED MEDICAL AND DENTAL SCHOOLS
    T. SHEPHERD B.Sc., MJ3., B.S., M.R.C.P*th„ D M J.                GUVS AND ST. THOMAS'S HOSPITAL
                                                                     LONDON BRIDGE. SE1 9RT
   .Telephone Line 071-407 0378
                                                                     TELEPHONE: 071-955 5000 Exi: 3118/3119
   071-403 7292)


    e photographs of Kevin Williams appear to show the correct body. They
     .nat.indicate the classic signs of traumatic asphyxia.     There^i^no
    eliing of the face although there js'll5ae1cyanosis. The most prominent,
   .ndings that can be seen on the photographs are the injuries _o v e r the
   idersurface of the chin and left jawline just below the prominence^of
  le larynx (Adam’s apple).    The photographs indicate one long a b r a s i o n
  ider the right side of the chin and an abrasion under the left jawline
  .id two abrasions over the region of the larynx. An additional abrasion
  s visible just outside the left eye. There,also appears to be deformity
  f ^ ) neck in the region of the larynx.

    n / opinion there has been substantial damage to the front of Mr.
    illiams neck as the result of compression of the neck possibly caused
   >y his neck being crushed under the feet of individuals in the crowd or
I caused by his neck being crushed against some rigid object.                The
   Jeformity seen in the photographs and the fractures, found by Dr. Slater
I luring his post mortem examination, strongly suggest that damage to the
  apper airway was an important contributory factor in the death of Kevin
  Williams. Damage to the airway at this level may lead to obstruction and
  swelling of the lining of the larynx which reduces the amount of air that
  can reach the deceased's lungs. As I have stated in my previous report
  I do not believe that this type of injury would lead to.unconsciousness
 within a few seconds.           Whilst death may occur repdily following such
  laryngeal injuries this is not inevitably the case and death may be
  delayed for a considerable period.          This type of injury is amenable to
 treatment in the formof an                emergency tracheostomy or a crico-
 thyroidotomy. Whilst an emergency tracheostomy is a relatively major
 p ^ f e d u r e , crico-thyroidotoray is a simpler procedure which involves the
 p B L a g e of a tube through the membrane between the thyroid and cricoid
 c tilages.           It is possible that if one of these procedures had been
 carried out at the scenethen hewould not have suffered from the fatal
 asphyxia which led to his             death.

 Both cricothyroidotoray and emergency tracheotomy can be performed in the
 field although, in the latter instance# with difficulties owing to an
 increased likelihood of haemorrahge at the operation site.

 I could find nothing, from the post • mortem report or from the
 photographs, to refute the realistic possibility that this young man was
,still alive after 3.15 pm on the day.   I do accept, however, that he is
/unlikely to have spoken the word "Muiti" if he had already suffeced
 convulsions due to lack of oxygen.   In my opinion, the primary cause of
 death in this instance is damage to his neck which would not have been
 inevitably rapidly fatal.
                                                           y -r——

                                     FOPEH'r' 1■; MEDIC IKE GUT'E              O'71 -*03 729-'           P.p


                        DEPARTMENT OF FORENSIC MEDICINE
                                 GUY’S HOSPITAL
                                           (UNTVERsrry o f l o n d o n )
                                                                                                                   TY
x. l.Ei WEST,                                                          UNITED MEDICAL AND DENTAL SCHOOLS
X. R.T. SHEPHERD B.Scn M 3 , B.S„ M.R.C-P*ih., J3.MJ .                 G U T S AND ST. THOMAS’S HOSPITAL
)irect Telephone Line 071*407 0378                                     LONDON BRIDGE. SEl 9RT
F « : 071-403 T292)                                                    TELEPHONE: 071 -955 5000 E xt 3118 / 3119


In relation to the individuals who have died of traumatic asphyxia.; it
is possible to say that, with sustained^ compression of the trunk# death
could have occurred prior to 3.15 pm and that they were likely to have
been quite rapidly rendered unconscious. There is no way, however, that
one can state with any certainty that death occurred within that period.
If the compression of the chest had been intermittent they could well
have survived well beyond 3«15 pm.




Iain Eric West, M.B., Ch.B., F.R.C.Path., D.M.J.,
Consultant Forensic Pathologist,
Director, Department of Forensic Medicine,
United Medical Schools of Guy's and St. Thomas',
Guy's Hospital,
London, SEl 9RT.
