                  Tlie U n iversity of L iverpool



ffp0M
f ROM THE  SUB
      th e s    DEPARTMENT
             ub d ep/      OF FORENSIC PATHOLOGY
SENIOR
s e n io r LECTURER    AND HEAD: DR. J. BURNS. M.D., F.R.C.PATH.
           lec tu r er a
LECTURER: DR.       C.P. JOHNSON
               DR.C.P.
                                                                            • TEL 051-706 - 4301
DUNCAN BUILDING ROYAL LIVERPOOL UNIVERSITY HOSPITAL PRESCOT STREET     TELEX NO: 627095 UNILPLG
P.O. BOX 147 LIVERPOOL L69 3BX                                                  FAX: 051-706 5859




       JB/SA                                                          11th April, 1994

       Mrs. Anne Williams,




       Dear Mrs. Williams,
             As requested, I have read the transcript of proceedings relating to the
       inquest into the death of your son, Kevin Daniel Williams, before
       Dr. S. L. Popper, Her Majesty's Coroner, at the Medico-Legal Centre,
       Sheffield, on 2nd and 4th May, 1990. In addition, I have read the post-mortem
       examination report of Dr. D. N. Slater and I would now make the following
       comments:-
       1.      The post-niortem examination findings clearly indicate that Kevin died as
                a result of aspnyxia due to compressive injury of the neck and chest.
       2.      On page 1011 of the inquest proceedings, Dr. Slater suggests that Kevin
                lost consciousness very quickly and I see no reason to disagree with
                this. However, Dr. Slater then goes on to generalise and state that
                death occurs after approximately three or five minutes in these cases of
                traumatic asphyxia.       While this may be so, in the vast majority of
                instances, it is by no means certain that even in a severe case of
              ^traumatic asphyxia, death necessarily ensues three or four minutes after
               'the compression begins. The all important factor, in my opinion, is
                whether the severe compression is sustained.        If the pressure is
                intermittent, then death may not ensue for a considerable length of
                time.    When death does finally occur, perhaps after a considerable
              ; length of time, it may occur not solely as a consequence of traumatic
              'asphyxia but as a consequence of loss of consciousness, with airways
                obstruction, following traumatic asphyxia.    The airway obstruction,
               which itself might       be intermittent, may arise as a consequence of
                swelling of the tissues of the neck following injury and/or postural
                obstruction c-f airways which is an all tod common occurrence in
                unconscious patients.
       3.      On page 1012 of the inquest proceedings, Dr. Slater states, "So all I
               can say, sir, that scientifically and medically I find that
                inconceivable that, the person could have spoken". Dr. Slater is stating
                                                                      - continued -
      here that he finds it inconceivable that Kevin could have spoken,
      following his injuries, because he had sustained four fractures, two of
      the cartilages of the voice-box and two of the hyoid bone, which is
      located at the junction of the throat and neck. While it may be true,
      in the majority of cases, that speech may be extremely difficult,
      following injuries of this type, I know of no evidence to support the
      view that s p e e c h , i n such circumstances, is absolutely impossible.
4.     On page 1012 of the proceedings, the Coroner, Dr. Popper, in questioning
      Dr. Slater, suggests that the evidence indicates that Kevin:, having
      extensive brain damage, "couldn't really communicate".       In answer to
      this suggestion, Dr. Slater states that the coning present in the brain
      indicates a severity of the asphyxia- which would, in Dr. Slater's
      opinion, have resulted in irreversible brain damage. While the changes
      in tjjie brain, as demonstrated at autopsy, may be fully consistent with
      irreversible brain damage, I know of no reason why such changes cannot
      be seen in the brain of someone dying within a minute or so of having
      spoken.
5.     On page 1016 of the inquest proceedings, Dr. Slater states "For somebody
      to have convulsions, this would imply that the amount of asphyxia is
      such that there must be virtually irreversible brain damage present and
      again this would fully support the concept that the evidence of opening
      eyes and speaking is not really conceivable, sir".            This is a
      generalisation, in my opinion, and it is my belief that a significant
      number of people suffering convulsions as a result of- asphyxia
      subsequently survive with no demonstrable ill-effects. Indeed, it is my
      understanding that at least one of the victims of the Hillsborough
      Disaster developed convulsions but survived and today has no residual
      untoward sequelae.
6.    It strikes me that W.P.C. Martin has been the victim of unjustifiable
     adverse criticism amounting almost to ridicule. I am amazed that the
     evidence of Miss Martin, a Dental Nurse, by training, and a Special
     Woman Police Constable of five years' standing, is treated with such
     incredulity, amounting almost to hostility. From what I have learned
     from the post-mortem examination of Dr. Slater, and from the evidence
     given by Dr. Slater at the inquest, I see no reason to doubt the
     evidence of Miss Martin when she states tnat she picked Kevin up in her
     arms, that Kevin opened his eyes, moved his mouth and said "Mom",
     flicked his eyelashes, closed his eyes and died.
      I trust that you will find these few comments of some use. If there is
any way in which I can be of further help to you in this matter, please do not
hesitate to contact me.
     With kind regards,
                               Yours sincerely,




                              (Dr./James Burns,
                           Hom4 Ofyfice Pathologist
