                                                  THE LEGAL SECRETARIAT TO THE LAW OFFICERS

                                                                ATTORNEY GENERAL'S CHAMBERS

                                                                           9 BUCKINGHAM GATE

                                                                              LONDON SW1E 6JP
General enquiries 0 1 7 1 - 8 2 8 7 1 5 5
D irect line          01 7 1 -8 2 8



      Dame Barbara Mills QC
      Director of Public Prosecutions
    - Crown Prosecution Service
      Headquarters
      50 Ludgate Hill
      LONDON EC4M7EX

         13 May 1997




        HILLSBOROUGH

        The Attorney General has asked me to thank you for your letter of 9 May 1997
        which, together with its enclosures, outlined and explained your view that you
        should now advise the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire that the further
        information provided by the Hillsborough Families Support Group does not
        justify reopening the police investigation into the Hillsborough disaster.

        The Attorney General is content to endorse that view. He has, however, asked
        me to pass on some points relating to the proposed handling.

        The first point relates to the relationship between your decision and questions
        relating to the inquest. The position in relation to the latter is that there is no
        outstanding decision so far as the Attorney General is concerned. Applications
        under Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 have been considered in the past
        and refused. There was also, as you are aware, an unsuccessful application
        for judicial review of the coroners decision. There has been no formal
        application under Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 since the ITV
        documentary drama "Hillsborough" was broadcast. The previous Attorney
        General undertook in correspondence with interested members of Parliament
        that there would be liaison with the Home Office to ascertain whether any of
        the material generated in response to the inquiries which the Home Secretary
        had initiated would in any way have influenced his earlier decisions. That was
        done and the then Attorney General concluded in March that there was no
        such material. My letter of 14 March 1997 to Dru Sharpling refers. The
        Attorney General was able to reach a conclusion more quickly than the Home
        Office or the CPS because the issues which fall properly to be considered in
        relation to the inquest are much narrower.


         SW/ 1305/4
The question of announcements and handling therefore needs to take account
only of the position of the CPS and the Home Office. Your decision has rightly
been taken independently of Home Office consideration of the request for a
further public inquiry but the communicating of that decision will need to take
account of the position which has been reached. My understanding is that the
Home Secretary received a submission from his officials in his last weekend
box and (as of yesterday) had not responded. Advice from officials within the
Home Office remains unchanged but it may be that the new Home Secretary
is more sympathetic than his predecessor. In the event that he were minded
to announce a public inquiry, it might be sensible to let that go first and for
you then to say that you did not consider there to be any grounds for a further
criminal investigation at this stage but the position could, if appropriate, be
considered further in the light of any further evidence emerging as the result
of the inquiry. On the other hand, if it appears that the Home Secretary is
unlikely to make a decision in the near future, or that the decision is to be
against the holding of a public inquiry, then it would be right for you to
proceed with an announcement which ought, in the circumstances, to be quite
low key.
Finally, you raised the possibility of a joint meeting between the HFSG, Home
Office, CPS and this office. Whilst the Attorney General has every sympathy
for those who lost relatives in the disaster, the point has now been reached
where careful explanations have been given over the years and, certainly so far
as the inquest is concerned, there has been full ventilation of the issue before
the Divisional Court. Given that there is no prospect of any good coming out
of such a meeting, let alone the HFSG now accepting explanations which they
had previously rejected, the Attorney General would not welcome the
involvement of his office in a meeting which might serve only as a gratuitous
invitation to reopen the question of a further application to the High Court
under Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988. He accepts, of course, that the
Home Office and the CPS must be free to handle the issue as they think fit.

If I can be of further assistance, please do not hesitate to contact me.


   o


S J WOOLER

S W /1305/4
