                                                        9 B U C K I N G H A M GA T E

                                                           LONDON       SW1E 6JP




071-828 1884




  Malcolm Thornton Esq., MP,
  House of Commons,
  London, SW1A OAA                                 11 February 1992




  Thank you for your letter of the 6 January 1992 and for sub­
  sequently forwarding the inquest transcripts referred to at page
  10 of the letter from your constituent, Mrs Anne Williams.


  I recognise the deep and ongoing grief of those whose friends and
  relatives died or were injured in the tragic events at Hills­
  borough, and should be grateful if you found an opportunity to
  convey to Mr and Mrs Williams the profound sympathy that I have
  for them.     There is a very natural desire on their part to
  establish the exact sequence of events at the time of Kevin's
  death.


   My own role in<-relation to inquests is a very limited one.
   Coroners are independent officers discharging a judicial func­
   tion, and in relation to the conduct of cases before them they
   are not subject to direction by any Minister or by any one else
   on behalf of the executive. Their proceedings may, however, be
   scrutinised by the High Court, either on an application for a new
   inquest made under section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 or through
   an application for judicial review.   The former can only be made
   on my authority, while the latter requires the leave of the Divi­
   sional Court.    I have no function beyond authorising applica­
   tions to the High Court.     Section 13 applies where an inquest
   has been held if 'by reason of fraud, rejection of evidence,
   irregularity of proceedings, insufficiency of inquiry, the dis­
   covery of new facts, evidence or otherwise' it is necessary or
   desirable in the interests of justice that another inquest should
   be held.


   I have read with care the transcripts of the "mini inquest" held
   by Dr. Popper in relation to Kevin Williams.    The scale of the
   catastrophe clearly presented the coroner with a very difficult
   task, which had to be undertaken within a statutory framework
designed for rather more straightforward cases. It appears from
the transcripts that his primary purpose in making an unusual
adaptation of that procedure was to draw together in respect of
each death, all the evidence relating in particular to it.


 The main area of concern for your constituents is the inconsis­
 tency between, the evidence contained in witness statements made
by PC Bruder and Special Constable Martin and, on the other hand,
by Dr Slater, who had carried out the post mortem examination.
Because of the obvious and understandable importance to your
constituents of knowing so far as possible what did occur, the
coroner held a further hearing on Friday 4 May 1990 devoted to
.clarifying the matter.       He caused PC Bruder and Special
Constable Martin to be seen again, and took further evidence from
Dr Slater as well as a consultant neurologist.        This was a
procedure which he was entitled to adopt.    From the totality of
the evidence before him it seems likely that the coroner
concluded that unconsciousness had occurred within a few seconds
and death within about five minutes, probably before the attempts
at resuscitation and certainly before the removal of Kevin
Williams to the mortuary.


Mr and Mrs Williams think that Kevin may still have been alive
in the temporary mortuary, on the basis of the earlier evidence
of PC Bruder and WPC Martin, a Special Constable, which had in
each instance later been substantially qualified.


I am unable to say whether a meeting of minds on this issue can
result.   I will, however, arrange for Dr Popper to be notified
of your constituent's request that they be provided with copies
of the relevant statements.    That will be a matter for him to
decide.   For my part, which I repeat is closely delineated by
statute, I can find nothing that would justify my authorising an
application to the High Court for a new inquest.
