                                                        22nd April, 1990.

Sir Patrick Mayhew, P.G., M.P.,
The Attorney General,
Attorney General's Chambers,
Royal Courts of Justice,
London, WC2A 2LL


Dear Attorney General,

                         Re Inquest into the Hillsborough Disaster.

    I have your letter of the 20th April written by Mr. Parkinson in reply
to my letter to you of the 18th April. Whilst I appreciate what is said
about your jurisdiction under Section 13 of the Coroner's Act, I988, if it
is pointed out to you that the Coroner conducting this inquest has resumed
it without statutory authority and therefore, the necessary jurisdiction
under the Act, I would have thought it was your duty to draw the attention
of the Coroner to his powers under the Act.

    Section 16 (l) is quite specific and only allows an adjournment on
resumption of the inquest if there have been manslaughter charges preferred
prior to or during the resumption of the inquest. This is not the position
so far as Dr. Popper is concerned. Mr. Kennedy of the Crown Prosecution
Service tells me that he still awaits the final report from the West Midlands
Police and that the DPP will probably make his decision whether to prosecute
"sometime during the summer."

    The Coroner has to await his decision before resuming the inquest. He
cannot empanel a jury and then deny them the opportunity of hearing the
evidence and reaching a verdict. If criminal proceedings ensue, it could be
months or even years before conclusion# of the proceedings result in
acquittal or conviction which are appealed against by those convicted.
Acquittal of any accused would necessitate a fresh inquest under Section 16 (6).

    Coroners have no authority to conduct inquests on the basis of a
"half way house" before the decision of the DPP is known. Saturday's report
regarding the inquest on the River Thames pleasure boat disaster reinfoces
this point. I enclose a copy of the report.

    Dr. Knapman has fallen into the same trap and is to commit the same error.
Meither coroners are lawyers and it is therefore, doubly imperative that you,
as Chief Law Officer of the Government, draw their attention to the irregularity
of the inquests they are conducting.

    Might I also suggest that you issue a directive to all coroners that when
an incident has been hta Tuemn referred to the DPP for consideration for
prosecution, coroners have to await that decision before resuming inquests
and empanelling juries for the reasons stated above and in conformity with the
Coroner's Act 1988, Section 16. It is not open to a coroner to anticipate the
institution of criminal proceedings.

                                     Yours sincerely,


                                     ROY EDEY.
