                                                                                                    ATT GEN                © 001/002
1 3 /0 2   98   13:32   FAX 0 1 7 1 219 4711


                         F r o m T h e R i g h t H o n o u r a b l e T h e L o r d Ir v i n e o f L a i r g




                                                                                                 H ouse of L o r d s,
                                                                                                       L o n d o n s w i a opw




     RESTRICTED


     The Right Honourable Jack Straw MP
     Home Secretary
     Home Office
     50 Queen Anne’s Gate
     London
     SW1H9AT                                                                      fS     February 1998




                                                    HILLSBOROUGH


          Thank you for my copy of your letter to John Morris of 9 February. I have not, of course,
    seen Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report; the following remarks are based on the comprehensive
    summary in your letter.

            The questions in respect of the publication of the DPP’s advice in 1990 and 1997, and the
    lack of justification for fresh criminal investigations, are of course for John, but if he is content, I
    would be too.

            More generally, I agree with your conclusions on Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s work.
    Though it will undoubtedly be disappointing for the family support group, I support the proposition
    that the Government response should make clear that diere are no grounds for a further public
    inquiry, nor for further investigations into the police conduct in respect of the amendment of
    statements. I also agree with your comments about the later evidence on the state of the ground,
    though that is not primarily a matter for me.

           The final point concerns the relationship between judicial enquiries into major disasters and
   coroners’ inquests into the resultant deaths. The recommendations of the Home Office working
   group are in my view entirely sound. Where it is possible to certify that a properly-constituted
   judicial inquiry would examine all the necessary issues, it merely prolongs and exacerbates the
   distress of bereaved relatives to have to contemplate the prospect of a coroner’s inquest as well. I
   therefore agree with the proposal to accept the working group’s recommendations in principle,
   recognising that the necessary primary legislation may have to wait for a suitable opportunity.




                                                                 1
                                                                        ^     ATT GEN            @ 002/
1 3 /0 2   98   13:33   FAX 0171 219 4711




             It follows that I am content with your proposals for handling the issues before Parliament
      next week.

            I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister, the Attorney General, the President of the
      Council, the Director of Public Prosecutions, and to Sir Richard Wilson.




                                                     2
