                       From -. T   he   P   r iv a t e   S ecretary
                                                                        t f 0 v |f l|.) © 5

                                                                            O c r T /W
                                                                                                     16272

                                                                                      H o m e O ffic e
                                                                                    Q U E E N A N N E 'S G A T E
                                                                               t, I L
                                                                                    L .O
                                                                                       UNl ND
                                                                                            UUOiN
                                                                                                > SWIH
                                                                                                  3 »*in 9
                                                                                                         7AA T
                                                                                                             I

                                                                           .> r /
                                                                                 September 1990




                                                                                        S>f?
                                                                                             s
                   /

Thank you for your letter of 6 September to the Home Secretary
expressing your group's concern over the decision of the Director
of Public Prosecutions (DPP) not to take criminal proceedings as
a result of the Hillsborough disaster.

I should perhaps make clear that decisions of the DPP are not
matters for the Home Secretary and the Inquiry carried out for
him by Lord Justice Taylor was not set up with a view to criminal
proceedings.    I hope you will understand, therefore, that it
would be wrong for the Home Secretary to comment on the decision
of the DPP to whom, I see, you have written direct. I am however
arranging for copies of this correspondence to be passed to the
Attorney General who has responsibility for the Crown Prosecution
Service (which is headed by the DPP) so that he is aware of your
concern.




                                                                P R C      STORR




Councillor H Chase
Hillsborough Working Party
Chief Executive's Office (R.5)
Municipal Buildings
Dale Street
LIVERPOOL L69 2DH
#
                                                      Chief Executives Office,
                                                                       Room 5, (j.
                                                          Municipal Buildings,^
             HILLSBOROUGH WORKING PARTY                           Dale Street,
                                                          LIVERPOOL. L69 2DH.

                                                     Telephone: 051-225-2333/4-
                                                        Fax:    051-236-2047

                                                     Your refs

                                                      Our ref: HC/DT

                                                         Date: 6th Sept 1990


    Mr. David Waddington, Q.C., M.P.,
    Home Secretary,
    Queen Anne’s Gate,
    LONDON. SW1H 9AT.


    Dear Mr. Waddington,

    This Authority, disturbed and perplexed by the Director of Public
    Prosecutions recent decision to not prosecute individuals or
    organisations for their roles in the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster, has
    written to the D.P.P. requesting his reasoning for rejecting
    prosecutions.

    We believe that solely applying the ’burden of proof’ test as the
    criteria to establish a decision in a matter of such public concern is
    inconsistent, damaging to public confidence and creates misgivings about
    the D.P.P.*s objectivity.

    The sheer weight,    emphasis, clarity and detail of evidence made
    available to Lord    Justice Taylor led him to publish a damning critique
    of Sheffield City    Council, South Yorkshire Police, Sheffield Wednesday
    Football Club and    its engineers.  That the D.P.P. refused to sanction a
    prosecution under    the ’burden of proof’ test alone causes much concern.

    Recently the D.P.P. has initiated a number of prosecutions arising from
    the performance of individuals and organisations in contemporary public
    disasters.  In such cases, with the apparent exception of Hillsborough,
    the ’burden of proof’ test has been rightly allied to considerations of
    ’public concern’.

    The scale, impact, status and implications of Britain’s worst sporting
    tragedy involving multiple deaths - not least on matters of public
    safety - warranted a thorough testing of the available evidence in an
    open court specifically in the wake of the criteria used by the D.P.P.
    in proceeding with a convictibn in the Purley train-crash tragedy.




    TSTCDZ
<   *

    #


                                           -   2-


        A reading of Mr. Justice Kennedy’s closing remarks in the aforementioned
        case highlights the degree to which the need to satisfy and re-assure
        ’public concern’ achieved prominence, given the requirement for
        individuals and organisations to be conscious of the implications of
        serious shortcomings in the performance of duties in the service of the
        public.                                                    -

        If justice is even handed the principles and criteria applied to the
        prosecution and sentencing in the Purley case should have been equally
        applicable in deliberations on the Hillsborough file.

        In challenging both the criteria used in the D.P.P.’s deliberations, on
        receipt of the West Midlands file, and in identifying a flaw if not a
        contradiction in the application of the principles of justice given the
        significance'of the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster to the public domain,
        this Authority requests you investigate this matter further.

        Our views on this subject are’shared by the Hillsborough Families
        Support Group and local M . P . ’s, amongst others. And in light of the
        non-exhaustive points raised in this letter this Authority will continue
        to articulate its serious misgivings regarding the process of justice in
        this case.

        Yours sincerely,




        Councillor Harry Chase,
        Chair,
        Hillsborough Working Party.




        TSTCDZ
