    Dr NRB Can


*   PO Box 33
    Ourdla PE7 5XN

    MOBILE:
    PAGER:
                07764 191544
                07669 19623-i
                                                                             FPS
                                                                              Forensic Pathology Services
                                                                              ? 0 B oa 34934
                                                                              Fulham SW6 2ZR
    15,r November 2002                                                        Tel 020 7T36 1403
                                                                              Fax: 020 7736 C316
                                                                              NR B Car/
                                                                              R C Chapman
                                                                              V Djurovic
    Mrs Anne Williams                                                         A W Fagan-Earl
                                                                              N C A Hunt
                                                                              P G JerTeat
                                                                              R T Shepherd
                                                                              I E West (Co-Founder)


    Dear Mrs Williams.

    Thank you for asking me to review the pathology and circumstances surrounding the tragic
    death of your son Kevin. ! have been able to obtain three photographs of the post mortem
    examination made by Dr Slater. ! have also seen a copy of his post mortem report and
    further comments. ! have seen two reports of Dr West dated 20 August 1S92 and 29th
    October 1993. i have also seen a copy of Dr W est's letter to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. i
    have seen a copy of a transcript of evidence given at the inquest held by Dr Popper on 4th
    May 1 9 9 0 .1 have seen a report in the form of a letter to you made by Dr ja m e s Burns.

    OPINION

    1     I support the views expressed by both Dr W est and Dr Burns, both very experienced
          and highly regarded forensic pathologists. In particular I support the view that Dr
          Slater was incorrect in ascribing death as being due to traumatic asphyxia when this
          term Is used properly. Based on the pathological findings described by him and the
          external findings that I have seen in photographs: the appropriate cause of death
          ■should have been compression of the neck.

    2    I see no pathological or scientific justification for the arbitrary setting of the time of
          3.15pm as being one after which anyone involved in the incident must have died. This
          lime makes no allowance for partial or intermittent effects arising fro n the crush.

    3    In the case of Kevin the principal injury was to the region of his neck including the
          voice box. However this should not have been taken to imply that he would have been
          incapable of uttering any speech. Fciiowinc injury to the voice box swelling may
          develop quite rapidly and cause sudden airway obstruction. Before this occurrsd, even
          if he had had a degree of hypoxic brain damage. I do not th.rk it is inconceivable that
          he cculd have nevertheless uttered a word cr two. Hypoxic brain damage ultimately
          causing death either in combination with sudden airway obstruction or on its ov/n
          could have taker some time to cause death through a mechanism of brain swelling. I
          find it disturbing that speculation about what someone could or could net have done
          was allowed to diminish the credible evidence cf Mrs Martin.

    4    Whilst theoretically emergency tracheotomy or cricothyroidectomy cculd have been
         lifesaving the likelihood of s-ich specialist help being readily available in the required
         time in any crcumstance would be siir. However simple suppoiive m eas-res such
/'"!ud(rit, ;5 I i Oc

P age 2 of 2

        as the administration of oxygen, passing of an endotracheal tube if this were possible
        could have had some useful effect. It may have been the case that cessation or
        inadequate breathing preceded cardiac arrest by some minutes and in these
        circumstances support of breathing through artificia1 respiraron may prevent
        progressive lowering of the blood oxygen and ultimate cardiac arrest.


Please do not hesitate to contact me if you have any further queries.




Nathaniel Roger Blair Cary, MA, MD, MB BS, FRCPath, DMJ Path
Home Office Accredited Consultant Forensic Pathologist
