MINUTE OF A MEETING WITH THE ATTORNEY GENERAL HELD AT 5.00PM IN
THE ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE, HOUSE OF COMMONS ON MONDAY 15 JUNE
1992

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

Those present:          Attorney General
                        Solicitor General
                        Tim Devlin - PPS to the Attorney General
                        Colin Pipe - LSLO
                        Stephen Wooler - LSLO
                        Jane Kennedy - Liverpool Broadgreen
                        Eddie Loyden - Liverpool Garston
                        Robert Parry - Liverpool Riverside
                        Peter Kilfoyle - Liverpool Walton
                        Robert Wareing - Liverpool West Derby


All of these members were concerned that they had constituents
who felt there should be a reopening of the inquest into the
Hillsborough disaster. Whilst there was general acceptance and
approval of the Taylor Report into what happened to cause the
disaster there was less confidence in the coroner's inquest which
did not deal fully with the way in which each of those killed
actually died. There was one verdict covering all 95 victims.
Particular concern was expressed about the fact that the Corner
had set a time of 3.1^.as the latest time at which death could
be   assumed   and   therefore   evidence   after   that   time was   not
admissible. Jane Kennedy was particularly concerned about the
relatives of Michael Kelly who were her constituents. He had few
signs of injury, no brain damage, a full bladder and only signs
of mild asphyxiation.      Whilst he was known to have been
resuscitated he still died. Peter Kilfoyle was concerned about
Ian Glover and the questions still unanswered about the time and
cause of his death and the query over the issuing of a death
certificate being authorised by a police officer who had been in
charge at the ground on the day.       Eddie O'Hara was concerned to
represent the relatives of Richard Jones.           He reported that Mr
Jones relatives were prepared to sell their home and all their
possessions to fund whatever action were necessary to reopen the
inquest.  Eddie Parry was representing the relatives of Peter
*   *   •   J>




                 O'Toole who believed that he had not received proper lifesaving
                 medical attention.


                 There was general concern that of~-G©w£«e not all of the victims
                 reached hospital and therefore may have been deprived of
                 lifesaving medical help. It was believed that this had not been
                 taken into account at the inquest in the way that it would have
                 done had the disaster been over a traffic accident.


                 The view was also expressed that the sheer volume of victims and
                 relatives and the emotiveness of the subject was a strong
                 argument for it being of public inquest to reopen the inquest.


                 The Attorney General undertook to give the matter his gravest
                 consideration and to write to each of the members individually
                 at the same time that he made his decision known so that they
                 would be in a position to advise their constituents.   He stressed
                 that no decision had been made at this time.
