                 Police Policy Directorate                                    Home Office
                                                                              50 Queen Anne’s Gate,
                 Paul Pugh                                                    London SW1H 9AT
                                                                              Telephone: 0171-273 3141
                 Head o f Operational Policing Polity Unit (OPPU)             Fax:       0171-273 2703




 RESTRICTED - POLIC

 Stephen Wooler Esq
 Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers
 Attorney General’s Chambers
 9 Buckingham Gate
 London SW 1E6JP                                             7 January 1998




                  -S            I—
 HILLSBOROUGH


 This is to give you advance warning that we expect Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to
 submit his report on Hillsborough during the week beginning 19 January, or soon
 after.

W e understand that his report will be a very substantial document - over 60,000
words plus substantial annexes - covering in considerable detail all the allegations
about ‘new’ evidence which have been put to him during the course of his scrutiny.

 In relation to the coroner’s proceedings, we understand that he will conclude that
they were properly conducted, and that the submissions which he has received
about medical evidence do not call into question the decision of the coroner in
relation to the 3.15pm cut off point. He will also conclude that he has not seen any
evidence which might suggest that an application under section 13 of the Coroners
Act would stand any chance of success. He will, however, be making some general
comment about the difficulties of carrying out an inquest after a major incident which
has already been subject to an inquiry. He intends to endorse the recommendation
made by the Home Office Working Group on disasters and inquests that the role of
the coroner in such circumstances should be very limited.

In relation to criminal proceedings, we expect him to conclude that he has seen
nothing to suggest that the previous basis on which the DPP took decisions about
criminal proceedings was inappropriate and nothing to suggest any new grounds for
criminal investigation.

The one area in his report which may raise questions about possible further action or
investigation is likely to be the process by which South Yorkshire Police officers’
statements were submitted to the Taylor Inquiry. Over 400 officers’ statements were



£\oppu'Jiou\misc^)p0505pd.doc
vetted by the force’s solicitors before submission to the inquiry, and in a significant
number of cases sections of the original statements were deleted before they were
submitted to the inquiry. We understand that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith considers
that in most cases the deletions were not inappropriate as they concerned matters of
personal opinion;     but in some cases his view is that factual material was
inappropriately removed. W e do not yet know to what extent he will make adverse
comment about those within the force who were responsible for this process and
therefore the extent to which any question of disciplinary matters might arise.

I expect that the Home Secretary will wish to publish the report and make an oral
statement reasonably soon after he receives it, and that he will want to agree the
terms of his response with the Attorney. I will ensure that you receive a copy of the
report as soon as we get it. We will then need to discuss its handling.

I am copying this letter to John Ringguth at CPS headquarters and to Robert Clifford
in the Coroners Unit here.




                                    PAUL PUGH




f:\oppu\hou\misc\pp0505pAdoc
