                         Director ofPubl ic Prosecutions                        Depu ty Director an d Chief Executive
                                       Allan Green Q.C.                         D. S.GandyCBOBE




                                            Director, Policy a n d Communications Group
                                                             K. R. Ashken



                                                                                     Crown Prosecution Service
         Stephen J Wooler Esq
         Legal Secretariat to the                                                    Headquarters
          Law Officers
                                                                                     4/12 Queen Annes Gate
         Attorney General's Chambers
                                                                                     London
         8-9 Buckingham Gate
                                                                                     SW1H 9AZ
         London SW1E 6JP
                                                                                     Telephone 071-273 8124
                                                                15862                Switchboard 071-273-3000




Your Ref:                                     O urR e f                                          Date:

                                                                                         * .3rd September 1990




         LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S REPORT: NEW OFFENCES


         Thank you for your memorandum received on 29th August
         requesting comments by today on the Home Secretary's letter
         dated 20th August to the Lord President.

         On 4th April 1990, Roger Daw wrote to John Goddard at the Home
         Office on behalf of the CPS indicating our support for Lord
         Justice Taylor's proposal that four new criminal offences
         should be created.  At the same time, the CPS sought to
         identify difficulties regarding the scope of the proposed
         offences and the identification of offenders.  A copy of Roger
         Daw's letter is enclosed.

         Whilst the CPS supports broadly the creation of the four new
         offences to assist in the crack down on football hooligans, it
         is difficult to assess the resource impact on the CPS because
         it is not possible to forecast with any degree of accuracy the
         number of offenders who will be arrested by the police.   I
         would therefore reiterate that if these proposals are to be
         enacted, the CPS and the Police should undertake a proper
         study of resource implications.  The Home Secretary's letter
         is just a little "broad-brush" on this point: to say that the
         resource effect on CPS is "unlikely to be significant" is not
         exactly what Roger said in his earlier letter.  I think it
         would be helpful for the Attorney to put down a marker about
         this point when he replies.

         I have no particular comment about the handling aspect
         discussed in the concluding paragraphs of the letter save to
         mention for information that we are co-operating with the Home


Fax 071-2 2 2 -0 3 9 2                               Telex 9 4 5 3 1 0 CPS HQ                                    Britdoc D X 2 3 2 8 Victoria
Office in the preparation of evidence to the Home Affairs
Committee in connection with its enquiry into the policing of
football hooliganism.




K R ASHKEN
