                                 THE QUBBN


                                     against


                              [name o f defendant]



IN PURSUANCE of the powers vested in the Attorney General at common law
and exercised by me in accordance with section 1(1) of the Law Officers Act
1997, let a nolle prosequi be entered in the nam e of the Attorney General in
the case of [name o f defendant], whose trial at the Crown Court a t [name] on
charges of [charges] currently stands adjourned, in order to discharge all
further proceedings therein AND FOR SO DOING THIS WILL BE YOUR
WARRANT.




                                      HER MAJESTY'S SOLICITOR GENERAL



DATED this          day of     199


Attorney General's Chambers
9 Buckingham Gate
London
SW1E 6JP
                           L f-/7/i^/                V' f ^rf                         ^
SOLICITOR GENERAL
                         s jj^ O ^ k ^ ^ A .     ^      ?^ D a v i d (S ey n l^ u r

                        y{x<L^     J j                                          ^         vvc^/

                          <L                         Otfi ' /I, f(Av
APPLICATION FOR NOLLE PROSEQUI: ADLINGTON V DUCKENFIELD


Introduction

Mr Duckenfield is the ex Chief Superintendent who was responsible for
policing operations a t the scene of the Hillsborough tragedy. He currently
faces an indictm ent of five counts, including two counts of m anslaughter,
as a result of a private prosecution brought by the Hillsborough Family
Support Group. He seeks a nolle prosequi in respect of counts 4 and 5 of
the indictm ent, which relate to allegations of perverting the course of
justice and of m isconduct in public office. My recom m endation is th at
you issue an nolle prosequi in respect of count 4 (perverting the course of
justice) b u t not count 5 (misconduct in public office). As I m entioned in
our brief discussion yesterday, there is a possibility that, whatever way
you decide this case, your decision will be made the subject of an
application for judicial review. I believe th a t a decision to issue a nolle
prosequi in respect of count 4, or counts four and five together, would be
unassailable.

There are two other m atters of which you should be aware by way of
introduction. First, this case is being subm itted to you because the
Attorney General, when in private practice, advised the DPP concerning
the case in 1990. Secondly, there is another defendant in these
proceedings, ex Superintendent Murray, b u t he is not the subject of
counts 4 or 5 on the indictm ent and therefore the application for a nolle
prosequi is made in respect of Mr Duckenfield alone.

Index o f docum ents

I have flagged key docum ents in the following order:

Flag A      Letter dated 13 October 1999 from Winkworth Sherwood to
            the Attorney General;

Flag B      Letter dated 11 November 1999 from Hillsborough Family
            Support Group to the Attorney General;
                                  1
Flag C        Letter dated 6 December 1999 from M essrs Winkworth
              Sherwood to the Attorney General;

Flag D        Indictment;

Flag E        Representations of 24 September 1998;

Flag F        Representations of 2 October 1998;

Flag G        Statem ent of Kirton;

Flag H        Statem ent of Kelly;

Flag I        Letters from the CPS dated 18 December 1998, and 1
              February 1999;
              Letter from Stephen Wooler dated 18 December 1998;

Flag J        Affidavit of Chris Newell

Flag K        Judgm ent of Divisional Court dated 31 March 1999;

Flag L        E xtract from Blackstone.


Background

a)       The facts

The scene of the tragedy which took place on Saturday 15 April 1989 was
the Hillsborough Football Stadium in Sheffield, which was the venue for
the FA Cup semi-final between Liverpool Football Club and Nottingham
Forest Football Club. In the disaster, 96 people lost their lives and over
400 required hospital treatm ent. An inquiry by Lord Taylor concluded
th a t the m ain reason for the disaster was the failure of police control.

In brief, David Dukenfield had been promoted to Chief Superintendent
some 21 days before the m atch was due to take place. He was in overall
charge of the policing operation for th a t day. He had no recent experience
a t any football m atch let alone a sell-out semi-final. Superintendent
M urray had the relevant recent experience and basically was Mr
Dunkenfield’s right han d man.

There was a dangerous build u p of spectators outside the turn-styles at
the Lepping’s Lane end of the ground between 2.30 and 2.45pm for a
                                  2
     3pm kick-off. As a result, a t 2.47pm a request was made to the police
     control room for perm ission to open the exit gates to relieve the pressure
     of the build up a t the turn-styles. Mr Duckenfield gave perm ission for the
     gates to be opened a t 2.52pm, when pens 3 and 4 behind the Liverpool
     Goal were already overfull. Gate C was opened, and a large num ber of
     spectators entered the ground fairly quickly and m ade their way through
     a tunnel to the rear of pens 3 and 4, immediately behind the goal. This
     led to the crushing of spectators in pens 3 and 4 and the stopping of the
     game a t 3.06pm.

7.   In chapter 16 of his report into the tragedy, Lord Taylor gave a brief
     sum m ary of the causes of the disaster, as follows:-

     •   The immediate cause of the gross over-crowding, and hence the
         disaster, was the failure, when gate C was opened, to cut off access to
         the central pens which were already overfull.

     • They were already overfull because no safe maximum capacities had
       been laid down, no attem pt was made to control entry to individual
       pens numerically, and there was no effective visual monitoring of
       crowd density.

     •   It should have been clear in the control room, where there was a view
         of the pens and of the crowd a t the turn-styles, th a t the tunnel had to
         be closed. If orders had been given to th a t effect when gate C was
         opened, the fans could have been directed to the empty areas of the
         wings and the disaster could still had been averted. Failure to give
         th a t order was a blunder of the first magnitude.

8.   There are num ber of paragraphs pertinent to the position of Mr
     Duckenfield. Lord Taylor said:

     •   Mr Duckenfield lent heavily on Mr M urray’s experience. Between them
         they misjudged the build-up a t the turn-styles and did little about it
         until they received Mr M arshall’s request to open the gate.

     • When Mr M arshall’s request came, Mr Duckenfield’s capacity to take
       decisions and give orders seemed to collapse. Having sanctioned, at
       last, the opening of the gates, he failed to give the necessary
       consequential orders to exert any control when the disaster occurred.




                                           3
      •   Most surprisingly, he^ftV^ Mr Kelly and others to think th a t there had   -?
          been an in -rush due to Liverpool fans forcing open a gate. This was
          not only untruthful, it set off a widely reported allegation against the
          supporters which caused grave offence and distress.

9.    Counts 4 and 5 of the indictm ent, which are the subject of this
      application, relate to this final point, and the rem ainder of this factual
      background will concern th a t issue.

10.   Lord Taylor found th a t Mr Duckenfield misled G raham Kelly and Glen
       Kirton of the Football Association about the cause of Gate C being
       opened. Their statem ents are a t Flags G and H respectively. I have
       highlighted the relevant parts of each statem ent. In sum m ary, after the
       game was halted a t 3.06pm, G raham Kelly and Glen Kirton went to the
       police control room and spoke to Mr Duckenfield. The time was about
       3.15pm.

             “Chief Superintendent Duckenfield told u s th a t a gate had been
             forced and there had been an in-rush of Liverpool supporters th at
             had caused casualties” (Kirton).

             “The police in the Control Box were apparently u nder the
             im pression th a t a gate or gates had been forced. They told me so
             and showed me a picture which purported to represent th is       we
             were told th a t when the gate had been forced there had been an in­
             ru sh of Liverpool supporters” (Kelly).

11.   Apparently HHJ Enzor, Peter Robinson, Chief Executive of the Liverpool
      club, and Jo h n Smith, Chairm an of the club, were told the sam e story by
      Mr Duckenfield in the formal circum stances of the Boardroom a t about
      3.30pm (see representations of 2 October 1998, paragraph 13 (Flag F)).

      H istory o f th is case

12.   Following an investigation by the West Midlands Police the DPP decided,
      in August 1990, not to undertake a prosecution. Following this, inquests
      were resum ed a t Sheffield and on 28 March 1991 the ju ry returned
      verdicts of accidental death in respect of all 95 cases before them (the
      last victim died in 1993). Disciplinary proceedings were commenced
      against both Mr Duckenfield and Mr M urray on 11 Ju ly 1991, b u t in
      November 19991 Duckenfield retired on grounds of ill health and the
      proceedings were withdrawn. Applications in 1992 and 1993 by the
      bereaved families for orders which would result in new inquests were
      refused.
                                           4
13.   On 5 December 1996, G ranada Television broadcast a television
      programme which suggested th a t there was fresh evidence in the case.
      Following the programme, the CPS reviewed the case again. It concluded,
      however, th a t there were no grounds for the CPS to recommend th at
      there should a further investigation of criminal allegations against the
      police or other persons. Notwithstanding that, on 30 Ju n e 1997, the
      Home Secretary appointed Lord Justice Stuart-Sm ith to conduct a
      scrutiny into w hether there was any fresh evidence which might have a
      bearing on various legal procedures and decisions th a t had been taken.
      Lord Ju stice Stewart-Sm ith reported on 18 February 1998 th a t none of
      the evidence he had been asked to consider added anything significant to
      the evidence which was available to Lord Taylor’s inquiry or to the
      inquest.

14.   In April 1998 a decision was made by the Hillsborough Family Support
      Group (HFSG) to commence private prosecutions against Duckenfield
      and Murray. After an abortive start, informations were laid by the
      solicitor acting for HSFG (Ms Adlington), on 26 Ju n e 1998. Shortly
      afterwards, solicitors for the two defendants asked the CPS to take over
      the prosecution in order to discontinue it. The decision-taker was Chris
      Newell since the DPP had previously been instructed in the case and
      could not therefore take the decision. The CPS announced Mr Newell’s
      decision not to intervene to take over any of the charges on 18 December
      1998. Mr Newell gave written reasons for his decision in a letter dated 1
      February 1999. These letters are a t Flag I.

15.   Mr Newell consulted the Law Officers before his decision was announced.
      Mr Newell had reached the view th a t there was no realistic prospect of a
      conviction in respect of the first three charges (which are the same as
      counts 1 - 3 of the current indictment), b u t he could not say th a t there
      was clearly no case to answer in respect of those charges. On the charge
      of perverting the course of justice (now count 4 of the indictment) there
      was in his view clearly no case to answer.

16.   The CPS policy concerning taking over private prosecutions had been
      made known to the parties in July 1998. On an application of th a t CPS
      policy to each charge, the CPS should have intervened and discontinued
      the charge of perverting the course of justice. Mr Newell reached the view
      th a t partial intervention was possible, b u t concluded th a t the CPS
      should not do so because it would be messy; it would be difficult to
      explain; and it would send the wrong m essage about the CPS assessm ent
      of the strength of the case. That approach to the issue was endorsed by
      the Law Officers. Stephen Wooler’s letter of 18 December (also Flag I)
      records th a t the Attorney General thought an additional reason for not
                                           5
      intervening was th a t the courts have in recent years developed a very
      wide approach to the topic of abuse of process, such th a t the m atters
      raised by Mr Duckenfield would be susceptible to a judicial remedy. Such
      consideration would be on an inter-partes basis and after argum ent.

17.   Mr Newell’s decision was made the subject of a judicial review application
      by Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray. Mr Newell sum m arised in his affidavit
      (Flag J) his reasons for not intervening. He said:

             “First, partial intervention was not, in my view, either appropriate
             or desirable. It seemed to me th a t the DPP should either intervene
             so as to take over the proceedings in their entirety or not a t all. To
             have intervened partially would still have left criminal proceedings
             in place in relation to the other charges, which included the even
             more serious charge of m anslaughter. Secondly, I took into
             account th a t Mr Duckenfield would not be left w ithout any remedy
             in relation to this additional charge. On the contrary, he would be
             entitled to invite the M agistrate Court to dism iss it on the basis
             th a t there is no case to answer. Thirdly, the charge arose out of
             essentially the sam e events as the events which gave rise to the
             other charges and th u s those events would be scrutinised in any
             event.”

18.   The judgm ent, which was given on 30 March this year, is a t Flag K. It
      deals, incidentally, with another unrelated issue. I have highlighted key
      p arts of the judgm ent. The Court found against the CPS on the issue of
      partial intervention, b u t declined to interfere with its approach with
      regard to the first three charges. In particular the court found:

      • The test applied by the CPS whereby it will intervene to take over and
        discontinue a case if there is clearly no case to answ er “rightly
        identified a class of case which should always be stopped”.

      •   “The DPP m ight      lawfully have decided to discontinue (all the
          charges). The tragic events a t Hillsborough have been the subject of
          repeated detailed inquiries. Nearly 10 years have passed. B ut the
          judgm ent was for the DPP to make. If we acceded to Mr H arrison’s
          subm ission, we would u su rp the role of the primary decision-maker”.

      •   “It is elem entary th a t in criminal cases each count constitutes a
          separate indictm ent; it is as if there are separate trials relating to
          each”.


                                            6
      •   “The DPP concluded th a t there was clearly (no case to answer) in
          relation to this charge (of perverting the course of justice) against D
          and yet decided to allow it to proceed. It follows, in my judgm ent th at
          there is a breach of D’s legitimate expectation th a t the policy would be
          applied. The pragm atic factors spoken to by Mr Newell in paragraph 6
          can m ake no difference.”

19.   It should be remembered th a t the policy of the CPS had been set out in a
      letter to HFSG in July 1998, after the request to discontinue proceedings
      had been made.

20.   Following the decision of the Divisional Court, the CPS reconsidered the
      question of intervention and by a letter dated 12 April 1999 concluded
      th a t they should take over the single charge of perverting the course of
      justice in order to discontinue it, the reason being th a t there was clearly
      no case answ er on the charge. The committal then proceeded on the
      three rem aining charges and Mr Duckenfield was committed for trial on
      20 Ju ly 1999.

21.   After th a t an indictm ent was settled which included a charge of
      perverting the course of justice (count 4) and a charge of m isconduct in
      public office (count 5). (Flag D) The term s of count 4 differ slightly from
      the original charge. The original charge alleged th a t Mr Duckenfield “with
      intent to pervert the course of justice did an act which has a tendency to
      pervert the course of justice in th a t he lied about the circum stances in
      which Gate C became open”.

22.   The particulars of offence in count 4 describe a t (a) and (b) two distinct
      allegations. The second allegation, concerning a failure by Mr
      Duckenfield, in the course of discussions about the crush, to correct the
      false belief of other persons, induced by his own previous statem ents,
      th a t the crush had been caused by spectators, goes wider th a t the
      original charge. Count 5 describes the sam e two allegations, b u t as
      particulars of the offence of m isconduct in public office.

      The request

23.   The letter of 13 October from Mr Duckenfield’s solicitors, Winkworths,
      (Flag A) is p u t on the basis th a t to perm it the prosecutor to reinstate the
      original charge of perverting the course of justice in the form of counts 4
      and 5 would be to perm it her effectively to negate the decision of the
      Director to discontinue. They make the point th a t had it not been for the
      existence of other charges, the proceedings would have been a t an end.


                                             7
      They say th a t the ability to indict a person ought not to be dependent on
      such circum stances.

24.   In their response, HFSG make the following points (Flag B):

      1.   G raham Kelly’s statem ent effectively constitutes new evidence th a t
           was not available to the CPS.

      2.    They did not seek judicial review of the GPS’ final decision for
            various reasons (with which I need not trouble you).

      3.   C ount 5 is entirely new. It is based on the sam e facts, b u t was
            never considered by the CPS.

      4.   Section 23(3) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 does not
            prevent the institution of fresh proceedings.

      5.   The best course now is for the judge in this case (Mr Justice
            Hooper) to decide w hether to quash the counts u nder the
            Administration of Ju stice Act 1933 or by way of abuse or process.

      6.   The judge has set aside 4 days from 4 Ja n u a ry 2000 for a full
            abuse of process hearing.

      7.   It is not accepted th a t a nolle prosequi can be entered on selected
            counts in an indictm ent. The power in relation to individual counts
            is in the prerogative of the judge.

      8.   As to the m erits, the case is very strong. They refer in particular to
            their representations of 2 October (Flag F) and the statem ents of
            Kirton and Kelly (Flag G and H).

25.   W inkworths have sent a reply, dated 6 December (Flag C). I should say
      th a t following the receipt of the application in October I wrote to the
      parties setting out a timetable in which subsequent representations were
      to be made. Winkworths reply is a week late, b u t completes the
      representations. In short they say:

      a)   The statem ent of Kelly adds nothing to the facts;

      b)   The reasons given by HFSG for not seeking judicial review of the
            CPS’ final decision are not valid;

      c)   There is power to enter a nolle prosequi;

                                           8
      d)    There is no evidence on counts 4 and 5. Kirton and Kelly do not
            advance the case a t all.

      D iscussion

26.   It may be helpful to divide this analysis into three parts:

            a)      procedural m atters raised in the correspondence;

            b)      the power to enter a nolle prosequi in these circum stances;

            c)      the appropriateness of doing so.


27.   There is a certain am ount of discussion in the correspondence as to
      w hether HFSG should have sought judicial review of the CPS decision,
      following the Divisional court judgm ent, to discontinue the charge of
      perverting the course of justice. In my view, this discussion is irrelevant
      to the decision th a t you have to make. W hether or not it would have been
      appropriate to seek a judicial review of the CPS decision, the fact is th at
      such an application was not made, and you have to m ake a decision on
      the m erits as to w hether or not to issue a nolle prosequi. I do not think
      the conduct of HFSG in not seeking a judicial review of the CPS decision
      is pertinent to your own decision.

28.   The second procedural m atter is th a t raised by Ms Adlington, in her
      letter of 11 November. She argues th a t Mr Duckenfield’s remedy is to
      ask Hooper J to q uash counts 4 and 5. She points out th a t the judge can
      h ear oral argum ent and is therefore in a m uch better position th an Mr
      Newell (presumably she m eans a Law Officer) to assess as a m atter of law
      w hether or not a prim a facie case is made out on the charges.

      You will recall from my description of Chris Newell’s approach on the
      question of partial intervention th a t the availability of other remedies is
      one of the factors he took into account in deciding not to intervene in the
      private prosecution. However the Divisional Court thought th a t this
      pragm atic reason for not intervening could m ake no difference to Mr
      Duckenfield’s legitimate expectation th a t the CPS policy would be
      applied. It m u st follow from this th a t the existence of alternative
      remedies did not limit the freedom of action of the CPS to intervene and
      take over a prosecution. I think that, by extension of this reasoning, the
      sam e approach would be applied to the question w hether or not you can
      enter a nolle. The fact th a t the court h as powers of its own to bring a
      prosecution to an end does not m ean th a t your own freedom of action is
      limited. Mr Ju stice Hooper is aware of the fact of this application and has
                                            9
      not suggested th a t it is inappropriate. Indeed he will not be hearing the
      abuse of process and other argum ents until the application for a nolle
      h as been determ ined by you one way or the other.

      The power to enter a nolle prosequi

29.   In her letter of 11 November, Ms Adlington h as argued th a t a nolle
      prosequi cannot be entered on selected counts in relation to an
      indictm ent. She said th a t this is the effect of Administration of Justice
      Act 1933. The power in relation to individual counts, she says, is surely
      the prerogative of the judge. I am sure th a t this m u st be wrong. Lord
      Ju stice Laws pointed out in his Divisional Court Judgm ent th a t it is
      elem entary th a t in criminal cases each count constitutes a separate
      indictm ent; it is as if there are separate trials relating to each (page 17).
      He thought it followed th a t the CPS should consider w hether there was
      clearly no case to answ er on each charge. Ms Adlington cites no authority
      in support of her position, and it seems to me th a t there is authority
      against. In the case of R v Teal (1809) it was held th a t a nolle prosequi
      may be entered as to one of several defendants. Presum ably this would
      be in respect of one of several counts of an indictm ent. Given this
      authority, it would need clear words in the Administration of Justice Act
      to limit the scope of the Law Officer’s power to enter a nolle prosequi. The
      Act is silent on the issue.

      The appropriateness o f entering a nolle prosequi

      a)    Count 4

30.   It seems to be fairly clear th a t the assertion in count 4 (a) effectively
      duplicates the original charge which was taken over and discontinued by
      the CPS a t the instigation of the Divisional Court. To this extent,
      including count 4 in the indictm ent does have the effect of negating Mr
      Newell’s earlier decision and frustrating expectations arising from it. It
      seems to me to be undesirable th a t the application of the CPS’ policy can
      be negated in this way. Equally, it is entirely appropriate th a t you should
      com plem ent the exercise of the CPS’ powers to discontinue proceedings
      (under section 23 of the Prosecutions of Offences Act 1985) by entering a
      nolle. You will find a t Flag L an extract from Blackstone on the power to
      enter a nolle which m akes this point. Put another way, it seems to me
      th a t if you were not to enter a nolle prosequi in these circum stances, the
      exercise of the statutory power by the CPS would be underm ined.

31.   To w hat extent should this approach, if right, be affected by the fact th a t
      count 4(b) goes wider th an the original charge? There are two points, to
      make. First, I think it would be undesirable simply to edit this count by
                                          10
      deleting (a). T hat seems to me to be an act which engages too m uch in
      the detail of the prosecution process. It would raise a question as to
      w hether any other am endm ents would have to be cleared with you. You
      are not a co-prosecutor; you are standing outside the situation. That
      m eans th a t you are left with a choice between issuing a nolle prosequi in
      respect of count 4, or leaving it alone. Secondly, it seems to me th at
      count 4(b) is something of a nonsense. How can a failure to do something
      am ount to the m aking of a statem ent? Moreover the underlying reason
      th a t led Chris Newell to intervene to stop the original prosecution
      continues to exist. He thought th a t there was clearly no case because he
      did not believe th a t when Mr Duckenfield told his lie he was
      contem plating judicial proceedings of any kind. T hat rationale applies to
      the failure to correct the false belief of other people ju s t as m uch as it
      does in relation to the lie itself.

32.   In the Divisional Court (page 12) Lord Ju stice Laws, commenting on the
      clearly no case to answ er test, said:

            “The test rightly identifies a class of case which should always be
            stopped”.

33.   In support of the their assertion th a t there is a strong case, HFSG refer
      you to their representations of 2 October, and the statem ents of Kirton
      and Kelly. However, none of this m aterial deals a t all with w hat to my
      mind is the fatal flaw in count 4, namely th a t there is no evidence th a t
      Mr Duckenfield was contemplating judicial proceedings a t th a t time.

34.   In conclusion, I think th a t there continues to be clearly no case to
      answ er in respect of this count, and an intervention by you seems to me
      to be necessary to bolster the decision of the CPS.

      Count 5

35.   Slightly different considerations apply to count 5. First, although the
      underlying subject m atter of the allegation is the sam e as in count 4, the
      charge of m isconduct in public office is not a charge th a t was considered
      by the CPS. Accordingly, one of the reasons th a t I advanced for you
      issuing a nolle in respect of count 4 does not apply to this particular
      count, i.e. it is not necessary for you to intervene to avoid the decision of
      Chris Newell being underm ined. The rationale for Chris Newell’s decision
      in respect of count 4 was focused firmly on the requirem ents of the
      offence of perverting the course of justice, rath er th a n doubts about the
      admissibility or reliability of the evidence needed to prove the offence.
      Obviously, the constituents of the offence of m isconduct in pubic office
      are different.
                                           11
36.   There are no limits, of course, on your power to enter a nolle prosequi,
      and you could therefore intervene in circum stances in which the CPS,
      applying their policy, would not intervene, eg in a situation in which you
      think there is an arguable case b u t not a realistic prospect of a
      conviction. However, I think it would be unwise to do so. The rationale
      behind the CPS policy is a sensible one. It seeks to ensure th a t clearly
      unm eritorious prosecutions are stopped, while recognising th a t private
      prosecutions ought to be allowed to continue even if the CPS would not
      undertake a prosecution in the sam e circum stances. If you adopt a
      different, more interventionist approach, it seems to me to be inevitable
      th a t defendants, having failed to persuade the CPS to intervene, will
      come next to the Law Officers. In other words, I think your approach
      ought a t least to be complementary to the approach adopted by the CPS.

37.   T hat would suggest th a t you ought to intervene if you take the view th a t
      there is clearly no case to answ er on count 5. On this question, I am not
      convinced th a t there is clearly no case to answer. Unfortunately, neither
      the subm issions from HFSG nor those of Winckworth address w hat seem
      to me to be the m ajor issue which arises in relation to count 5.

38.   The leading case on m isconduct in public office is the case of Dytham. In
       th a t case, the court held th a t there the offence was proved if a public
       officer wilfully neglected to perform a duty which he was bound to
       perform by common law or by statue; the neglect had to be wilful and no
       merely inadvertent and had to be culpable in the sense of being without
       reasonable excuse or justification.

39.   According to H alsbury’s Laws, vol.36, para 32, the responsibilities of
      police officers are primarily the preservation of the Q ueen’s peace. It is
      also their general duty to protect life and property.

40.   There can no doubt th a t Mr Duckenfield’s responsibility on the day
       included responsibility for crowd control and a share of responsibility for
       the safety of the crowd. It m ust be a t least arguable th a t in the
      immediate afterm ath of the tragic incident, when Mr Duckenfield told his
      lie and failed to correct it, th a t it was his responsibility to explain to
      those in authority the circum stances which had led to the tragedy, in
      order to assist them to make decisions.

41.   It seems reasonably clear th a t both Mr Kelly and Mr Kirton were
       decision-makers. In his statem ent on page 4, Mr Kelly said th a t he
       requested Mr Duckenfield to stay in close contact with the referee with
       regard to w hether the m atch should continue or not. He commented “my
       concern was to keep adm inistrative control over w hat was obviously a
                                           12
      confusing and difficult situation”. In paragraph 6 of Mr Kirton’s
      statem ent, he says th a t he had explained to Mr Smith, the Chairm an of
      Liverpool th a t “we had requested advice from the police as to w hether or
      not the m atch should be abandoned or suspended for a period”, and
      later in the statem ent he dem onstrates th a t he was taking on the
      responsibility for liaising with the press. According to paragraph 13 of
      representations of 2 October 1998, Mr Duckenfield repeated his lie to the
      Chief Executive and Chairm an of Liverpool Football Club who would also
      of course have had some executive responsiblity in the situation.

42.   W hether or not telling these individuals the tru th would have assisted
      them to discharge their responsibilities is arguable, b u t I suggest th a t
      the point I have made leads to the conclusion th a t the case on count 5
      falls outside the bracket of “clearly no case to answ er”.

43.   The CPS policy also allows them to intervene if the public interest factors
      against prosecution clearly outweigh those in favour, and if the
      prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests of justice. As you will
      see from the Divisional Court judgm ent, the CPS concluded th a t the
      strong public interest attaching to the prosecution of the grave offences
      in charge 1 - 3 outweighed the factors against the prosecution. I think
      you are entitled to take the same view with regard to count 5: Mr
      Duckenfield’s alleged conduct was part and parcel of the incident as a
      whole and caused a lot of distress.

      C onclusion

44.   I suggest th a t you enter a nolle in respect of count 4 b u t not count 5. If
       you agree I will prepare the necessary docum ent. We will need to
       consider how m uch information to include in the letter to the
       representatives of the parties. I suggest you and I speak about this, and
       include Philip Geering in the discussion.




      STEPHEN PARKINSON
      10 December 1999




                                            13
