v S .'




                                          THE LEGAL SECRETARIAT TO THE LAW OFFICERS
                                                     ATTORNEY GENERAL'S CHAMBERS
                                                                9 BUCKINGHAM GATE
                                                                  LONDON SW1E 6JP

 General enquiries 071-828 7155
 Direct line       071-828      1721

                   Hammond E s q . ,



                                                            28 October, 1991




              Dear Mr Hammond,


               I have' been asked to thank you for your letter of the
               27 September 1991 addressed to the Attorney General,
               about the verdicts returned at the inquest held in
               respect of those who died in the Hillsborough tragedy
               and to reply on his b e h a l f .


               As the Attorney General wrote in his letter of the 30
               November last, he does recognise the strength of
               feeling which remains following those tragic events.
               His role in relation to coroners inquests is however
               very limited, being confined to the situation set out
               in section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988.   This enables
               him to apply to, or give his authority for an
               application to, the High Court for an order that an
               inquest, or a fresh inquest as the case may be, is
               held into a persoris death.   The jurisdiction to make
               such an order is expressly reserved to the High Court
               itself, and his role is therefore limited to deciding
               whether or not an application to the High Court should
               be made under that section.


               In considering whether an application should be made
               or authorised, he must have regard to the requirements
               of section 13, which specify fraud, rejection of
               evidence, irregularity of proceedings, insufficiency
               of inquiry or the discovery of new facts or evidence
               as potential grounds for an application.   In addition
               the application must establish that "it is necessary
               or desirable in the interests of justice that another
               inquest should be held".


               The assertions you make in your letter, which for the
               purpose of considering your request he will assume are

                                          1
correct (as he knows you believe them to be)   do not
on their face persuade him that the circumstances are
such as would justify his making an application.


I do not wish to encourage you to incur expenditure
which may well prove to be in vain, but it is right to
tell you that if you are minded to pursue a request
for authority to make an application to the High Court
under section 13 of the 1988 Act, it will be necessary
to put forward a fully reasoned and documented case
such as would have a realistic prospect of succeeding
before the High Court.    It should deal with all the
relevant circumstances.    Although there is no legal
requirement for you to do so, I would strongly
recommend that you obtain the services of a lawyer in
putting forward any such qase.    One of the important
factors would be 'whether a fresh inquest would be
likely to result in a different verdict.

                   r

Turning to the question of costs, I can confirm, on
advice from the Lord Chancellor's Department, that
legal   aid  is not   available  for proceedings    in
coroners' courts.   The reason for this is that, while
legal representation is permissible, the proceedings
are generally informal and are concerned with the
facts surrounding a death rather than issues such as
civil or criminal liability.     Legal representation
is, therefore, generally unnecessary although the
position may be different where an individual's
conduct is likely to be seriously impugned criminal
liability suggested.       The decision by the South
Yorkshire Police to appoint lawyers to represent
police officers was a matter within the discretion of
the Chief Constable, and is one on which the Attorney
General has no comment to make.


Yours sincerely,




S. J. WOOLER

                          2
