                                                             THE LEGAL SECRETARIAT TO THE LAW OFFICERS
                                                                        ATTORNEY GENERAL'S CHAMBERS
                                                                                   9 BUCKINGHAM GATE
                                                                                      LONDON SW1E 6JP

G e n e r a l e n q u ir ie s 0 7 1 - 8 2 8 7 1 5 5
D ire c t lin e               0 7 1 -8 2 8            1/21

           Mrs J. McBrien,


                                                                                 \0   August 1992



            Dear Mrs McBrien,

            I write in response to your letter of the 18 June 1992 to the
            Attorney General about your son, John , who died as the result
            of the Hillsborough disaster.

            Your letter was received at a time when the Attorney General was
            considering a formal application made by solicitors acting ^on
            behalf of the families of six of those who died for his authority
            to apply to the High Court for an order directing^ a fresh
            inquest. He has now decided after the most careful consideration
            that there is nothing which would justify his authorising that
            application in any of the cases.

            The Attorney General has also considered whether there are any
            circumstances particular to the case of your son which would
            justify the making of an application.     He has come to the
            conclusion that there are none.

            He has reached his decision on the grounds that the application
            would have no reasonable prospect of establishing that it is
            necessary or desirable in the interests of justice for a fresh
            inquest to be held.

            The Attorney General recognises that this news will be deeply
            disappointing to you and extends to you his continuing and very
            sincere sympathy.


            Yours sincerely,




             S. J. WOOLER
