                                                                                 y?    “    *
                                                                                      SU ppQ^

                     Hillsborough Family Support Group
                                                                               /4 -c w -




Lord Williams o f Mostyn QC
Attorney General’s Chambers
9 Buckingham Gate
London SW1E 6JP

11th November 1999

Dear Attorney,

Regina v Duckenfield and Murray

1      I am the solicitor to the Hillsborough Family Support Group, and laid the
       informations alleging crimes on the part of the above named at the Leeds District
       Magistrates Court in July 1998. As such I was the prosecutor before the matter was
       committed for trial in July 1999, and I continue to act as instructing solicitor.

2      I write to set out the Crown’s submissions on the application by Mr Duckenfield to
       you to enter a nolle prosequi in relation to counts 4 and 5 on the indictment currently
       before the Crown Court sitting at Leeds. A copy o f the signed indictment is attached
       for ease o f reference.

The Attorney’s position

3     Although the application is addressed to you, we appreciate that you cannot take the
      decision in this matter in the light of the principles set out in Re Pinochet No 2,
      because you personally advised the Director o f Public Prosecutions in 1990 that no
      criminal prosecutions should be instituted. Neither can the matter, in our submission,
      be delegated to the Crown prosecution Service, which would then be invited to act as
      iudex in sua causa. However, we nonetheless invite you to take note of the contents
      o f this letter particularly in relation to the written advice o f August 1990.

Procedural aspects

4     The Crown Prosecution Office came to the view that there was no prima facie case on
      what is now count 4 on the indictment. However, the CPS initially declined to
      interfere in the prosecution on those charges having decided it would not interfere
      with the prosecution on the manslaughter charges. The Divisional Court ordered a
      reconsideration.



                                              1

          Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151 236 1936. E Mail info@hfsg.org
        1st Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
5   Accordingly, the CPS, acting through Christopher Mr Newell, reconsidered its
    previous decision, and took over and discontinued the prosecution in relation to the
    charge which is now count 4 of the indictment. It is apparent that the decision was
    based upon the opinion o f Mr Newell that there was insufficient evidence to
    constitute a prima facie case on that charge.

    Procedural irregularity

6   Unfortunately, the CPS did not give us an opportunity to make fresh submissions
    upon the question o f sufficiency o f evidence. The Crown regards this, therefore, as a
    decision flawed by procedural impropriety and a breach o f natural justice. If they had
    provided such an opportunity, we would have referred to the statement of Graham
    Kelly, enclosed, which we did not have when we made our representations to the CPS
    in October 1998.

7   The prosecution did not seek judicial review o f the CPS decision for the following
     reasons:

            (a) We had “alternative remedies”, such as the ability to put these counts on
            the indictment in the event o f committal by virtue of section 2(2) o f the
            Administration of Justice ( Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1933. This potential
            remedy would no doubt have led to the refusal of relief even if the Divisional
            Court had agreed with us as a matter o f substance.

            (b) We were afraid o f delay. After service of process in July 1998, the
            defendants have delayed these criminal proceedings by a variety of devices.
            They applied to the CPS to take over and discontinue the proceedings.
            Having failed, they applied in February for judicial review, arguing, among
            other things, that the CPS decision not to take over and discontinue the entire
            case was irrational. A further application for judicial review by us, launched in
            April 1999, would have caused further unacceptable delay in the hearing of
            these proceedings.

            (c) We were afraid o f cost. The South Yorkshire Police Authority agreed in
             1998 to fund the entire criminal defence o f Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray,
            including out o f pocket expenses, and was willing, it appears, to fund ancillary
            applications for judicial review. Two applications for judicial review have
            been brought by the defendants, one o f the decision o f the CPS, another of the
            decision o f the South Yorkshire Police Authority in March 1999. The first of
            these they lost. The second of these argued that the Authority had been wrong
            to decide, in February 1999, that it had no power to grant financial assistance.
            In this they succeeded. They were then given their costs by SYPA of
            applying, for the most part unsuccessfully, for review o f the CPS decision
            Another application mooted was an application for judicial review of a
            decision of the South Sefton Magistrate Court in July 1998 in relation to an
            application for their costs. Summonses had originally been brought there by
            the prosecution, but dropped because, though the court had jurisdiction to hear
            the case, no process existed to compel the defendants to appear there.


                                            2
The changed legal context

8      The position is now different. In the light of the CPS decision, the prosecution
       decided not to attempt to reinstate the charges at committal. The defendants were
       committed for trial on the charges o f manslaughter and misfeasance, having argued
       unsuccessfully that there was no case to answer, and that the proceedings were an
       abuse of process.

9      Pursuant to the 1933 Act, and on the advice o f leading counsel counts 4 and 5 were
       added to the indictment by the Crown after committal as charges disclosed on the
       committal documents. Count 5 is entirely new. It is based upon the same facts, but
       was never considered by the CPS. The transcripts o f evidence given by the
       defendants to Lord Taylor and the Inquest were in evidence at committal, and those of
       Mr Duckenfield contained admissions to telling lies to the Taylor Inquiry as part of
       his evidence about the disaster generally.

10     The Crown wishes also to emphasise that, where a prosecution is discontinued under
       section 23 (3) o f the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985, by virtue of section 23 (6);

               “The discontinuance o f any proceedings by virtue of this section shall not
               prevent the institution of fresh proceedings in respect o f the same offence.”

11    This subsection does not even contain a requirement for fresh evidence to come to
       light before fresh proceedings are instituted.

Alternative remedies fo r the defence; the powers o f the judge

12     Even if there were insufficient evidence to support a case to answer on those counts
       disclosed on the committal papers, the judge could grant a voluntary bill on
       indictment on those counts if there was sufficient evidence now available. He himself
       referred to this power in the preliminary hearing o f 3rd September 1999, and has set
       aside time in the week o f 20th December to hear argument on this matter, should the
       application for a nolle prosequi fail. We enclose a copy o f his observations on that
       matter on 3rd September 1999.

13    If the Crown is wrong in its position, which is entirely a matter of law, Mr
       Duckenfield’s remedy is to ask Hooper J. to quash those counts. The judge can hear
       oral argument and is therefore in a much better position than Mr Newell to assess as a
       matter o f law whether or not a prima facie case is made out on those charges. It is
       beyond argument that Hooper J. can quash those counts under the Administration of
       Justice ( Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1933 or by way o f abuse o f process; see R v
      Bedwelty JJ ex parte Williams [1997] AC 225.

14     Further, the judge has set aside four days from 4th January 2000 for a full abuse of
       process hearing. The judge has ample power to find that it is an abuse o f process to
       prosecute for those offences, even if they are sound in law.




                                               3
       It is not accepted that, since the powers conferred by the 1933 Act, whatever had been
       the position at common law, a nolle prosequi can be entered on selected counts in
       relation to an indictment. It was surely the intention of Parliament that the power of
       the Attorney-General, exercisable without the power to hear submissions or evidence,
       exists to prevent a trial; not to quash individual counts. The power in relation to
       individual counts is surely the prerogative o f the judge.

The merits o f the application

16     On the merits o f the application, it is the submission of the Crown that the case
       against Mr Duckenfield on counts 4 and 5 is very strong. It will be noted by the
       Attorney-General that the letter o f Winkworth and Sherwood of 13th October fails
       utterly to deal with the substance of the case or the strength o f the charges. Our
       representations o f 2nd October deal with the facts, and the enclosed statements of
       Kirton and Kelly throw further light on the matter.

17    We are surprised that the defence solicitors should not have enclosed copies o f the
      annexes to our representations o f September1998. You are asked to exercise a
      discretion, which, as Winkworth and Sherwood should know, must be exercised in
      the light o f all the circumstances o f the case. You will note that the prosecution
      produced abundant primary material to show that the DPP decided not to prosecute in
      1990 on the basis of selected statements, some o f which had been improperly edited
      to exclude statements by South Yorkshire police officers. It is necessary to look at the
      actual excisions to appreciate the significance of the deception.

18    In all the circumstances it would be wholly inappropriate for a nolle prosequi to be
       entered for counts 4 and 5 o f the current indictment.

The advice o f leading counsel to the DPP in 1990

19     Although for some reason the advice o f leading counsel to the DPP in 1990 has been
       sent to the South Yorkshire police, who retain a copy, and has been disclosed to Lord
       Justice Stuart-Smith, who quoted it in part in the report o f his “Scrutiny” in 1998, it
       has not been disclosed to the Crown in the prosecution o f this case.

20     It is believed that the DPP was given a misleading account in the final West Midlands
       Police Report about the question of gates being forced. Paragraph 8 o f the
       representations made by the prosecution on 9th October 1998 refers to this. It is
       believed that the attention o f leading counsel in 1990 could not have been directed to
       the true facts. The Attorney is invited in his capacity as statutory superintendent of
       the Director o f Public Prosecutions to invite the CPS to waive privilege in respect of
       this advice, so that the judge can determine the abuse of process application on 4th
       January, and the motion to quash on 20th December, on a fully informed basis.




                                               4
»*   4*


          The Winkworth and Sherwoodjibe

          21     The final paragraph of Winkworth’s letter to you of 13th October contains an
                 apparently gratuitous jibe, alleging, without giving particulars, that I have made
                 misrepresentations. This is connected with the fact that I am employed, rather than in
                 private practice.

          22     I have asked Winkworths for an explanation o f this, and for the provision o f an
                  example o f a misrepresentation that I have made, but have received no reply. I
                  enclose a copy o f the ruling by Mr Cadbury, the Leeds stipendiary magistrate,
                  dismissing the argument that the prosecution was an abuse of process, and upholding
                 the integrity and motives o f the prosecution.

          23     I should, in turn, be grateful to be given an opportunity to deal with any new matters
                 raised by the defendants in reply to this letter.

          24     I shall be pleased to deal with any queries arising out of this letter.

          Yours faithfully,



          Ann Adlington




                                                          5
