                                                         irtfk.    /**•*“« *» « *6-«<<-
                                                                               &A.




SOLICITOR GENERAL
                                             copy:          ATTORNEY GENERAL,
                                                            PRIVATE OFFICE
                                                                                         4M
APPLICATION UNDER SECTION 13 OF THE CORONERS ACT 1988
                                                                                             Urj   2^   .
1.     The parents of Kevin Williams, who died during the Hillsborough disaster, have made
a further formal application under section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 for the Attorney                  ,
General’s consent to the making of an application in the High Court for an order quashing               \S
the inquisitions in respect of their son. The formal letter of application and memorial are at
the front of the attached ring bindei^'^P appendices in the binder contain the detailed
material relied upon by the parents of Kevin Williams.

2.      This case was the subject of an earlier request for the Attorney to exercise his powers
under section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 in January 1992. Again the request was
accompanied by a letter from Sir Malcolm Thornton MP. This request was refused. A
further request for leave under section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 was made on 15 April
1992 by Kevin Williams’ parents and five other applicants. This was considered carefully,
especially in relation to Kevin Williams, but consent was refused on 18 August 1992.

3.     The applicants also made an application on 5 May 1992 for judicial review in respect
of the decisions of Her Majesty’s Coroner for South Yorkshire in the course of the inquest.
This was refused on 5 November 1993 (flag 2).

4.    The case of Kevin Williams was also the subject of a debate led by Sir Malcolm
Thornton MP on 26 October 1994 (flag 3).

RELEVANT PROVISIONS AND GENERAL APPROACH
5.  Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 provides as follows:
     (1)    This section applies where, on an application by or under the authority of the
            Attorney General, the High Court is satisfied as respects a coroner ("the
            coroner concerned") either -
            (a)    that he refuses or neglects to hold an inquest which ought to be held;
                   or
            (b)    where an inquest has been held by him, that (whether by reason of
                   fraud, rejection of evidence, irregularity of proceedings, insufficiency
                   of enquiiy, the discovery of new facts or evidence or otherwise) it is
                   necessary or desirable in the interests of justice that another inquest
                   should be held.

6.     Section 13(l)(b) is material to the present application. The main ground for seeking
leave is new evidence available since the judicial review proceedings. This will allow leave
to be granted if it is considered necessary or desirable "in the interests of justice that another
inquest should be held".

7.     The question of when it may be in the interests of justice to order a fresh inquest was
considered in Re: Rapier (deceased) IT9861 3 A11ER 726 a case in which the High Court was
considering fresh evidence. The court held that it had power to order an inquest where it was
necessary to consider a complaint as, to the conduct of an early inquest or to consider new
evidence whicljjn ie h tp a s s il^ h av e caused a coroner’s jury to come to a diffgrentconclusiofl,
even though it coulanot be shown that there was a probability of a fresh inquest producing
a different verdict. The general principle which may be said to apply is that a new inquest
will be ordered when there is a real psk that justice has not been done.

BACKGROUND AND STRUCTURE OF THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUEST

8.     Kevin Williams was a spectator at the FA Cup semi-final between Nottingham Forest
and Liverpool held at Hillsborough on Saturday 15 April 1989. Kevin Williams is the son
of the applicants James Stephen and Ann Williams, was born on 27 May 1973 and was 15
years old when he died at Hillsborough Football Ground. Kevin moved from enclosure 4 to
enclosure 3 at the Lapping Lane end of the ground and died during the crush that occurred
that afternoon when, you will be aware, a total of 95 people were killed and 400 physically
injured. Internal investigations were carried out by the authorities and agencies involved in
the disaster. In addition a, full public inquiry was conducted bv Lord Justice Tavlor (as he
then was). A full criminal investigation was advised by the DPP directed at police conduct.
This was undertaken by the West Midlands Police. Against this background the inquest
proceeded in three phases:

        i)      Inquests on the deceased were formally opened on or about 19 April 1989 and
                then adjourned. This is quite normal.
        ii)     Between 1 May and 4 May 1990 the Coroner held a series of "mini inquests"
                covering the death of each victim. Lord Justice Taylor delivered his interim
                report in August 1989 which dealt with the events at Hillsborough (but not the
                wider issues relating to safety at sports grounds) and the Criminal Investigation
                was in process and it was likely to be some time before the DPP reached any
                decisions.
        iii)    The evidence taken at the "mini inquest" was heard by the jury. The inquest
                was tffen adjourned until November 1990 when evidence relating to the
                incident as a whole was heard. The jury returned verdicts of "accidental
                death".

9.     In deciding to hear the "mini inquest" the coroner appears to have been motivated by
an appreciation of the desire of individual families to know the details of the fate of their
loved Cnes! He decided to hear evidence in relation to each deceased confined to the
statutory questions of "who" the deceased was and "when" and "where" he met his death. He
indicated that he would postpone all wider investigation into the further question of "how"
the deceased came by their death until/SjftHr^he decision by the DPP on wnetner to in Sale
criminal proceedings.

10.     During the "mini inquest" the coroner took evidence from the pathologist and the
balance of the remaining evidence in two parts. First, a summary was received from a police
officer of the evidence obtained from eye witnesses as to the movement of the deceased on
the day of the disaster, the sightings made of them at the time of the fatal crash, the finding
of their bodies on the pitch, any attempts at resuscitation made, the taking of their bodies to
the temporary mortuary in the gym and the certification of death. He took no direct oral
evidence. Second, a police officer took the jury through all the documentary evidence
relating to the individual such as sightings of them on photographs and videos recovered from
the media plus positions marked on plans by the various witnesses.

11.     The form of these "mini inquests" was unorthodox and does not appear to comnlv with
Rule 37 of the Coroners Rules. Rule 37 requires that before documentary evidence is put
before an inquest the evidence should be summarised and the consent of the interested party
sought.

12.     Such an irregularity does not of itself render a fresh inmiest necessary in the interests
of justice, it is one ot the tactorfto be considered "in the round" when making a decision
on the application. Certainly had the Coroner received oral evidence from witnesses during
the inquest many of the Williams’ complaints may have been answered.

13.    The evidence taken in the mini inquest was heard by the jury. The inquest was
adjourned until November 1990 when evidence relating to the incident a y ^ h o le w a s h e a n l
The jury returned verdicts of "accidental death".

HISTORY OF THE APPLICATION

14.    The parents of Kevin Williams made an earlier application under section 13 of the
Coroners Act 1988. Sir Malcolm Thornton wrote to the previous Attorney General who on
11 February 1992 declined to grant consent but left the door open for reconsideration on the
basis of a properly prepared submission.

15.    A formal application was submitted, together with evidence on 15 April 1992. This
was rejected in August 1992 on the basis that an application "would have no reasonable
prospect of establishing that it is necessary or desirable in the interests of justice for a fresh
inquest to be held".
16.    An application for judicial review of the coroner’s decision was made on 5 May 1992,
this was in addition to the request for leave under section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988.
Judgment was given on 5 November 1993 (flag 2) when the court dismissed the application
to quash the verdicts of the jury at the inquest and to order fresh inquests.

17.     In respect of Kevin Williams, the court found that the coroner had made full inquiry
and there was overwhelming evidence that the deceased was dead by 3.15 pm. The court had
in its possession fresh statements from both PC Bruder and Deborah Martin. The court also
had in its possession a letter from Dr Iain West which criticised the pathologist heard at the
inquest . Iain West concluded that there was a realistic prospect that Kevin Williams was
alive after 3.15 pm and there was a possibility that he could have been saved. The Divisional
Court held his evidence could fouqd an appliratirm nr^ e r section 13 of the Coroners Act but
th eyw erescath ineabo i^2^j^st’s evidence and made it clear that it was far too speculative
to warrant the ordering of a fresh inquest. Dr West’s evidence had never been referred to t o
but is now contained in the memorial supporting this nresent application although any weight J
which may have been attached to it is severely diminished following the Divisional Court
ruling.

18.    The Divisional Court held that a verdict of "lack of care" would not have been
appropriate in this case as such a verdict is concerned with the failure to provide care in the
form of food, clothing, shelter, etc. and not with cardessness.

19.     The court when dismissing the application considered the matters which would have
been of concern had it decided to order a new inquest. It considered what the purpose of
ordering such an inquest would be but doubted that if the purpose were to obtaia fiulh£r_
examination of the last minutes of the deceased’s lives that anything would be learned but
that the process would be a very harrnwino am? The court also highlighted that four and a
half years had already passed, at that stage since the tragedy had occurred and that i t j ^ n J ^
be wrong to ask witnesses to come along five years later and to trv to cast their minds back
to events that they must be trying to forget.

20.     On 26 October 1994 Sir Malcolm Thornton MP tabled an adjournment debate about
the Hillsborough disaster and in particular about the death of Kevin Williams (flag 3). Sir
Malcolm Thornton MP only talked about events which related to Kevin Williams and which
occurred after the 3.15 pm cut off point. The Attorney General in the course of the debate
indicated that if a further formal application under section 13 of the Coroners Act was made
that he would look carefully at the evidence and information. The Attorney General indicated
that following the judgment of Lord Justice McGowan in the judicial review that, it "will
require really cogent and persuasive fresh arguments if they are now to result in an order by
the High Court that there should be a fresh inquest."
BASIS OF THE PRESENT APPLICATION

21.    Thememorial presents new evidence available since the judicial review proceedings.
The memorial does not specifically indicate which of S ^ ro u n d s cited in section 13(1 )(b)"
they rely upon but concentrates on the evidence which it is submitted supports the contention
that Kevin Williams was alive long after 3.15 pm. It is contended that the coroner should
have heard PC Bruder ancLDeborah Martin. The previous application alleged irregularity of
proceedings, insufficiency of inquiry, as well as the discovery of new facts or evidence. This
application was rejected. In particular you considered that the coroner was right not to leave
a verdict of lack of care, to the jury (flag 4).

22.    Much emphasis has been placed both in this application and in the previous
applications, on the "3 15 nm cifl off noj|j|" The coroner did not in fact decline to received
evidence relating to matters after 3.15 pm. Indeed, he was careful to ensure that all evidence
about what happened to individual deceased persons was diawrLt^ether and presented to th e ''



23.      The test generally adopted in relation to section 13 applications is whether there is a
realistic likelihood that the High Court will hold that the interests of justice make a fresh
inquest necessary or desirable for one of the statutory, reasons. Following previous
applications it was decided that it was not established that there had been "insufficiency of
enquiry" or "a failure properly to direct the jury". Indeed this was confirmed by the High
Court in the judgment dismissing the application for judicial review. Nothing in the current
application would change that position.

24.     The only question left is that of 'Tresl^evidence''. The new evidence available since
the judicial review proceedings includes the following:

       i)      Dr J Bums MD FRC. Home Office pathologist, (Annex G of the memorial).
               Mr and Mrs Williams submit that this lgj^f offers substantial support to the
               evidence of Dr West and to the evidence of Deborah Martin. Dr Burns, states
               that he can "see no reason to disagree with" Dr Slater’s suggestion that Kevin
               lost consciousness very quickly. He then goes on to disagree with the
               generalisations made by Dr Slater and states that hp can "see no reason to
               doubt the evidence of MjssJVTartin_when she states that she picked Kevin up
               in' her aims, that Kevin opened his eves, moved Ms mouth and said ‘Mom’,
               flicked his eyelashes, closed his eyes and died." You may consider that Dr
               Burns’ evidence should be regarded as similar to Dr West’s evidence which
               the Divisional Court found to be too speculative to warrant thp myWirm n£_a
               fresh inquest. In addition when considering an earlier application you
               indicated that "the medical evidence given by Dr Slater and Dr G Gumpert is
               compelling."
       ii)    Tony.^dw^^^ (Annex H and I). Tony Edwards was employed as a non­
              emergency unqualified day ambulanceman on the day of the Hillsborough
              disaster. He was in an ambulance that was instructed to attend the incident at
              approximately 3.30 pm. He was told to drive to the far end of the pitch
              without stopping. Mr Edwards’ evidence corroborates that of PC Bruder that
              Kevin Williams was still alive aftet-3 15 pro. It also confirms PC Bruder s
              evidence that he saw a second ambulance arrive whilst Kesrin Williams y/gs
              still being resuscitated. It does not, however, alter his evidence that K evin
              Williams was dead by the time he left him. Mr and Mrs Williams allege that
              the failure to present the coroner with this information or appraise the court of
              the existence of Tony Edwards amounts to a deliberate concealment and
              suppression of evidence. Certainly Tony Edwards asserts that he was
              interviewed by West Midlands Police in some detail. Even if Tony Edwards
              had appeared before the coronerjt is doubtful whether his evidence alone
              would have changed the inquest verdict.

       iii)   John Prescott, (Annex L). John Prescott also corroborates the evidence of PC
              Bruder. He came forward after having seen himself on the television during
              the Cook Renprt which examined and questioned the coroner’s decision at the
              inquest. He confirms that PC Bruder resuscitated Kevin Williams and that he
              found a pulse. However, he also confirms that a woman doctor appeared who
              checked Kevin Williams, and confirmed that he was dead. So although Mr
              Prescott confirms PC Bruder’s story his evidence supports the assertion that
              Deborah Martin must have been mistaken when she asserted that Kevin
              Williams was still alive when she accompanied him to the gymnasium.

25. Other evidence which was first used in the "Cook Report" is enclosed with the
memorial.At the time of the adjournment debate in October 1994, the Attorney stated that
the "Cook Report" did not bring matters forward beyond where they stood at the time of the
judicial review."

26.    The case of Kevin Williams is the most unsatisfactory of ^ the Hillsborough victims
because the evidential position was confused at the inquest and has subsequently become even
more confused. New evidence has been put forward on at least three occasions all of which
make the position evenjnorc con fu sed . However, it is doubtful whether the uncertainties^.
flowing from the evidence haye any bearing on a legal issue. In any event the new evidence,
onlVl>erves to_confirrn that Kevin Williams was dead_byJhe_time_hej^aghedjhejno^ary.
Tn'^iew of this there seems even less reason to support a new inquest.

27.     The wish of the Williams family to have a clear picture of the final minutes of
Kevin’s life is understandable. Whether taking oral evidence rather than hearing the summary
in the mini inquest would have made any difference or enabled the issues to be resolved more
satisfactorily is doubtful. The new evidence does not take the matter further, other than,
perhaps, supporting th e e v id e n c e ^ fP C J^ u ^ .

28.     The question of the coroner’s omission to allow the jury to consider a verdict of "lack
of care" was canvassed in the judicial review where the Divisional Court fo
                               aflC£2BD^t^inthiscgse. This appears, in any event, to have
been accepted by the applicant’s counsel in that case.

29.     There is nothing in the present application which raises new issues which were not
considered in the earner applications or by the Divisional Court in the proceedings for judicial
review. There is also the difficulty which you considered before of limiting the scope of a.
freshinauest. Any new inquest could lead to a re-examination of the-whole incident even
though it may be concerned with only one death. There is also the difficulty that the death
took place nearly six years ago. As the Divisional Court stated, it is doubtful whether
anything more would be learned if a fresh inquest were ordered "but the process would be
a very harrowing one involving a large number of witnesses and lasting if not for 96 days,
for not far short. Moreover, in respect of whose fault, if anyones, it is, the fact is that four
and a half years have already passed since the tragedy occurred."

30.     Lord Justice McCowen went on to say, "The families are pursuing this matter because
they have a deep instinct to know the circumstances in which their relatives died. I am
perfectly prepared to accept that that is their motive and I respect it, but I hope they, for their
part, can understand that I have to take an objective view and I have to consider the interests
of all concerned including those of all the witnesses who would have to come along five
years later and try to cast their minds back to events that they must have been trying to
forget. Taking that objective view, and considering the interests of all concerned, I would in
my discretion conclude that this was not a case in which it will be right to order a fresh
inquest".

CONCLUSION


31.     I see no reason to depart from the judgment given by Lord Justice McGowan on the
basis of the new evidence put forward by Mr and Mrs Williams and therefore would advise
that there is nothing which makes a fresh inquest necessary or in the interests of justice.




ALISON SAUNDERS
13 March 1996
i       ^ w4j-—         r_   a ir   *




              With the Compliments
                             of

    0 Division                      U     "   V i4dlCB/d
    Home Office                     V
    Queen Anne's Gate               *-3
    LONDON
    SW1H 9AT
    Direct Line 071 273
    Switchboard 071 273 3000
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF JUDICATURE               No: CQ-1009-92
QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION
(DIVISIONAL COURT}

                                 Royal Courts of Justice
                                 Strand
                                 London WC2

                                 Friday, 5th November 1993


                           B e f o r e   :

                       LORD JUSTICE MCCOWAN          65869
                               and

                        MR JUSTICE TURNER




     REGINA v HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                  EX PARTE STRINGER AND OTHERS




MR A JONES QC and MR E FITZGERALD (instructed by Malcolm J
Gregg & Co., Century Buildings, 31 North Street, Liverpool
L2 6RG) appeared on behalf of the Applicants.

MR T COGHLAN QC and MR P PREECE (instructed by Mark Webster.
City Solicitor and Head of Administration, Sheffield City
Council, Town Hall, Sheffield, SI 2HH) appeared on behalf of
the Respondent.

MR M KALLIPETIS QC (instructed by Dibb Lupton Broomhead,
Fountain Precinct, Balm Green, Sheffield SI 1RZ) appeared on
behalf of the South Yorkshire Ambulance Service.


      (Computer Aided Transcript of the Stenograph Notes of
     John Larking, Chancery House, Chancery Lane, London WC2
                   Telephone No: 071 404 7464
             Official Shorthand Writers to the Court)


                         J U D G M E N T
                    (As approved by the Court)
*   ,




            IN THE SUPREME COURT OF JUDICATURE               No: CQ-1009-92
            QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION
            (DIVISIONAL COURT)

                                             Royal Courts of Justice
                                             Strand
                                             London WC2

                                             Friday, 5th November 1993

        B
                                       B e f o r e   :

                                   LORD JUSTICE MCCOWAN

                                           and

                                    MR JUSTICE TURNER




                 REGINA v HER MAJESTY'S CORONER FOR SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                              EX PARTE STRINGER AND OTHERS
        D



            MR A JONES QC and MR E FITZGERALD (instructed by Malcolm J
            Gregg & Co., Century Buildings, 31 North Street, Liverpool
            L2 6RG) appeared on behalf of the Applicants.

            MR T COGHLAN QC and MR P PREECE (instructed by Mark Webster.
            City Solicitor and Head of Administration, Sheffield City
            Council, Town Hall, Sheffield, Si 2HH) appeared on behalf of
            the Respondent.

            MR M KALLIPETIS QC (instructed by Dibb Lupton Broomhead,
            Fountain Precinct, Balm Green, Sheffield SI 1RZ) appeared on
            behalf of the South Yorkshire Ambulance Service.


                 (Computer Aided Transcript of the Stenograph Notes of
                John Larking, Chancery House, Chancery Lane, London WC2
                              Telephone No: 071 404 7464
                        Official Shorthand Writers to the Court)


                                     J U D G M E N T
                                (As approved by the Court)



                                   1
                                       Friday, 5th November 1993

                           J U D G M E N T

LORD JUSTICE MCCOWAN:   This is an application of 5th May 1992

    for judicial review in respect of various decisions of Her

   Majesty's Coroner for South Yorkshire in the course of the

    inquest held by him between 18th April 19 89 and 28th March

    1991 into the deaths of six named persons, plus 89 others,

   at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15th April 1989; and also in

   respect of the verdict recorded by the Coroner's jury at the

   end of the inquest that all 95 were cases of accidental

   death.

        The applicants are relatives of the six named deceased

   persons.   The relief sought is an Order of Certiorari to

   quash the jury's verdicts and also perhaps, but not

   necessarily, to order fresh inquests.

        On 15th April 1992, that is to say prior to making the

   application for judicial review, solicitors acting for the

   applicants sent to the Attorney General a memorial on behalf

   of the applicants requesting him to grant them leave under

   section 13(1)(b) of the Coroners Act 1988 to apply to the

   High Court for the inquest verdicts to be quashed and a

   fresh series of inquests held.     The applicants' legal

   advisers then decided to go for judicial review as well on

   the basis that under it the Court would have the alternative

   option of striking down the verdict without necessarily

   having to order a fresh inquest.    There followed the present-

   application.   In the event, the Attorney General refused the
fiat on 18th August 1992 on the ground that he had concluded

that there was nothing which would justify authorising an

application to the High Court for a new inquest, as the

application would have no reasonable prospect of

establishing that it was necessary or desirable in the

interests of justice for a fresh inquest to be held.

Meanwhile, the application for leave to bring the present

proceedings had been adjourned to await the outcome of the

application for the fiat.       It came before Macpherson J on

6th April 1993 and he granted leave.

        The applicants and their deceased relatives are all

from Liverpool.       On 15th April 1989 the deceased relatives

had come to Sheffield to watch Liverpool play Sjje^fiSld 1 “         f

Wednesday in the semi-final of the Football Association Cup
    §   V—C ' i' 1    J

at the               cfiound, Hillsborough Stadium.   The kick-off

of the match was scheduled for 3 pm.        Prior to kick-off

there was a great build up of supporters outside the

Leppings Lane entrance to the ground which caused pressure

and discomfort to those trying to get into the ground

through the turnstiles.       At 2.52 pm the Chief

Superintendent, who was the police officer in charge of

crowd control at the match, decided in order to relieve the

pressure at the turnstiles to let the gates at the Leppings

Lane entrance be opened.       The opening of one of the gates,

gate C, resulted in a sudden influx of about two thousand

supporters through gate C, the great majority of whom went

on through a tunnel and into spectator pens 3 and 4.        These
pens were capable of holding just over a thousand persons

each, but they were already full.        The result was the

building up of an intolerable pressure on the supporters at
the front of the pens.

     This was so when the match started at 2.59 pm.           it

intensified at 3.04 pm, when there was a further surge

caused by spectators'     responses to a near miss at goal by a

Liverpool player.     Many supporters were crushed against the

wall at the front and by then, if not before, many had

suffered severe crush injuries from which they died.          The

match was stopped at 3.05 pm and only then was the gravity

of the situation appreciated.        In the result, 95 people were

killed and some 400 physically injured.        The great majority

of those who had been killed had been in pen 3, but at least
five were in pen 4.

     On 17th April 1989 Taylor LJ, as he then was, was

appointed to conduct an inquiry into the disaster.        On 18th

April 1989 the Coroner formally opened and adjourned the

inquest.   From then and from time to time until 28th March

1991, he conducted the inquests into the deaths of the 95

individuals, sitting a total of 96 days.        His inquiry was

assisted by an independent police force, namely the West

Midlands Constabulary, who investigated the incident and

gathered evidence.    The Coroner faced the complications of

the sheer number of deaths, plus the fact that the Taylor

Inquiry was proceeding.        From the latter emerged an interim

report in August 1989.     But then the Coroner was told that


                           4
the Director of Public Prosecutions was being asked to

consider bringing criminal charges arising out of the

incident.   Eventually he was told that while the DPP made

his mind up, he could resume the inquest on a limited

basis.   This was that he could consider three of the

questions necessary under the Coroners Act, namely who the

deceased was and when and where he met his death, but must

not deal with how, for fear of prejudicing any criminal

proceedings that the DPP might decide to bring.

     What the Coroner, therefore, decided upon was that who,

when and where should be determined at a preliminary part of

the inquests for each of the 95 individuals, with the issue

of how being held over until a decision on criminal

proceedings was reached.   He also decided that the best way

to avoid the pitfalls of prejudice to the criminal

investigation was that the factual evidence for the first

part of the inquiry should be put in the form of summaries

by the West Midlands officers.   All this he explained to the

solicitor, Mr Fraser, who was representing the relatives,

and he agreed with the course proposed.   Indeed, the idea

was positively supported by the families, who were

distressed at having to wait what must have seemed an

eternity for the hearing of the investigation into the

individual deaths.   There followed a serious of mini

inquests, lasting from 18th April to 4th May 1990, with

Mr Fraser representing the vast majority of the relatives.

Then there was a pause while the DPP's decision was arrived
at.   Eventually, in September 1990, the Coroner was told

that the Director had decided not to prosecute anyone in

respect of the disaster.

      The main inquest began on 19th November 1990.   The

Coroner had made a provisional decision that he would impose

a cut-off time for the evidence he would hear of 3.15 pm on

the day of the disaster, being the time of the arrival of

the first ambulance, because he took the view that on the

overwhelming pathological evidence available to him

permanent irrecoverable damage had by then been suffered by

all the deceased.   In the absence of the jury, Mr Timothy

King of counsel, appearing for 43 of the families, including

five of those making the present application, argued against

that cut-off primarily on the ground that there was material

to support the proposition that not all the victims were

necessarily dead by 3.15 pm.   The Coroner, however, having

listened to those submissions, was not persuaded from his

preliminary view, and the inquest proceeded with the jury

present on that basis.

      The application for judicial review in respect of which

leave was given contained seven grounds.   Before this Court,

however, Mr Alun Jones for the applicants sought leave to

add two more, and I have regard first to those matters.     The

first of these supplementary grounds was that the Coroner

should have disqualified himself from hearing the inquests

and invited an outside Coroner to do so on the ground that

he was closely associated with Sheffield City Council, who
were an interested party appearing by counsel before the

Coroner and jury.     The nature of the association was that

the Coroner was appointed and his salary paid by that

Council.   Mr Jones made clear to us that he was not

suggesting actual, but only apparent bias.     He submitted,

however, on the authority of R v Gough [1993] 2 WLR 883 that

there was here a real danger of bias.     For the Coroner,

Mr Coghlan pointed out that, once appointed, the Coroner is

wholly independent, and that under section 3(4) of the

Coroners Act 1988 his tenure is determinable only by the

Lord Chancellor, who could remove him for "inability or

misbehaviour in the discharge of his duty".

     The real problem facing Mr Jones is that he has to

accept that from the start of the inquest it was known to

the applicants1 legal advisers that the Coroner had been

appointed and his salary was paid by an interested party,

and yet at no time was any application made to him to

disqualify himself.    That is immaterial, submits Mr Jones.

It is, he says, open to a relative to stand by, with the

necessary knowledge of the facts amounting to apparent bias,

for 96 days of an inquest, and indeed until after verdict,

and then seek judicial review to quash the verdict and have

a fresh inquest on the ground of apparent bias.

    The delay does not of course end there.     The inquest

ended on 28th March 1991, and it was not until the end of

October 1993 that the suggestion of bias was ever advanced

on behalf of the applicants.    It was the view of this Court


                          7
that that suggestion came far too late and had no merit.

Accordingly, we refused the application to add that ground.

        The second new ground which Mr Jones sought to add was

that the Coroner's direction upon the elements of the

offence of manslaughter was wrong in law.      What the Coroner

did was to direct them in terms of recklessness, in so

doing, faithfully following the judgment of Watkins LJ in R

v West London Coroner ex parte Gray and others     [1987] 2 WLR

1020.     He did so with the full agreement of Mr King

representing the relatives.      Mr Jones now says that this was

a misdirection because by the unreported cases of R v

Holloway and others decided in the Court of Appeal (Criminal

Division) on 20th May 1993, the offence of involuntary

manslaughter is established if there is proof of a grossly

negligent act or omission causing death.

        Assuming, without deciding, that there was a

misdirection, no blame can attach to the Coroner since he

summed up as he was told to do by the Divisional Court and

with the approval of counsel for the relatives.      That

Mr Jones accepts.    What exactly is it that Mr Jones would

have had the Coroner say?      He gave us a long passage ending

with these words:

            ".....that the attempted avoidance of the
            perceived risk, namely by opening the gates, was
            attended by such a high degree of negligence that
            it justifies a conviction for unlawful killing".


So directed, he submits, the jury could have found unlawful

killing.    But there is nothing to say they would have done.


                           8
The verdict they in fact brought in was a perfectly rational
one.

       What then, we asked, would be the point of sending the

matter back for another inquest?    Mr Jone s1s answer was

that, whatever the verdict might prove to be, the function

of the jury would have been fulfilled.    He agreed that no

prosecution of any police officer would result because the

decision was taken as long ago as September 1990    (before the

main inquest) that no one should be prosecuted.    It is, he

said, a point of legal purity.    Mr Coghlan said that a fatal

flaw in the application was that no notice of it had been

given to the South Yorkshire Police who, had they known of

it, might well have wanted to appear and to resist it.

Consequently, if we granted the application, there would

have to be an adjournment with yet more delay.    Once again

this Court considered that the application was made far too

late and that, if successful, it would achieve nothing of

value.    Consequently, we also rejected the application to

add this ground.

       I turn to the first ground in the application, which is

that the Coroner wrongly conducted the mini inquests by

reference to summaries of the statements of eye witnesses

which were read out and whose contents could not therefore

be tested by oral evidence and questioning.    The problem

that faced Mr Jones over this ground is the terms of the

Coroner Rules 1984, Rule 37(3) (c), which permits admission

of documentary evidence at an inquest provided the Coroner


                         9
first announces that objection may be taken to its

admission.   In fact, Mr Fraser, on behalf of the relatives,

expressed complete contentment with the use of the summary.

Accordingly, Mr Jones felt obliged to tell the Court

immediately that he could not pursue this ground.

     The second ground alleges that the Coroner failed to

comply with Rule 37 of the Coroners Rules in that he did not

go through the laid down procedure of first summarising the

contents of summaries and ascertaining whether there was an

objection to the proposed course.   As with ground one,

Mr Jones acknowledged that this ground had no substance and

accordingly abandoned it also.

     The next ground is that the Coroner wrongly introduced

a cut-off point of 3.15 pm at the outset of the main inquest

into the issue of how the deceased met their deaths, with

the result that there was no inquiry into whether, or how

far, their deaths were caused in part by the delay in

calling the emergency services and any shortcomings in the

response of the police and emergency services after

3.15 pm.   The Coroner gave his reasons for imposing this

cut-off.   This is what he said:

           "It is from my understanding of the pathological
           evidence, the overwhelming pathological evidence
           is and was that the people died as a result of
           crushing or traumatic asphyxia. Different words
           were used, but the sense was always the same.  The
           underlying problem which these poor men and women
           were subjected to was an inability to breathe.

           That does not mean to say that some of them did
           not in fact respire for a period of time or even
           have a heart beat thereafter, but the damage was
           done, and indeed both, Dr Gumpert, Dr Slater, Prof

                         10
          Usher, who dealt with this question in an overall
          point of view, all in fact said, as   understand
          their evidence, exactly the same."

Then a little later:

           "The medical evidence was that once - - I am not
           quoting verbatim - - but the sense of what
           Professor Usher said, and, indeed, the others as
           well, was that once the chest was fixed so that
         I respiration could no longer take place, then     II
         1 irrecoverab]p hraJ n damage would occur between w
         V four and six minute s . That is the point."       '

     In justification of what the Coroner did, Mr Coghlan,

appearing for him, drew to the Court's attention some words

of Bingham LJ in R v Her Majesty's Coroner for East Kent ex

parte Spooner 152 JP 115 at 122F:

          ".....the coroner is by law an inquisitor; the
          witnesses called are those whom he, under the
          statute, thinks it expedient to examine, and he is
          very much the master of his own procedure.

          These considerations are fortified here because
          the coroner has immersed himself in a huge mass of
          material which the court has not seen. We have
          scarcely glimpsed the top of the iceberg of
          evidence with which he is familiar.  Very great
          weight therefore should be given to his judgment,
          although on questions of law he is of course
          exercising a judgment, not a discretion.

          It is his duty to guide the jury to a correct
          verdict but his responsibility is to conduct a
          fact-finding exercise, not to apportion blame and
          not to decide civil liability.  In a case such as
          this the chain of causation may be of almost
          infinite length.  The coroner had to break it
          somewhere to keep his inquiry within tolerable
          bounds.  He broke it at what I judge to be a
          reasonable and sustainable point, particularly
          bearing in mind the exhaustive public inquiry
          which had already been conducted by Sheen J . "

I should say that that case was an application for judicial

review in respect of the inquests into the capsizing of the

Herald of Free Enterprise.   Adapting those words to the


                        11
 present case,   it seems to me that on the face of it the

 Coroner cut off the evidence      at a reasonable and sustainable

point, particularly bearing in mind the exhaustive public

inquiry which had already been conducted by Taylor LJ.           I

would add that it was also a compassionate point from the

aspect of the victims' relatives.

      However,   the applicants next point is connected,

because it is    there said that the Coroner wrongly refused to

call a Dr John Ashton and a Dr Glyn Phillips, who had highly

relevant evidence to give, because that evidence, or much of
it, fell after the cut-off point.

      It is necessary now to have a look at the interim

Taylor Report.     He found that the police had no alternative

but tq_open the crates f but that the blunder they made was

that the order to open was not accompanied or followed by

any other order to deal with the consequences, and, in

particular, to prevent those who entered from pouring

through the tunnel ^I^ £ >1^ ^ a l£®3Ldycrowded<ipen£iiii^   ^

He went on to deal with what he had heard from Drs Ashton

and Phillips.    This appears at paragraph 296 of the report

under the heading "First Aid and Emergency Services":

           "I say at the outset of this chapter that no
           valid criticism can be made of the response by the
           St John Ambulance, by SYMAS or by the fire brigade
           on 15 April.   Indeed, no represented party
           ventured any criticism of them. The only attack
           on SYMAS came from two Liverpool doctors. One
           claimed that ambulances did not arrive swiftly or
           with sufficient equipment and that there was a
           lack of triage.   He was proved to be wrong in all
           three respects. Unfortunately he had seen fit to
           go on television on 15 April when he said more
           lives could have been saved if staff and equipment

                           12
                  had arrived earlier. Apart from being proved
                  wrong in fact as to the times of arrival of
                  ambulances, he conceded in evidence that it was
A                 not possible to say whether lives could have been
                  saved.  His comments on television were
                  irresponsible.  The other doctor complained of the
                  absence of defibrillators.  I am satisfied on
                  overwhelming evidence that to attempt to use a
                  defibrillator on the pitch with people milling
                  about would have been highly dangerous owing to
B                 the risk of injury from the electric charge."

     I should point out that Dr Ashton was the first doctor there

     referred to, and Dr Phillips the second.      Continuing at

     paragraph 297, Taylor LJ said:

C                    find that all three of the emergency services
                  named above responded promptly when alerted, and
                  that they brought appropriate equipment and that
                  their personnel operated efficiently.



                  301. There was insufficiently close co-operation
                  between the police and the emergency services.    It
                  is clear that SYMAS and the fire brigade should
                  have been called earlier than they were.   However,
                  in view of the nature and extent, of the crushing,
                  the time when police rescue began and the
                  pathetically short period for which those unable
                  to breathe could survive, it is improbable that
                  quicker recourse to the emergency services would
E.                have saved more lives."

          We have been through the evidence of Dr Ashton at the

     inquiry in considerable detail and, for my part, I am not

     surprised that Tavlor LJ toQ}£ the view of him that he
F
     expressed.     I do not think it would have made the slightest

     difference to the result if he had given evidence at the

     inquest.     Dr Phillips seems to have had only two criticisms

     of the ambulance service and both of these were rejected by
     Taylor LJ.

          One other witness at the inquiry, it is suggested,


                                13
H
 should also have been called by the Coroner, a Mr Eccleston,

 a senior nurse manager, but I do not believe that the

 evidence he could have given was such that it should have

 caused the Coroner to abandon his sensible cut-off point

 based, as it was, on the plain and virtually unchallenged

 evidence of the pathologists as to when the deceased would
 have died.

      Mr Jones does not suggest that the Taylor Report should

 have been ignored by the Coroner.     As to the statutory

 position, by section 11(2) of the 1988 Act the Coroner is

 required to call all persons who tender evidence as to the

 facts of the death "whom he considers it expedient to

examine".     That gives the Coroner a discretion as to whom he

calls to give evidence, based on expediency.      In the light

of the contents of the interim Taylor Report, plus the

pathological evidence, I am very far from concluding that

his exercise of discretion was plainly wrong.

     I turn next to consider what is in fact the seventh
ground, which reads:

            "There is now available some evidence that the
            Coroner and his jury were not given a full picture
            or tne evidence of some of the witnesses whose
            statements were partially summarised at t-hp mini
            inquests, and that the result was that the
            proceedings were vitiated by the omission of
            certain facts."

Mr Jones looked in turn at each of the six victims whose

relatives have brought these proceedings.     I begin with

Paul Carlile.     Professor Alan Usher was the pathologist in

his case.     His evidence is at page 59 of the applicants'


                           14
bundle.   Here I read this question coming from Mr Fraser:

          "Q. Prof Usher, can you offer some reassurance
          to the family about the timescale for this type of
          injury in terms of the time that you think it may
          have taken for Paul to lose consciousness once the
          crushing that we have heard about actually started
          to take place?

          A. Yes, the reason for Paul's death was that his
          chest was held so tightly that he could not
          breathe in or out and, once that had happened,
          then he would have been unconscious in a matter of
          seconds, between 10-20 seconds.  He would have
          died within a few minutes."

From the form of the question it is to be observed that the

aim of the advocate was to reassure the victim's relatives

that the victim had not had to suffer long.

     Mr Hollinghurst, an off-duty nurse, was in pen 4.     At

the mini inquest his evidence was summarised by an officer

called Evans in these words:

          "After being subjected to this pressure for
          approximately 15 minutes, Mr Hollinghurst became
          aware of a space being created around him, and on
          looking down to the floor of the terracing, he saw
          a man he now knows to be Paul William Carlile.
          Mr Hollinghurst saw that Paul was blue in the face
          and, on not detecting a pulse, he tried to
          resuscitate him by heart massage and mouth to
          mouth resuscitation.  Paul failed to respond to
          the emergency treatment and Mr Hollinghurst then
          moved on to treat another casualty."

He gave evidence at the main inquest and was asked:

          "Q. What happened then?    What did you see or
          notice?

          A. The crush got worse rather than better and
          after a few minutes I was aware that somebody was
          on the ground right by where I was standing, by
          where I was positioned.

          Q. Was the match still in progress when you
          became aware of this or can you not remember?

          A.   Yes, the match was going on.

                         15
               Q.    This was in fact a young man?

               A.    That's right.

               Q. Being a charge nurse you checked to see
               whether his pulse was going and things like that,
               as soon as you could?

               A.    Yes, but not at that particular moment.
B
               Q.    I realise that.

               A.    As soon as the crowd cleared....

               Q. That is in fact my next question.   How long
               did it take before you were able to qet at this
               lad?

               A.  I really could not put a timescale on it
               because it just seemed like for ever.  It seemed
               like it was getting tighter and tighter and you
               were fighting for your breath.  It was probably
               only a matter of ten minutes at the moment, five
               or ten minutes."

D   Later he was asked:

               "Q. As I say, at that point that is when you had
               a look to see whether there was anything to be
               done for this lad?

               A.   Yes.

               Q.  In fact I think you came to the conclusion
               there wasn't, is that right?

               A.   I tried, as well the lad who was immediately
               below me. There was somebody just a couple of
               feet further away.   He was also in the same
               condition.

               Q.   So you tried for both of them?

               A.   Yes, I was going back       "

    Then he went    on to say that he identified both the persons

    concerned asdead and that the      younger one was in fact Paul

    Carlile.

         Last week the applicant's legal advisers got from the


                              16
H
Coroner's solicitors a statement by Mr Hollinghurst dated

5th May 1989.   It was in essence what he had said before.

The rest of the story is that two police officers then tried

to resuscitate him and their attempts were taken over by an

unknown ambulanceman, but without success.   There is no

evidence of any lack of care by that ambulanceman, and

indeed at the mini inquest the deceased's family, through

Mr Fraser, thanked the two policemen and the unknown

ambulanceman for the efforts that he had made.   I can see no

valid ground for complaint in respect of this deceased.

                      (Short Adjournment)

     Before leaving this deceased, Mr Jones placed reliance

on a passage in the recently discovered statement by

Mr Hollinghurst which read as follows:

          I was aware of a hand grabbing at my leg.  I
          reached down and took hold of his hand.   I was
          shouting to everyone that someone was down but the
          crush was that bad no one could move anyway.  I
          was frantically trying to pull the person up,
          grabbing at any part of him that I could but it
          was hopeless.11

It looks clear that the person who was doing the grabbing

was Paul Carlile; obviously he was alive at that stage.     But

the answer, I am afraid, is to be found in the further

passage in that statement:

          "After about 15 minutes I was suddenly aware of
          space being created around me and when I looked
          down I saw two men. The first was a white lad
          aged about 19 y r s ."


He then describes him and says:

          "His face was blue in colour and he was bloated.
          I checked for a pulse but there was none."

                        17
A little later he says:

          "I then tried to revive the younger lad by heart
          massage and mouth to mouth resuscitation but I was
          getting no response so I then tried on the older
          man. Again there was no response and eventually
          someone took hold of me and said I'd done what I
          could and that I should get out."


It seems fairly obvious that by that stage he was in fact
beyond revival.

     I turn next to Michael Kelly.     The pathologist in his

case was Dr John Clark and his evidence is to be found at

page 185 of the applicant's bundle.    He said:

          "His face was rather congested and had a bluish
          discolouration.  These changes, I have to say,
          were fairly mild in comparison to a lot of the
          other people and one of the other features of
          asphyxia is to find little haemorrhages on the
          skin. These weren't in fact present."


He continued later:

          "He hadn't inhaled vomit and he had not suffered
          any internal or severe injuries and there was no
          natural disease to account for his death and so I
          still think he died of crush asphyxia and for some
          reason the signs of that were rather mild."
Later again:

          "He ^probably lost consciousness within a short
          period of time, ten or fifteen seconds or so, and
          then knew nothing about it after that."

     At 3.08 pm the deceased was to be seen in a video in

pen 3 in "obvious distress".   The summary at the mini

inquest in his case was given by Detective Inspector Layton

and among other things he said this:

          "PC Maughan attempted to resuscitate a man at the
          Leppings Lane end of the pitch but without
          success. He assisted spectators to carry the man
          to the Spion Kop end of the ground where he states

                          18
            he left him with a St John's Ambulance Officer who
            has not been identified."


Then he continued:

           "It is fair to say that Michael's sister has since
           met PC Maughan and following that meeting I think
           they are both satisfied that it was actually
           Michael that he attempted to assist."


       At the main inquest this deceased's sister asked the

Coroner to call PC Maughan, and he did.      I read certain

passages of that evidence to be found beginning on page
196:

           "Q. You got on to the field just after three,
           about four minutes past three, 13 that right?

           A.   Yes.   The players were still on the pitch.



           Q. He did not appear to you to be breathing at
           that stage?

           A.   That is right.

           Q.   He also looked blue, is   that correct?

           A.   That is right.

           Q. I think you then positioned him and started
           resuscitation, is that right?

           A.   That is correct, sir.

           Q. In fact you thought you     were successful,   is
           that right?

           A.   I did think I was successful."

A little later he said:

           "....with the help of some civilians we turned the
           man over, worked on him for a few minutes.  He
           appeared to start to breathe again and then we got
           a hoarding and carried him to the ambulance area
           at the other end of the pitch.


                          19
          Q. Before you tell me about that you came on to
          the pitch about three or four minutes past three.
          How long was the time interval before you got to
          this chap? Have you any idea?

          A.   Probably three or four minutes."


Again on page 198 he gave this answer:

          "We continued breathing for him for a while, then
          he appeared to slip unconscious but he was
          breathing, it was just before we took him away to
          the other end of the pitch.



          Q . What did you do with him when you got to that
          position?

          A.   We handed him to the ambulancemen      "

Mr King cross-examined:

          "Q........ You say the players were still on the
          pitch when you got onto the field?

          A. That is correct, sir."


On page 200, Mr King:

          "Q.  I know it is difficult, but you say you
          worked on the man Michael Kelly for a few minutes,
          I think you put it, didn't you?

          A.   That is correct.

          Q. You were clearly confident in your
          recollection and that you appeared to have won
          through, if I can put it that way?

         A.     Yes, sir, I was.

         Q.   That was an expression which you used when you
         were describing it - I think you have spoken to
         Mrs Kelly about it, haven't you?

         A.    Yes.

         Q. And You used the expression 'We have won that
         o n e ', or something like that?

         A.    That is right, I did.

                          20
             Q. So it does sound as if you were quite
             confident in your own mind when you took the man
             over to where you put him into the care of the St
             John's Ambulance, that he at that stage was still
             breathing?

             A.   I was quite confident he was, sir."


     The criticism made was that the summary could not be

reconciled with the evidence because the summary had it that

Mr Maughan's attempt at resuscitation had been "without

success".     The suggestion made was that Detective Inspector

Layton had been giving a false picture in order to create

the impression that Mr Kelly was then dead and nothing more

could have been done for him.

     Subsequent to that criticism being made by Mr Jones, he

was given by counsel for the Coroner a statement made by

PC Maughan on 15th February 1990, that is to say before the

mini inquest, and which was no doubt used by Detective

Inspector Layton in the compilation of the summary.     Looking

at that statement I see these words:

             "I saw that the man was blue in the face and
             appeared not to be breathing.  I placed the man on
             the ground near to the goal nets and started to
             resuscitate him. After a while the man started to
             breathe but kept slipping back unconscious."

Having seen that, Mr Jones fairly conceded that his

criticism of Detective Inspector Layton could not be
sustained.

     I      deal next jgith Kevin Williams. In his,case the
                 ^                   ,
pathologist was DrjSlater and I take up his evidence on page

248B of the applicant's bundle:


                           21
          "My examination of Kevin showed that the main
          finding was that of asphyxia.      This opinion was
          formed through the extensive blueness on the face
          and upper part of the chest.      In addition there
          were small haemorrhages in both the face and
          internal organs, including the brain, heart and
          lungs            This had also resulted in four
          fractures to the small bones in the_a.ctua 1 volae
          b o x ...... the compression of the neck or chest has
          occurred here and unconsciousness occurs very
          rapidly, certainly within a few seconds, and there
          is one reported case of it occurring apparently
          instantaneously.      Following unconsciousness then
          there is no discomfort and no pain.      Death then
          occurs after approximately three to five
          minutes."


At G:

         Q. Now the reason why I asked you was this, and I
         want to put this to you because I would like to
         get your view on it, one Officer will be dealing
         with the value of this evidence in a moment but
         she [a Woman Special Constable called Debra
         Martin] says that at a point when this lad was in
         the gymnasium, in other words he had already been
         moved across the pitch, she says she helped him
         into the gym from the pitch, presumably she
         carried him.  He had stopped breathing.    She gave
         him the kiss of life, did some heart massage, he
         opened his eyes,    r1 j T-r^ri apd died. Now in the
         light of your pathological findings, is that in
         fact a possibility, do you think?"


In answer the doctor made several comments, among them

these:

         "     this was certainly the most severe case of
         traumatic asphyxia that I actually dealt with.



         This case was highly unusual in that in fact it
         had four fractures to thp_ia-rvnjy   it was by far
         the most severs rasp nf_vrn c.e box frar-HirPs. Not
         only does this indicate the severity of the
         traumatic asphyxia at the time but it also in fact
         makes it v irtually impossible for the person to
         have spoken by virtue of the fact that there were
         fractures to the voice box, sir.    So all I can
         say, sir, that scientifically and medically I find

                        22
          that inconceivable that the person could have
          spoken."


Then he referred to cortical coning and said:

          "The coning indicates the severity of the asphyxia
          and again that would have resulted in
          brain damage which again would totally p r o h ^ o T t ^
          any T o r m of communication.

          Q. I have thought about this comment as well, of
          course, and there are several explanations (l)
          that it didn't occur and that the observer is
          mistaken but another possibility that has occurred
          to me and I want to put it to you and please
          disagree if it is not either right or you don't
          accept it; it is possible, is it not, that if a
          person having died is moved air or stomach
          contents might be expelled and might make a sound
          as it escapes, so to speak.  Is that a
          possibility?

          A.  It is an interesting comment, sir, because it
          is a possibility that I considered also myself and
          that is certainly an explanation for the noise
          which could have been made which may have mimicked
          the word 'mum! but it would not explain the —
          opening of the eyes, sir . "

He added to the Coroner:

          "But it would explain the noise."

Then Mr Fraser said:

          "No questions, sir, but thank you very much,
          Dr Slater, for that sympathetic and detailed
          explanation."                      ‘      "—

    Then a Police Sergeant Killoch was called by the

Coroner to give the summary in this case.     Among other

things he said this:

         "Derek William Bruder, an off-duty Police
         Constable from the Merseyside Police who was a
         spectator at the match, recalls seeing a person
         lying on the pitch near the Spion Kop/North Stand
         of the ground.   The person was having
         convulsions.   Mr Bruder went on the pitch and gave
         mouth to mouth resuscitation aided by a St John's
         Ambulanceman who carried out cardiac massage.

                           23
          Mr Bruder recalls that a friend of the casualty
          was with him on the pitch.  Resuscitation was
          continued and they were joined by a St John's
          Ambulancewoman who took over from Mr Bruder.
          After a short time the St John's Ambulancemen said
          that the casualty was dead. Mr Bruder then left
          the scene.

          Neither of the St John's Ambulance personnel or
          the friend of the casualty had been identified.
          The person Mr Bruder tried to resuscitate is now
          known to be Kevin.

          Special Constable Debra Martin went on the pitch
          to assist and she helped to carry several deceased
          persons and many injured persons to the
          gymnasium.   She assisted to carry one youth who
          she now Ipiows to be Kevin into the gymnasium where
          she remained with him.

          At 16.06 hours Dr Curpen examined Kevin in the
          gymnasium which had been established as a
          temporary mortuary.  Dr Curpen certified life
          extinct."


At page 252D, the Coroner said:

          "We have already mentioned the evidence of
          Special Constable Martin who said about the lad
          speaking.  In no way do I want to run poor Special
          Constable Martin down because she had a very hard
          day but it is right she was obviously from her
          statement very distressed.

          A.  I also wouldn't want to criticise WPC Martin
          in any way but I have interviewed her twice, sir,
          and she was part p.m l a-rllv nnspt- as indeed many
          people w S r e o u t it affected her particularly badly
          the events of the day.M


    At page 253, Dr Slater was recalled by the Coroner and

asked about Mr Bruder's account of the man lying on the

floor having convulsions.     He said:

         "Unfortunately when people have not got enough
         oxygen in the brain, as I said in my earlier
         evidence, which is really what the word 'asphyxia'
         means, individuals can in fact have fits."



                         24
     Later he said:

                  ^For somebody to have convulsions, this would
A                 imply that the amount of asphyxia is such that
                  there must be virtually irreversible brain damage
                  present and again this would fully support the
                  concept that the evidence of opening eyes and
                  speaking is not really conceivable, sir.

                  THE CORONER:   Does that help, Mr Fraser?
B
                  MR FRASER:   I am sure it does, Dr Slater. It is
                  difficult to find the phrase to sum the situation
                  up.  Kevin at that stage was beyond help.  He was
                  as good^as^dead?^             ............

                  A.   Yes, that is right, absolutely.

C                 Q.   And would feel nothing and know nothing?

                  A.   Absolutely.    He would know nothing."

          A stage came, on 4th May 1990, when the Coroner

     recalled Sergeant Killoch and the sergeant dealt with

D    Mr Bruder's account of the person having convulsions, going
     on to say:

                  "I then took his pulse in his neck.     I could feel
                  a slight pulse."


E.        Then Inspector Sawers was called to give an account,

     beginning at page 264, about what contact he had since had

     with Mr Bruder:

                  "He goes on to say as a result of feeling
F                 depressed about the incident he applied of his own
                  volition for further first-aid training within
                  Merseyside Police."


     At page 265B:

                  "He has given very careful consideration, sir, to
G                 the expression he used of having convulsions and
                  in the light of his further training and what he
                  now knows and thinks about the incident was that
                  1convulsions1 was not the word that was
                  applicable to these circumstances.  He refers

                                 25
           specifically to having seen epileptic fits and
           says that what he originally described as a
           convulsion was not anything like an epileptic
           fit. He goes on to say later, sir, that if there
           was a part of the body that he saw move it was his
           head and that the word that he best thinks
           describes this movement
At D:

           "On reflection, sir, he feels he would be much
           more skilful if he were required to perform this
           action again and he cannot discount the
           possibility that he did not feel immediately in
           the right place for the carotid artery."
At G:

           "..... he cannot be categoric it was a pulse.   He
           feels he may well be mistaken in that matter,
           sir. "

At 266B:

           "In his original statement he referred to vomiting
           and thinking that Kevin had been sick.  He has
           given this matter some further thought and he is
           absolutely satisfied that Kevin was not sick.  He
           did not see Kevin vomiting and he did not see
           vomit on the ground or on his clothing."


At C:

           ".....he does have a clear impression in his mind,
           sir, of a fluid of some sort in the mouth, but he
           cannot discount that that could be spittle or
           phlegm of some sort."


Then at page 267E:

           "It was at this point, sir, that after
           approximately two minutes of the involvement of
           the woman St John's Ambulance Officer that the
           male St John's Ambulance Officer stood up and said
           'He's gone'.  He referred to the expression being
           completely grey and would seek to reaffirm that
           choice of words as his description of Kevin at
           that particular moment in time.  He says, sir,
           and I quote:

           'There is absolutely no doubt in my mind, both now
           and with the benefit of further training, that

                        26
             then at the moment the youth I had tried to save
             was dead, certainly dead, and beyond any further
             help.  I and St John's Ambulance personnel would
             not have stopped if there had been any glimmer of
             hope at all.  There was none.'"

        Then Mr Fraser was given the opportunity of asking

questions but said he had none, but he added this, that

Mr and Mrs Williams "are appreciative both of the efforts

the officer has made and of his visit and they have no

questions.     They have decided not to come today, sir."

        Dr Slater was again recalled and stuck to his original

position.     I do not think it would assist to go through his

evidence.

        The Coroner was not content to leave it there.   He

called Dr Gumpert, a consulting clinical neuro physiologist

and consulting neurologist.     He spoke of the brain stem and
said:

             "Once this part of the brain is dead, and that
             death occurs, as you heard from Dr Slater, in
             between four and six minutes after deprivation of
             oxygen, then the person is going to die."


At page 279D he said:

             "It seems clear to me, sir, in this case that poor
             Kevin was probably dead before he got out of the
             area in which he was standing.  I would agree with
             Dr Slater.  I would think consciousness was lost
             probably within ten seconds."                    ■
At F:

             "     after people are brain stem dead, they can
             twitch."


Page 276A:

             "     feeling the carotid pulse is quite difficult
             in somebody who has got a low blood pressure, as
                 would have been here ."

         At page 313 in the bundle is to be found a statement by-

    Debra Martin made on 17th March 1990.             I should read a few

    extracts from this.     She said, on the first page:

                 "My recollection of the events of that day are
                 vague and confused.  As a result of the disaster I
B                was prescribed medication by my Doctor to assist
                 me to sleep.  I was really upset by the whole
                 incident and was on medication for about a week.
                 The result being that I was in state of what I can
                 only describe as a state of semi-consciousness.  I
                 felt like a 'Zombie.'"


    She went on say that she can recall carrying a youth who she

    now knows to be Kevin Williams from the pitch to the

    gymnasium.     At the top of page 315:

                 "I didn't want to believe the boy was dead.  I
                 didn't know if he was dead or not but I decided
D                that I had got to attempt to revive him.  I
                 started to give him mouth-to-mouth but someone, I
                 don't know who, touched me on the shoulder and
                 told me he was dead.  By this time my head had
                 gone, I wasn't aware of what I was doing or what
                 was really happening.



                      under the circumstances I cannot be positive
                 that the details are accurate.  I have been quite
                 badly affected by the whole incident and I am
                 trying to erase it from my memory."

         It is to be noted that when a specific piece of

    evidence, or pieces of evidence, arose which might suggest

    that one of the deceased might have been alive after
                                           pwi   - ...........................   ■

    3.15 pm, the Coroner showed flexibility by going into it.

        We were told that some while after, Mrs Williams, the

    deceased's mother, made contact with Police Constable Bruder

    and Woman Police Constable Martin, and they alleged that


                               28
H
they had been pressurised into changing their stories and

that they now stuck by their original versions.         Where does

the truth lie?     I see no fault in the Coroner in this

matter.   He made full inquiry.     He was not asked by the

applicant's representative to do more.      There was
                                             c—
overvhe^q^^^j^dical^evidence that the deceased was in fact

dead by 3.15 pm.    In my judgment it would not be right to

quash the verdicts and order a new inquest on the strength

of these allegations made against the investigating police

officers.

     Before leaving this deceased, however, it would be

convenient to deal with a further point made by Mr Jones

which concerns this deceased.      This Court agreed to look de

bene esse at a Istter^vjgjj^ej^to the relative's solicitors

by a pathologist, Dr West.      It is dated 29th October 1993.

At their request he had looked at the post mortem reports

and photographs.    This was the first time he had seen them,

some four and a half years after the deaths.      He had not

been present at the post mortems or seen the bodies.        No

request had been made to the Coroner either at the mini or

main inquest to call him.      On the strength of a sight of the

reports and photographs, he doubts Dr Clark's diagnosis.         He

thinks there was substantial damage to the neck, possibly

caused by being                                   This type of

injury, he says, is amenable to an emergency tracheotomy and

there was a realistic possibility that this young man was

still alive after 3.15 p m , though unlikely to have spoken


                          29
the word 'Mum' if he had suffered convulsions.

     As I have indicated, no question arises of the Coroner

having refused to hear this witness.     He is in no way at

fault in this respect.     If the Attorney General's fiat had

been given, the discovery of new facts or evidence could,

under section 13(1) of the 1988 Act, have been held to make

it necessary or desirable in the interests of justice that a

new inquest be held.     I have grave doubts, however, whether

there is any power to look at fresh evidence of this nature

and in these circumstances in an application for judicial

review.   But, in any event, I find it of far too tenuous a

nature to justify ordering a new inquest.     I note that in R

v the Coroner for Inner North London, ex parte Linnane 155

JP 343, where the Coroner was held to have been wrong to

have refused the applicant's request to call a particular

doctor, the Divisional Court refused to order a new inquest,

or even to quash the verdict of the one that had occurred,

on the ground that it was 21 months since it had occurred

and the resolution of complex medical issues was not so

important as to overcome the other considerations against

holding a new inquest.

     As to Ian Glover, in the Coroner's documents volume 1

at page 249 is to be found the evidence of Professor Usher,

the pathologist in this case.    He said:

          "I give the cause of death as traumatic asphyxia.
          That means he died because his chest wall was
          compressed so it could not move in and out. When
          that happens you are not able to breathe properly
          and you die really in that way. Mercifully,
          anyone caught in that position once the chest

                          30
              becomes fixed they become unconscious very, very
              early, between ten and twenty seconds. Once this
              boy was unconscious then he would have no
              knowledge or any sensation subsequent to that. He
              would take between four and six minutes to
              actually die."


         The summary at the mini inquest showed he had gone to

B   the match with his brother Joseph.   They were in pen 3 and

    were pushed forward by a surge.   He, Joseph, got out onto

    the pitch and, looking back, saw his brother in a distressed

    state four feet from the front of the enclosure.   Twenty

    minutes later he saw his brother pulled from the enclosure

    and onto pitch by two police officers.   There then followed

    passages in the account given at page 251 of the bundle I

    have referred to:

D             "Joseph attempted to resuscitate his brother who
              was then placed on a temporary stretcher and
              carried across the pitch by a number of persons
              into the gymnasium where a temporary mortuary had
              been set up.

              Sir, I have to include here that I have spoken to
              Joseph this morning and he wishes to state that in
              the gymnasium a doctor was present and when he
              examined Ian he did in fact find a pulse and
              attempted to resuscitate him for about fifteen
              minutes but was unsuccessful."


    Then at E on that page:

              "Q. I think it is only fair to say that Joe,
              when he made his first statement, referred to the
              doctor?

              A.   Yes, sir.

              Q. But he never mentioned anything about the
              pulse being found?

              A. No, sir, that is something he brought to my
              attention this morning."


                               31
H
             Inspector Layton was called, on page 252 and said:

                  "Sir, in the summary you will see reference to
A                 circumstances described by PC Fojut of the South
                  Yorkshire Police.  He initially made an
                  identification from clothing and felt that he at
                  one stage had assisted to carry Ian across the
                  pitch."


     At D:
B
                  "Sir, it is now apparent having spoken to Joe
                  this morning, his recollection is that no
                  uniformed police officers were present when Ian
                  was carried across the pitch.

                  Q . The evidence of PC Fojut was based on
C                 identification of clothing, as opposed to---

                  A.    That is right, sir.

                  Q. That is, of course, a relatively weak
                  identification?

                  A.    That is right, sir."
D

             At page 254 it is to be observed that the Coroner

     recalled Professor Usher to deal with the suggestion by

     Joseph of a pulse being detected by a doctor at the
E.   gymnasium.        He said, at the bottom of page 254:

                  "I think the only way that could have happened
                  would be if this lad had sustained severe brain
                  damage but not quite got to the point where the
                  respiratory and pulse centres faded out.

F                 Q. He did not say there was any respiratory
                  effect. He said there was a faint pulse.

                  A. The two centres are close together.   If that
                  was the case then if he had been revived he would
                  have been severely brain damaged.


G

                  Q. The other possibility is, of course, there may
                  have been a mistake about the pulse?


                                   32
H
            A. Y e s ....... it really means that either the
            doctor was mistaken in thinking he could feel a
            pulse or that this lad was severely brain damaged
            and then went on to d i e ."


     Mr Jones realistically accepts that the evidence put

before the jury of any pulse was weak.    It is another matter

that he relies on.    Mention has already been made of

PC Fojut.    It seems that in September 1993, the Glover

family learned of a flow chart, which read in respect of

PC Fojut:

            "I saw a person who I now know to be Ian Glover.
            I assisted in carrying him to the gymnasium.   I
            still^ thought he was alive at this stage as he was
            vomiting as we carried him."


     Last week the applicants were given a copy of a

statement made by PC Fojut dated 7th September 1982.     This

is to be found at page 522 of the applicant's bundle.      It is

a statement of 7th September 1989 and it begins:    "Further to

my original statement" that the applicant had not seen.

Then in the second paragraph he says:

            "I am able to identify in a photograph the
            deceased Ian Glover and from a photograph of
            clothing shown to me as being the same male whom
            whilst I was on the pitch (by the Leppings Lane
            terraces) I went over to and assisted to carry off
            the pitch. When I approached Glover he was lying
            on the grass surrounded by a group of Liverpool
            fans two of whom I believe were his brothers. At
            this stage I believed Glover was still alive and
            my main concern was to get him moved to enable him
            to receive first aid treatment. A hoarding board
            was brought over Glover was placed on this board
            and together with the group that had been
            originally surrounding him I assisted to carry
            Glover off the pitch and up to the Spion Kop end
            of _the ground. I still thought he was alive at
            this stage as he was vomiting as we carried him.


                          33
          We took him to outside the gymnasium by a sandpit
          and placed him on the ground and the hoarding
          board was taken away.  I tried to feel or a pulse
          but couldn't find one.  Then a woman who stated
          she was a nurse came over and checked him over at
          my request to do so and I then moved away leaving
          the nurse whom I do not know with two men who I
          believe were Glover's brothers with him."


     The problem that has faced the Coroner's legal

advisers, we are told, and the reason for late delivery of

statements to the applicants is that the statements are in

the possession of the investigating police force and have to

be extracted from them.    It is obviously unfortunate that

this statement that we have seen was not put in evidence and

Professor Usher asked to comment upon it.     I for my part

would acquit the Coroner of blame for this.    As we have

seen, he was scrupulous.   Whenever a matter was brought to

his attention suggesting that a victim might have survived

the cut-off point, he investigated it and in particular

sought the reaction of the relevant pathologist.     He had

done just that, as we saw, in respect of the pulse.       I have

no doubt that he would have done the same about the vomiting

had the matter been drawn to his attention.    I do not

believe that Professor Usher would have been caused to alter

his whole opinion if given this information.    A clue to his

answer may be afforded by the evidence which Dr Slater gave

in respect of Kevin Williams that if a person who had died

is moved, air or stomach contents may be expelled.

     This may, however, be an appropriate stage at which to

mention that Mr Jones asked me to record that he wishes to
reserve the right to argue in a higher court that the

decision of the Divisional Court in R v Her Majesty's

Coroner at Hammersmith ex parte Peach [1980] QB 211 that the

denial by a Coroner to a properly interested party of sight

of the statements of witnesses was not a breach of the rules

of natural justice, was wrongly decided.

        As to Richard James and Peter Tootle, it is accepted

that the pathological evidence in each of their cases was

that they were dead before 3.15 pm.     The way Mr Jones puts

it is to say: "In the first four cases we have now got

evidence to suggest that the pathological evidence may not

have been correct, which raises doubt as to whether it may

not also have been wrong in the cases of Richard Jones and

Peter Tootle."     This is pure speculation and I do not find

it persuasive.

        That takes me on to the sixth ground which alleges that

the Coroner should have left the verdict of "lack of care"

to the jury.     Rule 42 of the Coroner's Rules 1984 provides

that:

            "No verdict shall be framed in such a way as to
            appear to determine any question of -

            (a) criminal liability on the part of a named
            person, or

             (b) civil liability."

However, in R v Southwark Coroner ex parte Hicks    [1987] 1

WLR 1624, where a prisoner had died in custody and the

Coroner refused to leave a verdict of "lack of care" to the

jury because he thought such a verdict would offend against
Rule 42, the Divisional Court quashed the verdict.         It was

held that a verdict of "lack of care" was permissible where

the death was caused by neglect of the deceased's condition

and that "lack of care" was not synonymous with a breach of

the common law duty of care but bore a more restricted

meaning.     There are other authorities to the same effect but

I do not find it necessary to refer to them.      In my judgment

the following analysis by Mr Coghlan of the verdict "lack of

care" well conveys the legal position, namely "it is

concerned with the failure to provide care in the form of

fo^I, medicine, clothing, shelter, etcetera, not with

cajjjg^^sne^s, and is appropriatq^only>p.n cases which are the

other side of the coin of self-ne^fTect such as starvation,

hypothermia and persistent failure to provide medication.11         II

     I    conclude, therefore, that such a verdict would not

have been appropriate in this case.     Indeed, I understood,

in the end, Mr Jones to concede this, for I noted him as

saying:    11In the present case it may have been right not to

leave 1lack of c a r e ' because there were no circumstances of

dependency at the time that the injuries causing death

occurred, but the more you narrow down the application of

the acknowledged verdict of 1lack of care1 the more you

promote the importance of being allowed to give a narrative

verdict, i.e. one incorporating primary and secondary

causes."    The impression given by those v/ords is that the

jury were not allowed to give any narrative verdict, but

that would not in fact be accurate.     In the Coroner's


                           36
documents volume 2, at page 642, the Coroner is to be found

saying this to the jury:

           "I will give you another example of what you
           might say. They are all basically the same but
           there is slight variance.   You could say, 'Died on
           15th April, 19 89, as a result of crush injuries
           sustained      ' and you could add, if that is what
           you thought the evidence said, '      following
           overcrowding and/or crowd movement and/or
           following the opening of concertina gates,' or
           anything else that relates to the circumstances
           which you feel have been found in relation to that
           death and which you think ought to be included."

The following page at A:

           "That is the way I would tackle it but I do want
           to stress to you that in the final analysis it is
           your decision."

In passing I draw attention to the fact that at F on that

page he went on to say:

           "In this particular instance I have come to the
           conclusion that there are three possible
           conclusions or verdicts which you might be able to
           return.  These are unlawfully killed, accident/
           misadventure - - I will explain this to you in a
           moment -- and, thirdly, an open verdict."


     The answer is, therefore, that he did give the jury the

opportunity to bring in a narrative verdict but they chose

not to do so.   Mr Jones makes two further points on that,

however.   He says, first, that what the Coroner was

suggesting was not a true narrative verdict.     He gave us

some examples of what he says would have been.     I mention

two of these.   First,   "Accidental death caused by the

failure of the police to divert the supporters away from the

tunnel to other parts of the spectators accommodation", to

which he said might have been added a second, for example,
«




        "A contributory cause of death was the failure to summons

        the ambulance service promptly".

             His second criticism was that the Coroner was

        suggesting to the jury the wrong box for the inclusion of

        the narrative verdict.   This conveniently takes me to the

        last ground which is number 5, which reads:

                  "The Coroner wrongly limited the inquiry into how
                  the deceased met their deaths so as to exclude
                  inquiry into whether lives could have been saved
                  by calling the emergency services sooner and
                  providing better emergency care for the injured
                  thereafter."


        It is necessary to have regard to the terms of two

        subsections of section 11 of the Coroners Act 19 88.

        Subsection (5) reads:

                  "An inquisition -

                  (a) shall be in writing under the hand of the
                  coroner and, in the case of an inquest held with a
                  jury, under the hands of the jurors who concur in
                  the verdict;

                 (b) shall set out, so far as such particulars have
                 been proved -

                  (i) who the deceased was; and

                 (ii) how, when and where the deceased came by his
                 death; and

                 (c) shall be in such form as the Lord Chancellor
                 may by rules made by statutory instrument from
                 time to time prescribe.

                 (6)   At a coroner's inquest into the death of a
                 person who came by his death by murder,
                 manslaughter or infanticide, the purpose of the
                 proceedings shall not include the finding of any
                 person guilty of murder, manslaughter or
                 infanticide; and accordingly a coroner's
                 inquisition shall in no case charge a person with
                 any of those offences."



    H
        I look next at the Coroner's Rules 1984, Rule 36, which

reads:

             "(1) The proceedings and evidence at an inquest
             shall be directed solely to ascertaining the
             following matters, namely -

             (a) who the deceased was;

             (b) how, when and where the deceased came by his
             death."


       Form 22 is the one prescribed.    It was used by the

Coroner and the jury in these inquests.      We have been taken

through one of the inquisitions.     With the exception of the

names of the deceased, they were all identical.      In the

inquisition it is said:     "The following matters are

found         " Then comes "Name of deceased" and that was

completed.     That answered the question who the deceased

was.    Next came section 2, "Injury or disease causing death"

and the answer given was "Crush asphyxia".      Section 3 reads

"Time, place and circumstances at or in which injury was

sustained".     The answer given was "Died on 15th April 1989

as a result of crush injuries sustained at Hillsborough

Football Ground, Sheffield."     Here it was the Coroner

invited the jury, if they chose, to add a narrative

verdict.     Mr Jones says that was wrong.   It should have come

under section 4 which reads "Conclusion of the jury/Coroner

as to the death".     Here the jury answered "Accidental

death".    "Time and place" in section 3 dealt with the

questions when and where the deceased came by his death, but

the form also asked under section 3 for the circumstances in


                           39
which injury was sustained.       What can it there be asking for

if not an answer to the question how the deceased came by

his death?    I am unable, therefore, to accept Mr Jones's

submission that the right place for any narrative verdict

was under section 4.       That section is for the conclusion

and, in my judgment, the jury were entitled to answer there

as they did "Accidental death", having been directed by the

Coroner, as we have seen, that three verdicts were open to

them -- unlawful killing, accidental death and an open

verdict.

      I would hold that the inquisition was correctly

completed and the Coroner's direction to the jury as to the

manner in which they should approach its completion was

impeccable.    The proceedings were solely directed to

ascertaining who the deceased was and how, when and where he

came by his death, as they were required to be under the

statute.    Accordingly,   I have discovered no good reason for

ordering a new inquest or for merely quashing the existing

verdicts.

      If I had found such reason and had to exercise my

discretion the following matters would have weighed with

me.   What would be the purpose of fresh inquests?     To^et^i

verdict criticising the police?      Such criticism has already

been firmly ipypiipd bv thgjraY^ ^              ThejpolJjCe^have

adm^tted^faul^^ng^j^uj^ftaajjugjigj^y^Qfl^ To get a verdict

criticising the emergency services?      I see no evidence to

justify such criticism, and in any event it would be


                            40
    irrelevant if all six were brain dead by 3.15 pm.   To obtain

    further examination of the last minutes of their lives?      I

    doubt that anything more would be learned, but the process

    would be a very harrowing one involving large numbers of

    witnesses and lasting if not for 96 days, for not far

    short.   Moreover, irrespective of whose fault, if anyone's,

    it is, the fact is that four and a half years have already

    passed since the tragedy occurred.   As to the alternative

    suggestion of a mere quashing of the existing verdicts

    leaving nothing in their place, I would regard that as

    absolutely valueless.

         Mr Jones says that the families are pursuing this

    matter because they have a deep instinct to know the

    circumstances in which their relatives died.   I am perfectly

    prepared to accept that that is their motive and I respect

    it, but I hope they, for their part, can understand that I

    have to take an objective view and I have to consider the

    interests of all concerned including those of all the

    witnesses who would have to come along five years later and

    try to cast their minds back to events that they must have

    been trying to forget.   Taking that objective view, and

    considering the interests of all concerned, I would in my

    discretion conclude that this was not a case in which it

    will be right to order fresh inquests.

         For all these reasons I would dismiss the application.

MR JUSTICE TURNER:   I agree and add a few words of my own out of

    deference to the careful arguments to which we have listened


                             41
and out of respect to the concerns of the applicants.

     The essential complaint made against the Coroner is

that having introduced evidence from the various

pathologists as to the causes and probable timescales of

these several deaths at the preliminary inquests, he

proceeded to limit or exclude evidence from the main inquest

which might have led the jury to form a different

conclusion.   As my Lord has demonstrated, to the extent that

he could the Coroner not merely led further evidence that

might have persuaded pathologists to form different

conclusions than those expressed at the preliminary

inquests, but also recalled some of pathologists, either

once or twice, in order to explore or further explore

matters which had become known since the time of those

preliminary inquests.    This was to enable the Coroner to

explore in the presence of the jury alternative factual

bases upon which the pathologists could have formed and then

expressed their conclusions.   Having regard to all the

pathologists who gave their evidence at the preliminary

inquests and those who were recalled at the main inquest,

the overwhelming burden of that pvidpnce is that-, there was



of about^J^ei^minute^^ro]^

led to the asphyxia.    I say this but with the possible

exception in mind in the case of Mr Glover.   But in his

case, and indeed in others, there was clear evidence that

bodily functions may continue and give a semblance of life
        when the prior occurrence of brain death renders the

        existence of life unlikely,   if not impossible.

             On the evidence to which our attention has been drawn

        on the hearing of this application I, for my part, conclude

        that there is nothing to show that there was any lack of

B       fairness, or unreasonableness in the well-known Wednesbury

        sense, in the manner in which the Coroner conducted the

        inquest; and so far from there being any sustainable

        criticism of his decision to call before him "such persons

        having knowledge of those facts", that is to say of death,

        whom he considered it expedient to examine,   there was no

        error.

             No one having even a broad knowledge of the

D       circumstances of these deaths could be other than deeply

        moved.   It is of importance for all to understand that the

        relief which can be provided in this Court is tightly

        circumscribed by the law which we have to apply.   We can
E       only interfere in cases of procedural irregularity, legal

        error or unreasonable decision.   I agree with my Lord that

        the applicants have failed to raise any cogent argument to

        support relief on any of those three grounds and I, too,

        would dismiss this application.

    MR COGHLAN: My Lords, there remains only the matter of costs.
        I am not going to apply for costs, but may I just say this:
        five of the six parties are legally aided and one is not.
        It would, therefore, have been open to me to have applied
        for, against the five, an order not to be enforced without
        leave of the Court, and against the sixth an outright order
        for costs.  I do not do so; that w ould bp vprv harsh. But
        those on this side of the camp have- been much concerned from
        the very outset at thpengTTnonp pvnpnsp of ^ H " m 1!    fvn
        which was regarded as "doomecl to failure, and when we hear

                                43
H
    talk of going on to next stage, and appeals and so forth,
    further concern is felt.  I wish only to place this marker
    that the merciful attitude taken with regard to costs on
    this occasion may not be repeated if we should have to face
    the further expense of an appeal.

MR KALLIPETIS: My Lords, on behalf of my clients I have a
    similar approach.  I merely observe this, if I be permitted
    to do so, that every pound spent by those instructing me in
    resisting this sort of application means a pound less to
    heal those who need it. I trust that those who advise the
    applicants would draw to the attention of the Legal Aid Fund
    that if that matter is to be advised to go further we shall
    not take the same attitude in a higher court.

MR JONES: My Lords, there are two matters I want to raise.
    First of all, I apply for legal aid taxation, which I have
    formally to do.

LORD JUSTICE MCCOWAN:   Yes, you may have that.

MR JONES: My Lords, the second matter is upon the question of
    appeal. My Lords, of course under the new regulations if an
    application is sought to appeal then one has to canvass the
    Divisional Court first. No decision in any case can be
    taken as to whether to seek leave to appeal until the
    judgments have been digested and studied and one has advised
    and taken instruction from the applicants. My Lords, we
    appreciate that obviously any such decisions must, in the
    interests of everyone, be made quickly.  I, therefore, apply
    to your Lordships for a period of seven days so that that
    matter can be discussed.

LORD JUSTICE MCCOWAN:   Is there a timescale?

MR JONES: My Lords, the regulations are very new. One has
    formally to apply. As I understand it, one can certainly
    ask that that matter be considered within a period.  It is
    in what is called the stop press in the new supplement to
    the White Book at IB:

              "(1) The classes of cases prescribed for the
              purposes of section 18(1)(a) of the Act (appeals
              subject to leave) are the following -

              (a) a determination by a divisional court of any
              appeal to the High Court."

   My Lords, as I understand the matter, this has only come
   into force on the 1st October of this year. Application
   must be made, at least in the first instance, to this
   Court.  I do not understand it has to be made at once and
   obviously it could not be made at once. One has to take
   instructions from all the applicants and consider the

                            44
975                Legal Aid and Advice           26 OCTOBER 1994                                                   976

[Mr. Dalyell]                                                                  Kevin Williams
                                                               Motion made, and Question proposed, That this House
they may not wish to give way in those circumstances.        do now adjourn.—[Mr. Bates.]
But what happened this evening was, I repeat, somewhat
unfortunate.                                                 9.25 pm
   M r. D eputy S peaker: The hon. Gentleman has been in        S ir M alcolm T hornton (Crosby): The House will be
the House for many years, so he knows that the Minister is   familiar with the tragic events at Hillsborough on 15 April
responsible for his own speech. I was very tolerant with     1989, when 95 people died, a couple of them my
the hon. Gentleman while he was speaking, even though        constituents. The House will also be familiar with the fact
he strayed rather far outside the narrow motion under        that the events leading up to the disaster have been well
discussion.                                                  rehearsed and were reported on by Lord Justice Taylor. It
                                                             is not the purpose o f this debate to go over that ground
                                                             again or to rehash the arguments that were dealt with in
                                                             some detail by the Taylor report.
                                                                Tonight’s debate is narrowly and tightly dn.wn. It
                                                             relates only to the death of one of my constituents, Kevin
                                                             Williams. It is not my purpose to talk about events before
                                                             3.15 pm, the cut-off point that the coroner decided should
                                                             be set at the inquest. His suggestion was that all who died
                                                             that day were brain dead by that time. Therefore the
                                                             evidence from that day was dealt with only up to that
                                                             point.
                                                                I should like to put firmly on the record the events
                                                             relating to Kevin Williams which occurred after 3.15 pm
                                                             and which, because of the coroner’s decision, were not
                                                             deemed admissible as evidence. The chronology o f what
                                                             happened to Kevin that day is broadly speaking as
                                                             follows. At 3.28 pm Kevin was lifted out o f enclosure 3
                                                             and helped on to the pitch by PC Michael Craighill. There
                                                             is visual evidence of that fact from BBC tapes. At 3.32
                                                             pm Kevin was rushed across the pitch on an advertising
                                                             hoarding—there is a timed photograph of that taking
                                                             place. Also at 3.32 pm, an off-duty Merseyside
                                                             policeman, a Mr. Bruder, who was in the north stand
                                                             spotted Kevin lying on the ground and left his seat to go
                                                             to attend to him. There is also visual evidence o f that
                                                             incident, as a set of photographs is available from The
                                                             Times.
                                                                At 3.35 pm, there is visual evidence o f a second
                                                             ambulance entering the ground. There is a timed
                                                             photograph o f that incident. It appears also on video. At
                                                             3.37 pm, Mr. Bruder says, an ambulance passed while he
                                                             was attending to Kevin and he asked the St. John’s
                                                             ambulance man present to stop it and to put Kevin in it.
                                                             The ambulance would not stop. Mr. Bruder said that it
                                                             looked as though it had orders not to.
                                                                Since then, Mr. Tony Edwards of the ambulance
                                                             service has confirmed that he was the assistant to the
                                                             driver in the ambulance and that he would have passed
                                                             Mr. Bruder at 3.37 pm that day. Mr. Edwards also says
                                                             that he had orders to go straight to the Leppings lane end
                                                             o f the ground, as there were fatalities.
                                                                At 3.45 pm, special WPC Debra Martin came across
                                                             Kevin lying on the ground in the recovery position. She
                                                             says that she saw life in his face and found pulses in his
                                                             neck. Miss Martin and the police constable who was with
                                                             her ran with Kevin to the gym. Miss Martin was told by
                                                             her superiors to stay with Kevin and to carry out
                                                             resuscitation and heart massage. After resuscitation,
                                                             Kevin started to breathe again, his ribs were moving. Miss
                                                             Martin picked Kevin up in her arms. It was then that
                                                             Kevin opened his eyes, murmured, “Mom”, then closed
                                                             his eyes and died. Miss Martin said that Kevin turned grey
                                                             and then went quickly blue. The time would have been
                                                             about 3.55 pm.
                                                                                                   Kevin Williams                         978
                         Kevin Williams                     26 OCTOBER 1994
977
                                                                           which her evidence was treated at the inquest is little short
  At 4.6 pm, Dr. Curpen certified life extinct.
                                                                           of scandalous. It provoked the specialist pathologist
  Those are the bare facts of the chronology of the death                  whom I have already mentioned to say, in a letter to
of Kevin Williams.                                                         Mrs. Williams:
   I turn now to the medical evidence. At the inquest, Dr.                    “It strikes me that WPC Martin has been the victim of
Slater, giving evidence of his findings concerning Kevin,                  unjustifiable adverse criticism amounting almost to ridicule. I am
said:                                                                      amazed that the evidence of Miss Martin, a Dental Nurse, by
  “My examination of Kevin showed that the main finding was that           training, and a Special Woman Police Constable of five years
of asphyxia . . . This had also resulted in four fractures to the small    ending, is treated with such incredulity, amounting almost to
bones in the actual voice box . . . the compression of the neck or         hostility. From what I have learned from the post-mortem
chest has occurred here and unconsciousness occurs very rapidly,           gYsminatinn 0 f Dr. Slater, and from the evidence given by Dr. Slater
certainly within a few seconds . . . Following unconsciousness then        at the inquest, I see no reason to doubt the evidence of Miss Martin
there is no discomfort and no pain. Death then occurs after                when she states that she picked Kevin up in her arms, that Kevin
approximately three to five minutes.”                                       opened his eyes, moved his mouth and said ‘Mom’, flicked his
                                                                            eyelashes, closed his eyes and died.”
  Further evidence came before the judicial review,
which has since taken place, from the specialists who                           The questions that I should wish to stress and that are
were asked to provide their opinions. In his evidence, Dr.                  the central issue of the debate are these. Why has it proved
Iain W est, from the department of forensic medicine at                     necessary for the evidence to be presented to a judicial
                                                                            review, where it was given only scant attention? Why has
Guy’s hospital, clearly said:
                                                                            it proved necessary for the evidence to be the subject of
   “I do not believe it is possible to say how long consciousness
 would have been retained, but he certainly would not have become
                                                                             a television programme? That served only to extend
 unconscious between 3 and 5 seconds of being crushed. Again I               further the agonies of Anne Williams and her family. Was
 would not agree with Dr. Slater in estimating how long the deceased         it an attempt to try to lay blame for something that
 would have survived . . . he could well have survived for a                 occurred a long time ago?
 considerable period, well beyond 3.15 pm.                                      I suggest that little in the way of preparation or training
   He suffered convulsions as the result of anoxic brain damage.             could have helped once the disaster at Hillsborough had
 Whether Mr. Bruder saw convulsions or twitching is irrelevant. A             occurred. Almost inevitably, people were bound to make
      body neither convulses or twitches.”                                    some mistakes. It was inevitable that judgments would be
    He goes on further to say that that apparent twitching                    made on the spot which perhaps, with the benefit of
 is seen                                                                      hindsight and of considering the matter after some years
 “in individuals who are maintained on a respirator but whose heart           had passed, should not and certainly would not have been
 is still functioning . . . This phenomenon only occurs for a very            made. But what is there to hide? I cannot understand why
 short period after death unless muscles are electrically stimulated.         the evidence of Mr. Bruder and WPC Martin should be
 Twitching movements, however, suggest that one is much more
                                                                              called into question.
 likely to be dealing with a live body than a dead one.
                                                                                 If Kevin were dead by 3.15 pm or if he were brain dead
    Dr. James Bums, a forensic scientist from Liverpool                        and died very soon thereafter, the events that took place
  university, commented as follows on Dr. Slater’s                             between 3.26 pm and 3.55 pm are irrelevant. As Dr lam
  evidence:                                                                    W est said, however, dead bodies do not twitch. In this
    “Dr. Slater suggests that Kevin lost consciousness very quickly            case, prima facie evidence shows that Kevin Williams was
  and I see no reason to disagree with this. However, Dr. Slater then
  goes on to generalise and state that death occurs after approximately
                                                                               still Very much alive at that time.
  three or five minutes in these cases of traumatic asphyxia. While              M r. George H ow arth (Knowsley, North): W ill the
  this may be so, in the vast majority of instances, it is by no means        hon. Gentleman object if I speak for a couple of minutes
  certain that even in a severe case of traumatic asphyxia, death
   necessarily ensues three or four minutes after the compression
                                                                              at the conclusion of his speech, and before the M inister
  begins. The all important factor, in my opinion, is whether the severe      replies?
   compression is sustained. If the pressure is intermittent, then death
                                                                                  S ir M alcolm T hornton: Of course not.
   may not ensue for a considerable length of time.”
         My concerns arise from a detailed examination of the                     The matters that I described are the cause of my
                                                                              concern. My right hon. and learned Friend the
      evidence that was presented to the inquest. The off-duty
                                                                              Attorney-General has been courteous in the extreme in
      policeman from Merseyside, Mr. Bruder—who was
                                                                              dealing with this case. He has considered it very fairly. I
      present as a Liverpool fan—clearly stated in his original
                                                                              have corresponded with him. He has spent probably more
      evidence that he had seen and taken a pulse in Kevin, and
                                                                              time on the Kevin Williams case than on any aspect of
      that Kevin was convulsing. That was the opinion of an
                                                                              the cases of the other victims who died at Hillsborough
      experienced police officer who had had some first-aid
                                                                              on that day. I thank my right hon. and learned Friend for
      training. Subsequently, Mr. Bruder changed his mind, and
                                                                               that and I know that Kevin’s mother, Mrs. Anne Williams,
       suspected that they had not in fact been convulsions.
                                                                               thanks him for it, too.
          I have to say that that change of mind came after Mr.
                                                                                   In our most recent exchange of correspondence, my
       Bruder had been interviewed by W est Yorkshire police
                                                                               right hon and learned Friend said that he had considered
       and had been asked to reflect on his evidence. He has
                                                                                the matter in the light of the judicial review and that he
       since spoken to Kevin’s mother, Anne Williams, and has
                                                                                felt that, although he has powers under section 13 of the
        confirmed that his original evidence was the evidence to
                                                                                Coroners Act 1988, he could not find sufficient new
        which he would adhere.                                                  evidence that would warrant his intervention on this
           I want to make particular mention of Debra Martin, the                occasion. However, he left the door open for full and
        special WPC who was on duty. She was a trained dental                    further consideration of any new evidence.
        nurse and, in her own words, had probably had more
                                                                                    I have read the transcript of the judicial review. Scant
        experience of dealing with first aid than most of her
                                                                                 attention was given to the reports of the pathologists Iain
        colleagues who were there that day. She is convinced in
                                                                                 W est and James Bums. Scant attention was given to
         her own mind about what had happened; yet the way in
                                                        26 OCTOBER 1994                      Kevin Williams                     980
979                    Kevin Williams

                                                                       traumas again. But what impresses itself on me is the fact
[Sir Malcolm Thornton]
                                                                       that those families do not feel that all that needs to be said
anything that did not appear at the original inquest. An               has been said. I could quote particular constituents, but I
examination of all the documentation that is available and             shall not.
that I shall make available to the Attorney-General                        The difficulty is caused by the fact that there was a
tomorrow will show clearly that there is a need, in the                cut-off point of 3.15 pm for the events considered by the
Kevin Williams case, to consider the circumstances                      inquest. Things that happened after that time were not
again.                                                                  taken fully into account. Consequently people feel,
    What can possibly be changed by re-examining this                   probably rightly, that despite everything that has been said
tragic case? It will not bring back Kevin or change what                and all the conclusions that may have been drawn, exactly
occurred. I have already referred to the Taylor report and              what happened in those individual cases has not been
the hope that lessons will have been learnt from that day               properly covered.
to ensure that such tragedies can never occur again, so                     I do not want to go into the technical detail, as the hon.
why reopen the case?                                                    Member for Crosby has done so exhaustively and with
     Since that day, I have spoken to Anne Williams many                 such great skill. But until people feel fully satisfied that
 times. I and other colleagues who have had to meet their                every stone that can be turned has been turned to find out
 constituents—the families, of those who lost their lives                exactly what happened in every case, even beyond the
 that day—have all been made aware of the grief that they                cut-off point of 3.15 pm, they will not feel satisfied that
 still feel to this day and the uncertainties that they still            everything that can be done has been done.
 face, but it is not the object of this exercise to talk about
                                                                             In congratulating the hon. Gentleman on bringing the
  other cases.                                                           matter to the attention of the Attorney-General and of the
     The one thing that impressed me about Anne Williams                 House, it is important to say that we have not yet gone all
  was her desire to know the truth. Somewhere in Sheffield               the way with the process. That is not because of what I
  there is a death certificate that relates to Kevin; it does            may think, or what the Attorney-General or the hon.
  not relate to the circumstances of which Anne Williams                  Member for Crosby may feel, but because the families
  is now aware. In other words, the cut-off point of 3.15
                                                                          feel that even if justice has been done, it has not been
  pm does not relate to Kevin, and I believe that the
                                                                          seen to have been done. Until they feel that justice has
  evidence shows that clearly. She has told me more than
                                                                          been done, we cannot let the matter rest.
  once that, until the truth is known, neither she nor Kevin
  will know peace. I believe her. It is not my purpose, or
                                                                        9.51 pm
  hers, to expose errors that may have been made that day
  because of human frailty. That exercise has already been                The A ttorney-G eneral (Sir Nicholas Lyell): I am
   undertaken. I have already said that I find it difficult to          grateful to my hon. Friend the Member for Crosby (Sir
   understand why evidence that was freely given was                    M. Thornton) for the careful and comprehensive way in
   somehow altered afterwards. The purpose is not to point              which he has brought before the House the very real and
   the finger; the purpose is to find out the truth.                    understandable concerns of his constituents. Nobody can
      I can best finish by quoting Anne Williams. She said;             fail to understand or to sympathise with the deep and
   “He was just a little boy that went to watch a football match and    continuing anguish of Mrs. Williams and the other
 never came home. There is nothing that I can be told now that will     families, both from the Liverpool area and from anywhere
 make the agony any worse. I just want to know the truth.”              else in the country, who were affected by the disaster, and
 For those reasons, together with the evidence that I shall             with their wish to have as much information as possible
 certainly give to my right hon. and learned Friend—it will             about the circumstances in which their loved ones—and
 be with his office tomorrow—I urge him to re-examine                   Kevin in particular—so tragically died.
 the case, to exercise the powers available to him under
 section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 and to hold a full                    I am grateful, too, to the hon. Member for Knowsley,
 inquiry. The House can then show mercy to a family who                  North (Mr. Howarth) for his brief contribution to the
 have suffered for far too long.                                         debate. Rightly, he drew attention to the fact that he and
                                                                         his hon. Friend the Member for Liverpool, Walton (Mr.
  9.47 pm                                                                Kilfoyle)         to see me to discuss the matter. I have
                                                                         discussed it with other hon. Members, too, and I recognise
     M r. G eorge H ow arth (Knowsley, North); I wish to                 that it is a matter of the greatest concern to the families.
  express my gratitude to the hon. Member for Crosby (Sir
  M. Thornton) for allowing me to speak for a few minutes                    I hasten to make it clear that from my point of view—
  and for the assiduous way in which he has pursued this                  indeed, from anyone’s point of view—there is nothing to
  case for a number of years on behalf of his constituents.               hide here. That said, I know that my hon. Friend and the
                                                                          hon. Member for Knowsley, North recognise that my role
     In raising this matter, the hon. Gentleman has also
                                                                          in the matter has to be that of Attorney-General, and has
  raised many concerns common to the families of those
  who died at Hillsborough—people from Merseyside and                     therefore focused primarily on the consideration that I
  beyond. On one occasion, he and my hon. Friend the                      gave in 1992 to an application by relatives of six of the
  Member for Liverpool, Walton (Mr. Kilfoyle) and I met                    victims of the Hillsborough disaster, including Mrs.
   to discuss the problems arising from Hillsborough.                     W illiam s, for my consent under section 13 of the
                                                                           Coroners Act 1988 to the making of an application to
      My concern is simple. There have been times since the
                                                                           the High Court for an order quashing the inquisition and
   disaster when I felt that it might have been right to draw
                                                                           directing a fresh inquest. When I have to use legal phrases
   a line under the incident. There are times when I have felt
   that it might not be in the best interests of the bereaved              I do not intend them to be as dry as dust; I simply mention
   families to reopen the process and go through all the                   them to put them into context.
^^81                    Kevin Williams                26 OCTOB iR 1994                        Kevin Williams                          982


      After careful consideration I felt it right to decline to         The thoroughness of that wider inquiry did n o t
                                                                     however, dispense with the legal requirement that an
  authorise such an application, because I had concluded
  that there would be no reasonable prospect of establishing         inquest be held in respect of each person who died. That
                                                                     inquest was conducted by Her M ajesty’s coroner for
  before the High Court that it was
                                                                     South Yorkshire in difficult circumstances because of the
  “necessary or desirable in the interests of justice                complications that flowed from the sheer number of
  for a fresh inquest to be held. That is the statutory test.        deaths; the fact that the Taylor inquiry was proceeding;
  Subsequent litigation has tended to confirm that                   and the fact that its interim report caused the Director of
   assessment                                                        Public Prosecutions to request a criminal investigation
       My hon. Friend the Member for Crosby and a number              into the police handling of the events.
   of hon. Members have brought to my attention the                      Two points need to be emphasised in relation to
   broadcast on rrV of “H ie Cook Report”. I have seen that           inquests generally. F irst inquests are not intended to be
   broadcast and I have studied it. I have thought about what         wide-ranging public inquiries, but serve a specific
   I am saying in the context of this debate and in the context       statutory purpose. The position was carefully explained
   of that programme. It relates to the Hillsborough disaster,        by the M aster of the Rolls in his judgment in the Court
   with particular reference to the case of Kevin Williams.           of Appeal earlier this year in Regina v The Coroner for
        No further formal application has yet been made to me         North Humberside and Scunthorpe ex parte Jamieson. The
   under section 13 of the Coroners Act and if I am formally          Master of the Rolls said:
   to consider the matter, such an application would need to            “An inquest is a fact-finding inquiry conducted by a coroner, with
   be made. In saying that, I can reassure my hon. Friend            or without a jury, to establish reliable answers to four important but
                                                                     limited factual questions. The first of these relates to the identity of
   and other hon. Members that I shall look carefully at the         the deceased, the second to the place of his death, the third to the
    evidence and information that my hon. Friend has said he         time of death. In most cases these questions are not hard to answer
    will put before me tomorrow— and I welcome that.                 but in a minority of cases the answer may be problematical. The
        I have made it clear to those who have written to me—        fourth question, and that to which evidence and inquiry are most
    many have—that I remain willing, as is my duty,                  often and most closely directed, relates to how the deceased came
                                                                     by his death. Rule 36 requires that the proceedings and evidence
    objectively to consider any further application under             shall be directed solely to ascertaining these matters and forbids any
    section 13. A proper application, of course, has to be            expression of opinion on any other matter.”
    supported by evidence in proper and admissible form.              The M aster of the Rolls went on to add:
    That is not a legal technicality. Obviously, if I considered
                                                                        “It is noteworthy that the task is not to ascertain how the deceased
    an application appropriate, I should sooner or later have         died, which might raise general and far-reaching issues, but ‘how. . .
    to put it before the court.                                       the deceased came by his death’, a more limited question directed
         I make no criticism of “The Cook Report”. It was an          to the means by which the deceased came by his death.”
     absorbing, fascinating programme on a tragic subject, but          Secondly, coroners are independent judicial officers.
     it is not p.videnc” jf]        Thave more to say about some      Although the Home Secretary has responsibility for the
     of the topics with which it dealt. It will be well understood    substance of the law relating to coroners—
     by the House that a media report cannot be the basis for           It being Ten o ’clock, the motion fo r the Adjournment
     a legal decision in itself. A proper view must be based on       lapsed, without Question put.
     an analysis of the underlying evidence and it is in that
                                                                        Motion made, and Question proposed, That this House
     spirit that I approach the matter tonight.
                                                                      do now adjourn.— \Mr. Bates.]
          Before I deal with the matter in detail, I must issue a
      slight caution. The matter has been looked at enormously             The A ttorney-G eneral: Although the Home Secretary
      carefully; we shall look at it again. I do not want to give      has responsibility for the substance of the law relating to
      false hopes. I do not have a closed mind; I have an open         coroners, neither he nor any M inister has power to
      mind.                                                            interfere in their decisions. It is for the High Court and
          The scale of the Hillsborough tragedy was enormous.          the other appellate courts to determine issues relating to
      The then Home Secretary responded by establishing a              proceedings before coroners courts.
      public inquiry chaired by Lord Justice Taylor, now the               One route of access to the High Court is by way of
      Lord Chief Justice. It was a painstaking and thorough            application under section 13 of the 1988 Act and the
       inquiry which examined not only the events which led to         legislation provides that my authority is required for such
       the 95 deaths, not to mention the many serious injuries,         application. The existence of that filter reflects the
       but wider issues including safety at football grounds and        statutory requirement that, in order to justify directing a
       the need for changes in public order law. The Taylor             fresh inquest there should not only be made out one of the
       report placed the blame for the tragedy fairly and squarely      specific grounds mentioned in the statute, such as fresh
        on police handling of crowd control at the event. The           evidence or irregularity, but circumstances such that the
        police have admitted fault and paid compensation.               interests of justice require a fresh inquest. The quashing
                                                                        of an inquest verdict and the directing of a fresh inquest
           The Government have responded positively to the
                                                                        is a serious step which may have implications for many
        report By August 1994, the vast majority of the 46 clubs
                                                                        persons and organisations whose competing interests
        in the premier league and first division had all-seater
                                                                         therefore have to be considered and balanced. It is not
        grounds or had closed their last remaining standing
                                                                         every irregularity or piece of fresh evidence which will
        accommodation and were working on its conversion to
                                                                        justify an application to the High Court.
        seating. The Government have also set up the Football
        Licensing Authority which is responsible for keeping                In recent years—I now come to the question of judicial
        under review the way in which local authorities discharge        review—the High Court has developed the doctrine of
         their functions under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act          judicial review so that the vast majority of issues arising
                                                                         from the conduct of inquests may also be considered by
         1975.
                                                            26 OCTOBER 1994                            Kevin Williams                           984
983                       Kevin Williams

                                                                                Those allegations are of course the same ones which
[Sir Nicholas Lyell]                                                         were subsequently repeated in the ITV programme to
                                                                             which my honourable Friend has referred. The divisional
the High Court, in the exercise of its supervisory
                                                                             court, however, went further and examined a letter written
jurisdiction, without resort to the procedure under section
 13 of the 1988 Act. There is a substantial overlap between                  by the pathologist, Dr. Ian West, who also provided an
the two procedures and that is very sensible.                                interview for the ITV programme.
     As I indicated earlier, Mrs. Williams was one of those                     The divisional court did question its own authority to
who, in 1992, made an application under section 13 of the                    look at fresh evidence of that nature on an application for
 1988 A ct All the points raised on her behalf were                          judicial review, but, having done so, it commented that it
 carefully considered. The application on her behalf was                     found the evidence to be of far too tenuous a nature to
 thoroughly prepared by a barrister, by counsel. There                       justify ordering a new inquest.
 were three general and procedural matters relied upon.                          At the conclusion of his judgment, Lord Justice
 First, it was relied on that the coroner wrongly failed to                   McCowan concluded that the inquest was correctly
 direct the jury as to the verdicts of lack of care or                        completed and the coroner’s directions to the jury as to
 accidental death due to or “aggravated by” lack of care                      the manner in which they should approach the case were
 relating to the negligence of the police which caused the                    impeccable. He added some comments which the House
  tragedy.                                                                    may wish also to consider:
       Secondly, it was relied on that the coroner wrongly                         “If I had found such reason and had to exercise my discretion the
  excluded evidence of lack of care in the emergency                          following matters would have weighed with me. What would be the
  services—that is close to what my hon. Friend the                           purpose of fresh inquests? To get a verdict criticising the police?
  Member for Crosby was saying—and the police’s reaction                      Such criticism has already been firmly levelled by the Taylor
   to the deceased’s initial injuries, wrongly insisted on a                  Report. The police have admitted fault and paid compensation. To
                                                                              get a verdict criticising the emergency services? I see no evidence
   cut-off point of 3.15 pm for the evidence heard at the                      to justify such criticism, and in any event it would be irrelevant if
   main inquest, and wrongly failed to direct the jury on the                  all six were brain dead by 3.15 pm. To obtain further examination
   availability of a verdict of accidental death by lack of care               of the last minutes of their lives? I doubt that anything more would
   or lack of care based on the failure of the various                         be learned, but the process would be a very harrowing one involving
   responsible agencies to provide the deceased with                           large numbers of witnesses and lasting if not for 96 days. for not
    adequate medical attention after they had sustained their                  far short. Moreover, irrespective of whose fault, if anyone’s, it is,
    original injuries.                                                          the fact is that four and a half years have already passed since the
                                                                                tragedy occurred. As to the alternative suggestion of a mere
        It was also asserted in relation to Kevin Williams that                 q..aching of the existing verdicts leaving nothing in their place, I
    there was evidence to justify the coroner in concluding                     would regard that as absolutely valueless.
    that he was alive beyond the 3.15 pm cut-off time adopted                       Mr. Jones says that the families are pursuing this matter because
    by the coroner. I pause to emphasise that because anyone                    they have a deep instinct to know the circumstances in which their
    who has seen “The Cook Report” knows how important                           relatives died. I am perfectly prepared to accept that that is their
    the cut-off timp. was. I emphasise that that matter was very                 motive and I respect it, but I hope they, for their part, can understand
     much before the High Court when it considered the                           that I have to take an objective view and I have to consider the
    judicial review. Moreover, evidence had emerged                              interests of all concerned including those of all the witnesses who
     subsequent to the inquest to suggest that considerable                      would have to come along five years later and try to cast their minds
     pressure had been put on two witnesses to retract or                        back to events that they must have been trying to forget Taking that
     qualify their evidence about the signs of life that they                     objective view, and considering the interests of all concerned, I
                                                                                  would in my discretion conclude that this was not a case in which
     described in Kevin Williams after 3.15 pm.
                                                                                  it will be right to order fresh inquests.”
         The conclusion that I reached was that none of the
                                                                                   All that adds up to the fact that it «’\]} " T "™ mallv
     matters raised afforded a realistic likelihood of successful
                                                                                cogent and persuasive freshargMngflts if they are now to
     application to the High Court. In the event, the applicants
                                                                                result in an order by the High Court that there should be
     proceeded by way of application for judicial review which
                                                                                a fresh inquest. So far as I have been able to ascertain
      I have described. It is clear from the judgment of the
                                                                                before today, the evidence referred to in “The Cook
      divisional court that all these points which would have
                                                                                Report” did not bring matters forward beyond where they
      been relied upon in an application under section 13 of the
      Coroners Act 1988 were canvassed in those proceedings.                     stood at the time of the application for judicial review.
                                                                                 Moreover, the court would not have regard, as I have
     In giving the judgment of the divisional court, Lord                        indicated, to “The Cook Report” itself, but it will need to
   Justice McCowan ruled that none of the procedural or                          see the evidence in proper form. However, I have made
   tArhniral points raised justified the intervention of the
                                                                                 that point
   divisional court and then he went on—and I hope that this
   will be of some comfort—to deal in the following manner                          S ir M alcolm T hornton: Will my right hon. and
   with the evidence relating to the death of Kevin Williams:                    learned Friend confirm that at the judicial review—I am
         “We were told that some while after, Mrs. Williams, the                 referring to paragraph D, page 29 of the judgment the
      deceased’s mother, made contact with PC Bruder and WPC Martin              court was restricted in the main to consideration of
      and they alleged that they had been pressurised into changing their
      stories and that they now stuck by their original versions. Where
                                                                                 evidence available at the time of the inquest and that that
      does the truth lie? I see no fault in the corona: in this matter. He       meant, for example, that scant regard was paid to the
              full inquiry. He was not asked by the applicant’s                  evidence of Dr. West? At paragraph D, page 29, the court
      representative to do more. There was overwhelming medical                   simply agreed to look de bene esse at Dr. W est s report.
      evidence that the deceased was in fact dead by 3.15 pm. In my               The court also admitted the restrictive nature of judicial
      judgment it would not be right to quash the verdicts and order a            review proceedings. It conceded, as the Attorney-General
       new inquest on the strength of these allegations made against the
                                                                                  has already mentioned, that it had grave doubts as to
       investigating police officers.”
                       Kevin Williams                 26 OCTOBER 1994                   Kevin Williams                    986


whether it had power to look at fresh evidence which had          that he said, but I am quite sure that the court did not give
emerged since the date of the inquests. That is paragraph         scant regard to anything. I am sure that the court looked
D, page 30 of the judgment.                                       very carefully.
  I have tried—I hope that my right hon. and learned                  The House will have recognised from what I have said
Friend the Attorney-General will accept this—to show              that, although the court was worried as to whether it had
that the limitations of the judicial review prohibited            power to look at certain evidence, in fact it did, in that
proper examination of that further evidence and that,             curious Latin phrase, de bene esse. It went on to look at
under his pewers under section 13, there is an opportunity        that evidence. It did not brush it aside; it looked at it. My
for my right hon. and learned Friend to have a further            hon. Friend and Opposition Members are concerned that
look at it; it is that which is the basis of my submission        I should look careM ly once again at what my hon. Friend
and of the evidence which I shall give him tomorrow.              can put before me, and I assure the House that I will. I
                                                                  caution that it requires very cogent evidence before the
   The A ttorney-G eneral: I am grateful to my hon.               matter can be reopened, but I fully understand the
Friend. I shall say what I was about to say to my hon.            concerns of the families and I express my deepest
Friend, which is that I will indeed look very carefully at        sympathy for them. I shall look carefully at the matter
the evidence that he gives me tomorrow, and I will look           that my hon. Friend can bring forward.
at it in the context of all the matters that I have dealt with.       Question put and agreed to.
As my hon. Friend mentioned, although I have a copy of                Adjourned accordingly at twelve minutes past Ten
the judgment in front of me, I cannot pick up all the words        o ’clock.
