        *

                                  ®J*e Sail® WtU^mph                                                                    (^ eyjsT^f (( (0.5>
                                  1 CANADA SQUARE     CANARY WHARF     LONDON E14 5DT
■ O '                               TELEPHONE: 0171-538 5000  TELEX; 22874 TELLDN G
                                                 DX42657 ISLE OF DOGS


                            DIRECT LINE;         0171 538 6307           FAX;      0171 538 7838


            Our Ref: AH/AWD 1992(5)                                                                                  March 2, 1995
            Your Ref: 74916


            S J Wooler Esq
            The Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers
            Attorney General's Chambers
            9 Buckingham Gate
            London SW1E 6JP




                                                                                                                              76185
            Dear Sir,
            Litigation arising from the Hillsborough Football Tragedy:
            Complaint of Contempt of Court
            We have now considered carefully the matters raised in the letter of complaint which the
            Attorney General has received from Messrs Russell Jones & Walker ("the plaintiffs'
            solicitors") concerning the articles in the 3 February 1995 issue of The Daily Telegraph to
            which they refer. The Editor thanks the Attorney General for his courtesy in providing
            particulars of the complaint, and he also very much appreciates our being given the
            opportunity to assist the Attorney General in his consideration of this matter.
            The plaintiffs' solicitors are, of course, perfectly entitled to refer to the Attorney General any
            publication they perceive as constituting an improper interference with the rights of their
            clients. We fully recognise the constitutional right of each of these plaintiffs to have
            unhindered access to the courts for the determination of disputes as to their respective legal
            rights. We reject absolutely, however, the suggestion that the publication of our articles
            constitutes an impediment to the civil proceedings in which these plaintiffs are currently
            involved. The complaint is wholly misconceived: there has been no contempt of court on
            the grounds alleged by the plaintiffs' solicitors, or at all.
            Our news report of the settlement of 14 of the relevant claims, as well as our
            contemporaneous editorial, which referred to the settlement in a wider context, were
            subjected to rigorous legal scrutiny on the eve of publication, and, for the several reasons
            given below, we submit that each was a legitimate publication on matters of considerable
            public interest and concern. The Editor trusts that, having considered our submissions, the
            Attorney General will uphold freedom of expression in this instance and thereby spare the
            courts from the burden of having to adjudicate on the matter.
            As the p laintiffs' solicitors make clear on page 2 of their letter, the complaint is essentially
            concerned with alleged pressure, and the alleged effect or potential effect of such pressure,
            not on the High Court judge who is to preside over the trial of 7 "test" cases which is due to
            start on 27 March, or on any potential witnesses, but rather on their clients as parties. There
            is no suggestion that the publication of either of our articles constitutes conduct calculated to




                                    THETELEGRAPH PLC REGISTERED IN ENGLAND No. 451593   Q   r e c y c le d pa pe r
»                                                 -   2   -




    prejudice either the second or third of the requirements for the due administration of justice
    referred to by Lord Diplock in Attorney General -v- Times Newspapers Limited 119741 AC
    275 HL & p309 B-C ("the Thalidomide case"). While it is alleged that our editorial
    constitutes prejudice of the first requirement ("unhindered access to the constitutionally
    established courts"), the complainants do not seem to contend that our news report is
    calculated to prejudice that requirement or any other. Indeed, Mr Simon Allen, of the
    plaintiffs' solicitors, to whom our reporter, Nigel Bunyan, spoke shortly after its publication,
    made clear that he had no complaint about our news report.
    We propose, therefore, to make separate submissions in respect of our two articles, although
    there will inevitably be some overlap at certain points.


    "Hillsborough police may get £250.000 for trauma"

    This report comprises news of the settlement (in principle) of 14 of the cases, coupled with
    some entirely non-prejudicial speculation - based on reliable sources - on the possible levels
    of compensation, together with some reaction to the news - both favourable and critical - in
    the form of the comments of identified third parties having a legitimate interest in the
    subject.
    The subject of the article is undoubtedly a matter of wide public interest and concern,
    namely, the out-of-court settlement of a significant number of negligence claims brought by
    police officers. As stated in our report, they claimed to have suffered (to varying degrees)
    personal injuries in the form of nervous shock as a consequence of being present on duty at
    the time or during the aftermath of a disaster of national proportions at the Hillsborough
    Stadium in 1989. The awards of compensation, once agreed, might, in some cases, be as
    much as £250,000. The fact that one of the defendants is a public body and that all three are
    backed by insurance adds to the public interest in the matter. Ultimately, it is the public that
    pays.
    Given the public interest in reporting the settlement, the fact that there remains to be tried (or
    settled) a further set in a series of actions by different plaintiffs, does not, in our submission,
    necessitate the curtailment of the freedom to comment fairly on that settlement. Lord Reid
    (p296 C of the Thalidomide case) said, in relation to a series of actions of a similar kind, that
    the public policy at the core of our law of contempt "...does not require that a system o f stop
    and go shall apply to public discussion". Moreover, it would be an unreasonable restriction
    on press freedom to gag fair comment on the part settlement of such a series of civil actions.
    It would, on the authority of The Sunday Times -v- United Kingdom H979J 2 EHRR 245,
    be wholly out of proportion to any sufficiently pressing social need for our courts to hold
    such comment to be in contempt.
    There is no suggestion that our news report contains any factual inaccuracy or
    misrepresentation. In this regard, the guidance provided in the case of In re William Thomas
    Shipping Co Ltd [193012 Ch 368 on the dividing line between comment on litigation which
    is permissible, and comment involving contempt, is helpful. Adopting Lord Reid's summary
    (p297 D of the Thalidomide case): "...the dividing line there drawn was between comment
    containing injurious misrepresentation which was contempt and fa ir and temperate criticism
    which would not have been".
    We submit that our news report was fair, balanced and accurate and well on the right side of
    that dividing line. While some of the comments attributed to the identified sources are
    critical, they are plainly expressions of the freedom of speech enshrined in Article 10 of the
    European Convention on Human Rights. The public not only have a right to be properly
                                             -   3   -




informed of the development (ie the settlement), but also to hear the reactions of interested
parties to it. Comprising, as it does, comment sympathetic to the entire group of plaintiffs -
as instanced by the quotes attributed to Mr Paul Middup (secretary of the South Yorkshire
Police Federation) and Mr Doug Frazer (solicitor for some relations of Hillsborough
victims), our report achieves a fair balance of opinion. It constitutes no threat whatsoever,
either to the integrity of the pending proceedings, or to the freedom of those plaintiffs whose
actions are pending.


"Moral blackmail"

Before addressing the specific issues raised in connection with this editorial, we believe it
would be helpful to explain our purpose in causing it to be published when the residual cases
were still active.
Although news of the settlement was plainly the immediate spur for our editorial, it was
neither conceived as a means of influencing nor was it calculated to interfere in any other
way in the conduct, or, indeed, possible settlement, of the residual cases. In fact, there is but
one passing reference to the outstanding set of claims - in the editorial's opening paragraph -
wherein the hope is expressed that the claims will be contested "to the hilt". Such a comment
- urging a defendant to resist a civil claim for damages without expressing any opinion on the
legal merits or otherwise of the case of either side - cannot, in our submission, begin to
constitute contempt of court.
News of the settlement had in fact appeared in the 2 February issue of The Independent (copy
enclosed) whose report predicted that, having regard to the plight of some of the relatives of
the Hillsborough victims, the settlement would give rise to public controversy. On being
investigated further by our own reporters later that day, it soon became clear that the
settlement had indeed given rise to controversy, not least among other police officers,
including Mr Richard Wells, the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire. On the eve of the
publication of our editorial, therefore, the settlement was already a matter of public concern.

The settlement had been reached in principle with the several defendants, who had, as is
made abundantly clear in the second sentence of our editorial, admitted liability with the
backing of their insurers on the basis of the legal realities. While the defendants, apparently
in the light of the legal advice they had received, considered it economically prudent to settle,
the development was, in our view, to be regretted. For our own part, we would have
preferred to see the defendants resisting the claims on principle, and in the public interest,
win or lose. The decision to settle involved a potentially very high global cost to the
defendants, and, therefore, ultimately to members of the public, either as taxpayers, or as
clients of insurance companies. Accordingly, it was a matter upon which we could
legitimately voice our opinion.
However, given the outstanding claims, we were mindful of the need to be fair in declaring
our views publicly. In particular, we recognised our obligation to avoid creating any
substantial risk of serious prejudice to the residual actions. We were not motivated to launch
a newspaper campaign to heap moral pressure on a party to pending proceedings to settle (as
instanced by the Thalidomide case), or worse, to vilify in print a sole plaintiff with the
ulterior motive of causing that plaintiff to withdraw a civil claim (as instanced by Attorney
General -v- Hislop & Anr F199112 WLR p269 CA). Our aim was to focus in a responsible
way on the much wider issues of legitimate public interest that we had previously addressed
in our editorial columns, namely, the workings of and threats to our legal system. In this
regard, the reference in the opening paragraph of our editorial to the £1 million award in
another recent civil action is highly relevant.
                                                 -   4   -



#
    It is a view consistently expressed in our editorials, that in several other connections, we in
    Britain must resist what we regard as the American excesses, by holding out against the
    extension of litigation into what many people regard as new areas, and which we, and others,
    believe works against the public interest. We have been particularly concerned to observe
    the increasing tendency towards generous compensation being awarded where the taxpayer, a
    large corporate enterprise or an insurance company is footing the bill. Thus we have
    opposed the large awards of compensation for servicewomen discharged because of
    pregnancy; we have objected to the Disability Bill because of its potential to open up new
    areas of litigation; we have opposed, and will continue to oppose, the creation of a new tort
    of invasion of privacy. We have also questioned, and will continue to question, the concept
    of damages for psychological trauma resulting simply from seeing a frightening or disturbing
    spectacle, while at the same time recognising - as indeed does the editorial now in issue - that
    for the purposes of claiming damages for negligence, nervous shock, as the law now stands
    in this country, is a recognised category of injury.
    We do not accept that such legal developments were or are inevitable, and we believe it is a
    legitimate exercise in press freedom to say that they should be resisted. We have aimed our
    arguments, as is right and appropriate, at the legislature, the legal profession, the courts and
    the legal system in general. We are motivated by the sincere belief that it is harmful to the
    public interest to generate a climate in which anyone who suffers a misfortune should first
    look around for someone to blame and then sue for damages, or, as our editorial put it,
    should go "...down the deplorable path o f America's victim society where cash compensation
    is sought fo r every human misfortune". We shudder at the prospect of hundreds of legally
    aided smokers suing the tobacco industry.
    In relation to the settlement of the 14 claims, we found in the course of our news gathering
    on 2 February that our sentiments as described above seemed to be echoed in the reaction of
    many officers in the South Yorkshire Police Force who took a less than favourable view of
    the legal actions. Our own view was that such disquiet justified not only our reporting some
    of the critical reactions in our news story, but also our commenting critically on the
    development in a measured and temperate editorial.
    Having thus outlined the relevant facts and circumstances, as well as the editorial and legal
    considerations we took into account before deciding to publish our editorial, we now turn to
    the central issue raised by the plaintiffs' solicitors, namely, whether this article constitutes
    improper pressure on their clients and therefore a contempt of court. In our submission it
    does not.
    The plaintiffs whose actions are yet to be determined, constitute a sizeable group of police
    officers who, at the time they sustained their alleged injuries, were essentially performing a
    public role. As such, they were members of a considerably larger section of our country's
    public servants, including members of all the emergency services, the armed forces and so
    forth. The employment of each member of this large section of the community necessarily
    contemplates danger and an assumption of the risk of sustaining personal, if not mortal,
    injury in the line of duty. Each is prepared by training to cope with the dangers inherent in
    the job, and rewarded with pay that invariably includes an element of danger money.
    It is our belief that very great harm would be done to the public interest if those having the
    control of our emergency services were to modify their response to, or attendance at,
    disasters and catastrophes for fear of the possibility of subsequent claims for damages from
    those deployed to deal with the same. In our view, it is one of the very real dangers inherent
    in cases of this kind because such awards tend inevitably to encourage litigation by setting
    precedents for others to follow.
                                                  -   5   -




#   While it is true that our editorial refers to both the settlement and the pending actions, unlike
    the Thalidomide and Hislop cases referred to earlier, our editorial does not single out for
    treatment any individual party to the pending litigation. Having regard to the fact that many
    of their colleagues (or former colleagues) had already withdrawn their claims, we did not
    believe at the time we went to print that there was the remotest likelihood of the remaining
    plaintiffs being improperly influenced by anything we had to say on the subject. In our view,
    it is reasonable to suppose that police officers as a class are not only resolute and rational, but
    also well able to resist critical comment.
    We firmly believe, however, that reasonable persuasion is entirely another matter. It is
    within the proper function of a newspaper to point out to active and potential litigants what it
    honestly thinks about the social disadvantages or consequences of a particular course of
    action. As a member of society, the individual who exercises his or her right to have
    recourse to our civil courts should weigh the consequences of the action, not just on his or
    her own individual interests, but also on the wider community. Just as urging a defendant to
    resist a civil claim cannot, as we have submitted earlier, begin to constitute a contempt, it
    cannot, in our submission, be a contempt to point out the social consequences of a certain
    types of litigation, nor to express the hope that others will point that out too. For as Lord
    Morris of Borth-y-Gest said in the Thalidomide case (p305 F):
          "The power o f the press can so often be beneficially used to call attention to the needs
          o f those in distress or to advocate some desirable changes in the law."

    and then (p306 E):
          "I can see no reason why there should not have been comment as to the amounts paid
          on settlement... and why there should not have been fu ll and free yet temperate
          discussion as to whether legal principles and practices in regard to the assessment o f
          damages were not inadequate or unfair or unrealistic."

    Our freedom as a newspaper to express views on matters of such public interest is guaranteed
    by Article 10 of the European Convention. Public policy is at the heart of our law of
    contempt and as Lord Scarman said in Attorney General -v- BBC f 19811 AC 203 @ v354:
          "If the issue should ultimately be a question o f legal policy, we must have regard to the
          country's international obligation to observe the European Convention as interpreted
          by the European Court o f Human Rights."

    This approach has clearly been adopted by the House of Lords in a number of cases since,
    such as Attorney General -v- Guardian Newspapers Ltd (No 2) [198813 A ll ER p545.

    Quite apart from Article 10, however, several of the dicta of the majority of their Lordships
    in the Thalidomide case support the proposition expounded by Lord Reid (p297 H):
          "...as a general rule where the only matter to be considered is pressure put on a
          litigant, fa ir and temperate criticism is legitimate, but anything which goes beyond that
          may well involve contempt o f court"

    and then p299 B-C:
          "The crucial question on this point is whether it can ever be permissible to urge a party
          to a litigation to forego his legal rights in whole or in part... In my view it is
          permissible so long as it is done in a fair and temperate way and without any oblique
          motive."
                                             -   6   -




While it is true that in the Thalidomide case Lord Diplock and Lord Simon of Glaisdale
expressed the minority view {obiter) that the article previously published by The Sunday
Times on 24 September 1972 (upon which the then Attorney General - significantly given the
nature of the current complaint - decided to take no action), constituted a contempt of court,
Lord Diplock nevertheless emphasised the importance of freedom of expression and
discussion (p313 A-B):
      "I entirely agree that discussion, however strongly expressed, on matters o f general
     public interest o f this kind is not to be stifled merely because there is litigation pending
     arising out o f particular facts to which general principles discussed would be
      applicable. I f the arousing ofpublic opinion by this kind o f discussion has the indirect
      effect o f bringing pressure to bear on a particular litigant to abandon or settle a
     pending action, this must be borne because o f the greater public interest in upholding
     freedom o f discussion on matters o f general public concern." (our underlining.)

The latter dictum is, of course, now effectively mirrored in s.5 of the Contempt of Court Act
1981 which provides:

      "A publication made as or as part of a discussion in good faith of public affairs
      or other matters of general public interest is not to be treated as a contempt of
      court under the strict liability rule if the risk of impediment or prejudice to
      particular legal proceedings is merely incidental to the discussion."

If, which we do not admit, our editorial is perceived as tending to put pressure on - rather
than to persuade - the plaintiffs, we submit that, as a discussion in good faith on a matter of
general public interest, and notwithstanding the opinions therein being "strongly expressed',
such perceived pressure is merely incidental to the discussion. Accordingly, both on the
authority of the Thalidomide case and the more recent statute, the criticism must be borne by
the relevant plaintiffs because of the greater public interest in upholding freedom of
discussion on a matter of such obvious public concern.
 On a true construction of our editorial, the references to the settlement and the pending
 litigation, are also in themselves merely incidental in the sense that they provide yet another
 example upon which to peg and further in our columns the legitimate discussion of the
workings of our legal system to which we have already referred. The admittedly robust
views expressed in our editorial, which do not in any way abuse the relevant plaintiffs, are
plainly directed to the wider issues, primarily the perceived tendency among some judges,
jurors, lawyers and claimants to allow themselves to be led down "...the deplorable path o f
America's victim society" especially when taxpayers or insurance companies are footing the
bill.
All the leading authorities on contempt of court underline the importance of giving greater
latitude to publications that deal with issues of principle and which do not purport to settle
facts in a pending legal dispute. While recognising that a balance must be struck between the
public interest in freedom of speech and the public interest in protecting the administration of
justice from interference, we submit that this is plainly an instance where freedom of
expression must prevail. In the Thalidomide case Lord Reid said that he could find no better
statement of the law on the balancing of the relevant considerations than the judgment of
Jordan C.J. in ex parte Bread Manufacturers Ltd f 19371 S.R. fN.S. W. 1242 @ p249-250:
      "If in the course o f the ventilation o f a question o f public concern matter is published
      which may prejudice a party in the conduct o f a lawsuit it does not follow that a
      contempt has been committed The case may be one in which as between competing
      matters o f public interest the possibility o f prejudice to a litigant may be required to
4



                                                 -   7   -




          yield to other and superior considerations. The discussion o f public affairs and the
          denunciation o f public abuses, actual or supposed, cannot be required to be suspended
          merely because the discussion or the denunciation may, as an incidental but not
          intended by-product, cause some likelihood o f prejudice to a person who happens at
          that time to be a litigant. It is well settled that a person cannot be prevented by process
          o f contempt from continuing to discuss publicly a matter which may fairly be regarded
          as one o f public interest, by reason merely o f the fact that the matter in question has
          become the subject o f litigation, or that a person whose conduct is being publicly
          criticised has become a party to litigation either as plaintiff or as defendant, and
          whether in relation to the matter which is under discussion or with respect to some
          other matter."
    Accordingly we submit that, having regard to the facts and all material considerations,
    especially our good intentions and the balance of the public interest, neither of the articles in
    question constitute a contempt of court, either at common law, or under the Contempt of
    Court Act 1981.

    Yours faithfully,




    Andrew Hutchinsoj
    Managing Editor




    Enc
