ATTORNEY
                                             Iris fy* ?lA^r vV^-     '




copy to
                 r i- m s



           SOLICITOR GENERAL
                            S*                    r^j^2^u'v
           Private Office

                                                   tF * «^S
                                                            C<    "1/^
                                            * •    ^ 7   ^   ^      / a. j


Please see the attached letter from Messrs Russell Jones and /| /t
Walker, who act on behalf of the Police Federation, inviting you
to take action in relation to an alleged contempt of court. They
act on behalf of police officers and former police officers in
the South Yorkshire Police who have sought or are to make or are
pursuing claims for damages as the result of psychiatric illness
flowing from what they had seen and done at Hillsborough Football
Ground in the tragic events of April 1989. There were initially
147 officers intending to pursue claims but subsequently writs
were issued only in respect of 52.        The number of actions
proceeding is now down to 37 and representative cases will be
tried shortly before Mr Justice Waller.

It became known recently that the insurers to the polic^_
authority were proposing to settle the number of cases.    There
have been some adverse press comment and specific criticism is
made of the editorial in the Daily Telegraph on the 3 February.
Attention is drawn to the last sentence.      It is asserted by
Messrs Russell Jones and Walker that the article goes beyond
legitimate comment and argument and amounts to improper pressure
on the claimants not to pursue their legitimate actions in the
courts.            y1
I am not convinced by their argument.    They rely on the Sunday
Times case (the thalidomide issue) but the circumstances are
significantly different.    That related to a calculated campaign
of pressure.    Nor is it a question of a timorous plaintiff who
might be easily deflected.      The notion that 37 officers and
former officers of the South Yorkshire Police supported by the
Police Federation and robust solicitors would be likely to be
defected seems implausible.      We do however need to think
carefully about the handling.

It would be likely to lead to questioning and challenge by Messrs
Russell Jones and Walker if the matter was to be rejected out of
hand.   On the other hand, there is little to be done by way of
investigation.   I do not think we would be justified in writing
our normal "letter before action" to the Daily Telegraph inviting
them to give reasons why they feel they should not be proceeded
against. I wonder whether a middle course might be appropriate:
a short letter to the Daily Telegraph informing that we have had
the complaint and copying the letter to them.       They could be
asked to give their observations.

My suggested approach to the Daily Telegraph has one
disadvantage.     It might cause the Daily Telegraph then to
comment on the fact of the complaint. Nonetheless, I do not see
any way of taking this forward without the Daily Telegraph
becoming aware of the fact.

On balance, I feel the short low key approach to the Daily
Telegraph would be the most appropriate. I should welcome your
comments.




S. J. WOOLER                                    10 February 1995
