Please see (flag A) the letter from Mr Malcolm Thornton dated 6th
January 1992.      A reading of the constituent's letter indicated
that a proper response could not be provided without sight of the
inquest papers     referred to   at the top   of page   10   of the
constituent’s letter.     Despite contact on several occasions by
Janet Glover, Mr Thornton’s office did not forward those papers
until 31st January.


You are aware of the continuing agitation on the part of the
relatives of the deceased at the Hillsborough disaster who
criticise the inquest as having failed sufficiently to attribute
responsibility to those whose conduct they believe contributed
to the disaster.


Mr and Mrs Williams have a more specific complaint, they believe
that the inquest did not satisfactorily resolve the circumstances
surrounding the death of their son, Kevin (aged 15 years).      The
cause of death was asphyxia and the view of the pathologist was
that death would have occurred within some three to five minutes
once the crushing had commenced.       The asphyxia was so severe
that unconsciousness would have supervened within three or five
seconds.
4.   Uncertainty arose as the result of evidence of an off duty                 pc
     (Merseyside) police officer who had attempted resusitation and
     was   apparently    assisted   by   two   (unidentified)   St.    John’s
     Ambulance personnel.       The officer described Kevin Williams as
     having suffered a convulsion whilst attempted resudltation was
     in progress.       He had then be taken to a temporary mortuary at
     the ground.    The Woman Special Constable who was responsible for
     him there had thought that at one point he opened his eyes and
     said the word "Mum".


5.   On the first day of the inquest Dr Slater did not deal very fully
     with the suggestion of convulsion (because he was not asked to)
     but positively excluded the deceased having spoken.              He said
     that the extent of the irreversible brain damage caused by the
     asphixia was such that it would have totally prohibited any form
     of communication.      Even if he was wrong on that, the crushing
     had been so severe as to produce four fractures of the two bones
     in the voice box and therefore the deceased could have uttered
     nothing whatsoever.


6.   Because of the known concern of the family about the possibility
     that Kevin Williams was still alive at a point later than had
     been thought, the coroner caused PC Bruder and WSC Martin to be
     reinterviewed and took further evidence.       It is fair to say that
     PC Bruder, when asked to go in detail through the evidence about
     resusitation was less firm and said that, having had further
     first aid training since the incident, he would no longer use the
word."convulsion,l but describe what he saw as "twitching".             The
twitching of bodies after death is of course a much more readily
explicable phenomenon.         Likewise, it is not uncommon for the
passing of air from dead bodies to produce sounds which may be
mistaken as grunts or words.


Sadly, the family are convinced that their son was alive for some
time after he was removed from the stand at Hillsborough and that
some form of "cover up" is afoot.         Please see the extract from
the Liverpool Echo at flag 6.


It seems clear that the coroner has, within the framework of his
inquest, set out to try and dispel any lingering misunder­
standings and doubts      as much as possible.              He cannot be
criticised for insufficiency of enquiry.           There are, however,
two aspects of the inquest to which I do draw attention:


(i)   I   understand    that   the   coroner    effectively    split    the
      inquests into two parts.        First he took general evidence
      about   the   circumstances    of   the   occasion.        Then    he
      proceeded to hold a series of "mini inquests" in relation
      to each deceased dealing with the train of events so far as
      each individual was concerned insofar as those events could
      be ascertained.


(ii) The coroner seems to have relied very heavily on written
      statements rather than calling witnesses.          I presume (but
           do not know) that this was to avoid the same witnesses
           having to be called time and time again in relation to each
           individual deceased.     It is understandable that Mr and Mrs
           Williams would have preferred to see PC Bruder and WSC
           Martin giving their evidence in person.


9.    The two points mentioned above are procedural matters for the
      coroner.     It cannot really be said that the inquest was anything
      other than thorough.      It seems unlikely now that the issue as
      to the precise time of death can be established with any greater
      precision.


10.   Even if the extent of the reliance on written evidence was such
      as to amount to an irregularity, I very much doubt whether it
      could be said that the interests of justice required a further
      inquest to be held having regard to the fact that there has
      already been a Public Inquiry, a criminal investigation and a
      quite detailed inquest.


11.   A draft letter to Mr Thornton is attached opposite for your
      consideration.




      S. J. WOOLER
      6 February 1992
                                                                    CORONERS ACT 1988 s 13                     567



  im   (2) contain provisions form erly in the C oroners (Am endm ent) Act 1926 s i 5(1). Sub-s (3)
  Provisions form erly in s 15(2) o f that Act (as repealed in part by the C oroners Act 1980 s l.S c h 2).
  ertheld w ith a jury. T his includes a reference to an inquest part o f w hich is held w ith a ju ry , see

       for ■        ™ inp another jury. As to the sum m oning o f juries, etc, see s 8(2) ante and the
  Is Rules 1984, SI 1984/552, rr 44-53, Sch 4, Form s 3-5.

                                        Inquests: special cases

  rder to hold inquest
 ft This section applies w here, on an application by o r und er the authority o f the
 |jey-General, the H igh C o u rt is satisfied as respects a coroner ( the coroner
  tied”) either—
   (a) that he refuses o r neglects to hold an inquest w hich oug ht to be held; or
   (b) w here an inquest has been held b y him , that (w hether by reason o f fraud,
        rejection o f evidence, irregularity o f proceedings, insufficiency o f inquiry the
        discovery o f new facts or evidence o r otherwise) it is necessary or desirable in
        the interests o f justice that another inquest should be held.
I The H igh C o u rt m ay—                                                    .
J (a) order an inquest or, as the case m ay be, another inquest to be held into the
       death either—
        (i) by th e coroner concerned; o r                   . . . .
       (ii) by the coroner for another district in the same adm inistrative area;
  (&) order the coroner concerned to pay such costs o f and incidental to the
       application as to the court m ay appear just ; and
  (c) w here an inquest has been held, quash the inquisition on that inquest.
}) In relation to an inquest held under subsection (2)(a)(ii) above, the coroner by
jm it is held shall be treated for the purposes o f this Act as if he w ere the coroner for
district o f the coroner concerned.

riss
,b-s (1) contains provisions form erly in the C oroners Act 1 8 8 7 , s 6 ( 1 ), a n d t h e C o ro n e n (Am endment)
1926 s 19 Sub-s (2) contains provisions form erly in s 6(1), (2) o f the 1887 Act (as repealed in part, in
of76(2) by                     G o v ern m en t Act 1972, s 272(1), Sch 30). Sub-s (3) contains provisions form erly
     o f the 1887 Act (as repealed in part as noted above).                                  ,     ■ ■      , ..       .
* or            the authority o f the A ttorney-G eneral. As to the procedure w hen it is sought to quash
requisition on certiorari and otherw ise than by authority o f the A ttorney General, see R v Directors o f
u Western R lv Co (1888) 20 Q B D 4 1 0 ,5 2 JP 772.                                                      ,          .
he court is not entitled to use the w ide powers contained in this section to quash a coroner s verdict if the
-mev General has refused to make or authorise the application. An inquest is a court, not a tribunal,
efore the w ide supervisory powers over statutory tribunals are not available and consequently the court
onl^ o r d e T j u d i d a f review o f an inquest on the grounds of,=rror?on ,the face o f the record f r a u d o r a n
;ssor refusal o f jurisdiction; see R v Surrey Coroner, ex p CampbeU! [ 1 ^ ]
 followed in R v Greater Manchester Coroner, e x p Tal [1985] Q B 67, [1984J 3 All UK Z4U w nere tne
sional court’s pow er to order judicial review was extended to review o f an e rro r o f law com m itted

»^ m t a c ^ t h i ’fim rtio i^ o f the A ttorney General m ay be discharged by the Solicitor General; see the
itOfficers A ct 1944, s 1, Vol 10, title Constitutional Law (Pt 4).

U f u s ^ o r n e ^ L c t l ^ p e r s o n w ho is unable to do som ething o r has a reasonable excuse for not doing it
not be said to neglect o r refuse to do it; cf, in particular, Re London and Paris Banking CorpnJ1875) LR 19
444 R ?Richm % d Gas Co and Richmond (Surrey) Corpn [1893] 1 Q B 56; Partridge u Partndge [1S94] 1
3 5 1 *; Re Edwards, Lloyd v Boyes [1910] 1 C h 541; and Re Quintm Dick, Lord Cloncurry v Fenton [1926]


^ o [ve9r v i f n e Ew fa ec ts o te v id e n c e . For relevant cases, see R v Divine, e x p Walton [1930] 2 KB 29,
30] All ER Rep 302, and R v Huntbach, e x p Lockky [1944] KB 606, [1944] 2 All ER 453.

^ h ^ h e ^ q ^ i s i t i o l ^ o r 'r ^ i s o n s for quashing an inquisition, see 9 Halsbury’s Laws (4th edn) paras
