liP%




        ATTORNEY GENERAL                                            cc:



        HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

        You will recall th a t you w rote to th e Home S ecretaiy on 10 J u n e ab o u t Ms
        proposal th a t a retired judge should be invited to review th e evidence relating
        to th e H illsborough Stadium D isaster, consider w hether any m aterial is
        available w hich h as not previously been considered by relevant decision
        m akers an d to advise about possible fu rth er public inquiry, prosecution or
        application to th e High Court for a n inquest. Although you were content, in
        principle, th a t there should be a fu rth er investigation by a judge, you were
        anxious th a t the Terms of Reference should be drafted in a way th a t ensured
        th at, in relation to questions of prosecution and application to the High Court,
        th e role of th e judge was confined to establishing w hether further evidence
        existed w ithout expressing a n opinion, w hether directly or indirectly, w hich
        m ight fetter or pre-em pt the discretion of yourself or the Director in relation to
        your respective responsibilities.

        That letter is at F lag A. The Home Secretaiy h as now replied a t F lag B. He
        h a s taken on board the points you m ade b u t suggests some slight
        am endm ents. Subject to the views of th e CPS, I have no difficulty with w hat
        is proposed. I will so inform the Home Office if you are content.




/ / • S J WOOLER
  '   16 J u n e 1997




       S W / 1 6 0 6 /7
                              The Rt Hon John Mom's QC MP
                                                                      9 B U C K IN G H A M GATE

                                                                         L OND ON SW 1 E 6JP



0 1 71 -828 1884


   The Rt Hon Ja c k Straw MP
   Secretary of State for the Home D epartm ent
   Home Office
   50 Q ueen Anne's Gate
   LONDON SW1H9AT

    10 J u n e 1997




   THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

   T hank you for your letter of 5 J u n e 1997 outlining the considerations which
   have led you to conclude th at we should initiate an independent exam ination
   of the alleged new evidence because this appears to be the only way to allay
   public concern.

   I have no difficulty in principle with your approach. There undoubtedly
   rem ains deep rooted dissatisfaction am ongst the relatives of those who died as
   well as some of the survivors and their relatives about the m an n er in w hich the
   public authorities conducted them selves at the m aterial time. They have
   m anifested themselves in calls for official action which, even if acceded to.
   would in all probability not then address the concerns. For example, a further
   inquest - which can only be ordered by the High Court - would have to
   consider the statutory issues prescribed by the Coroners Act 1988 an d could
   not properly become a wide ranging or generalised enquiry.

   But I do have difficulty with the draft Terms of Reference. They do not
   distinguish adequately between the question of a further public enquiry which
   is properly a m atter of political judgm ent and the questions of a further
   inquest or possible prosecution w hich have to be addressed on a quasi-judicial
   basis and according to established criteria. We sta rt from a position where
   there is nothing to suggest th at the Director of Public Prosecutions and my
   predecessor have failed properly to consider, in accordance with the relevant
   tests, all the evidence which has been m ade available to them. The sole issue
   therefore in relation to questions about further inquests or prosecution is
   w hether there is any evidence w hich has not already been considered.
   Moreover, consideration of th at fu rth er evidence would be a m atter for the DPP
   or myself as appropriate. It would for a num ber of reasons be wrong for a
   public enquiry to express a view, for example, on possible crim inal charges.
   A ( './O S K ) K / 1
S tatutory responsibility for these decisions rests with myself and the DPP. We
m u st not let o u r discretion be fettered or pre-empted. Any recom mendation
of a public enquiry would create an alm ost irresistible pressure: this scenario
could not properly be compared with the taking of private legal advice from
counsel. In relation to the prosecution issue the publicly expressed views of
a High Court judge about prosecution would be likely to carry such weight th at
they m ight be regarded as m aking a fair trial impossible.

In these circum stances. I enclose a suggested revised wording for the Terms
of Reference. If you are intending to proceed as envisaged. I would be content
for Lord Ju stic e Stewart Smith to be appointed.




                               JOHN MORRIS
      GGESTED TERMS OF REFERENCE


To ascertain w hether any evidence exists relating to the d isaster at the
Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:


(a)        to the inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor: or


(b)        to the Director of Public Prosecution or the Attorney General for the
           purpose of discharging their respective statutory responsibilities;


(c)        to the chief officer of the S outh Yorkshire Police in relation to police
           discipline matter:


and in relation to (a) above to advise w hether any evidence not previously
available is of such significance as to justify establishm ent of a further public
inquiry and. in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to their attention any evidence
not previously considered by them w hich m ay be relevant to their respective
duties.




s w/ wx m/ s
                                                                           /A JQ : <T-


                                              QUEEN ANNE'S GATE LONDON SW1H 9AT
                                                                      16 JUN 1997



The Rt Hon John Morris QC MP                       16 JUR 1937
Attorney General
9 Buckingham Gate                                                          1®0772
LONDON
SW1E 6JP




THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

Thank you for your letter of 10 June about the proposed independent
examination of the alleged new evidence about the Hillsborough disaster.

I am grateful to you for your agreement in principle with w hat I proposed.
I understand your concerns about the terms of reference and the statutory
responsibilities which rest with you and the Director of Public Prosecutions.
Although I would prefer terms of reference which invited more explicit
recommendations, I am broadly content w ith,the amended terms which you
proposed. I would, however, like to suggest some small changes to refer
explicitly to my role as Home Secretary, and to allow the person appointed to
advise on any other action which should be taken in the public interest. I
suggest therefore terms of reference along the following lines:

      To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
      Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1 9 8 9 which was not available:

      (a)   To the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or

      (b)   To the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General for
            the purpose of discharging their respective statutory
            responsibilities; or

      (c)   To the Chief Officer of the South Yorkshire Police in relation to
            police disciplinary matters;
      And in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously
      available is of such significance as to justify establishment by the
      Secretary of State for the Home Department of a further Public Inquiry;
      and in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not
      previously considered by them which which may be relevant to their
      respective duties; and to advise whether there is any other action which
      should be taken in the public interest.

I would be grateful if you would confirm that you are happy with the slightly
amended version.

I am grateful to Derry Irvine for proposing that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith might
take on this task. He seems to me very suitable for w hat w e have in mind. If
Derry is able to confirm that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is willing to take on the
task, I suggest the next step might be for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to meet
officials to discuss his requirements. The appropriate official is Paul Pugh,
Head of the Operational Policing Policy Unit here (0 1 7 1 -2 7 3 3 1 4 1 ).

I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, the
Lord Chancellor, the President of the Council, the Minister without Portfolio, the
Secretary of State for National Heritage, the Director of Public Prosecutions and
to Sir Robin Butler.




                                  JACK STRAW
