                                                THE LEGAL SECRETARIAT TO THE LAW OFFICERS

                                                            ATTORNEY GENERAL'S CHAMBERS

                                                                       9 BUCKINGHAM GATE

                                                                         LONDON SW1E 6JP
General enquiries 0171-271 2400
Direct line      0171-



          Ms Ann Adlington
          Solicitors
          Hillsborough Family Support Group
          1st Floor
          Central Buildings
          41 North John Street
          LIVERPOOL L2 6RR

          22 October 1998




          Dear Madam

          THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

          I write to acknowledge with thanks your letter of 8 October 1998
          enclosing, for information, a copy of a letter and documentary material
          sent to the Home Secretary. Your letter did not in fact reach this office
          until 20 October.

          The request by the defendants th at the DPP take over the conduct of the
          prosecution under Section 6 of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 is
          being considered within the Crown Prosecution Service and I understand
          that they are in touch with your organisation.

          Yours faithfully




          S J WOOLER



          SW/2210/2
F
                                                                                   vSBORon,




                  Hillsborough Family Support Group



    The Attorney General
    Attorney General’s Office
    9 Buckingham Gate
    London SW1E 6JP


    8 October 1998


    Dear Attorney-General

    The Hillsborough Disaster

    We enclose for your information copies of a letter and documentary materials sent by us today
    to the Home Secretary. Prosecutions have been taken out against David Duckenfield and
    Bernard Murray, formerly of the South Yorkshire police, for manslaughter, misfeasance and
    attempting to pervert the course of justice. The documents have been prepared by the
    Hillsborough Family Support Group for the purpose of arguing against a request by the
    defendants that the Director of Public Prosecutions should intervene to discontinue the
    prosecution.

    They are sent to you because the “Scrutiny”, whose findings are undermined by the attached
    documents, inquired, inter alia, as to whether your powers under the Coroners Act 1988
    might be invoked. The Hillsborough Family Support Group is also conscious that the Director
    of Public Prosecutions acts under your supervision.


    Yours faithfully




    Ann Adiington
    Solicitor




           Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151 236 1936. E Mail info@hfsg.org
         1st Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
sBOfla




5(/ppQ^
                  Hillsborough Family Support Group


     8 October 1998

     Rt Hon Jack Straw
     Secretary of State for Home Affairs
     50 Queen Anne’s Gate
     London SW1H9AT

      Dear Secretary of State

      The Hillsborough Inquiry

      In July 1998 a private prosecution was instituted by the Hillsborough Family Support Group
      against David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray, formerly of the South Yorkshire police. They
      are charged with manslaughter and misfeasance in public office, and Duckenfield is further
      charged with attempting to pervert the course of justice.

      This prosecution has been instituted after the disclosure of a large number of statements of
      South Yorkshire police officers, following your decision to allow the Liverpool families access
      to these statements, and after receipt in the course of the “Scrutiny” of Lord Justice Stuart-
      Smith of a substantial number of statements from the “body files” in the possession of the
      South Yorkshire police.

      The open approach by your department has allowed the HFSG for the first time to gain an
      evidential basis for the suspicions that it has entertained for many years, namely, that senior
      members of the South Yorkshire and West Midlands police forces have worked together to
      suppress the truth about the Hillsborough disaster.

      We enclose for your information copies of material that we have sent to the Crown
      Prosecution Service. These documents undermine or call into question the findings made by
      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in the course of his “Scrutiny”. The defendants have asked the CPS
      to intervene in the prosecutions for the purpose of discontinuing them, and these documents
      have been prepared by the HFSG to counter this request. The documents are as follows:

              (a) Informations and supporting documents placed before the Leeds Magistrates’
              Court, after which the defendants were summoned to court;

              (b) A letter from the Hillsborough Family Support Group to the Crown Prosecution
              Service of 31st July 1998;



                                                      -   1
                                                          -




            Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151 236 1936. E Mail info@hfsg.org
          1st Floor Central BuOdings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
          (c) A letter and file of supporting documents sent to the CPS, dated 24th August 1998;

          (d) Formal Representations and file of supporting documents settled by leading
          counsel and sent to the CPS, dated 24th September 1998;

          (e) Supplementary Representations settled by leading counsel dated 2nd October 1998.

In summary, these papers show the following matters relevant to the findings of the
“Scrutiny”;

(i)       The process of editing the unsworn and usually undated statements of South Yorkshire
          police was used improperly to conceal factual matters at the centre of the disaster
          which were prejudicial to the South Yorkshire police force. That process extended far
          beyond the matters set out in the report of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. Previous
          inquiries were seriously misled by the editing. (See letter of 24th August and attached
          file, the Representations of 24th September paragraphs 36-39, and the file marked
          “Annex D” attached to those Representations).

(ii)      The alleged independence of the West Midlands police in the case has been a sham
          (Representations of 24th September 1998, paragraphs 8 to 10, 56-97).

(iii)     Much evidence is now available, since the “Scrutiny”, showing that the Director of
          Public Prosecutions and Coroner’s jury made their decisions on the basis of incomplete
          as well as edited material, selected by South Yorkshire police in collusion with West
          Midlands police. (Letter of 31st July 1998, and Representations of 24th September
          1998, paragraphs 40-55).

(iv)      The South Yorkshire police continues to withhold material from the Hillsborough
          Family Support Group, and seems, extraordinarily, to maintain complete control of
          information collected for and on behalf of the Home Office (Lord Taylor’s Inquiry),
          the Coroner, DPP and Police Complaints Authority. File sent on 24th August 1998,
          Tab 17; paragraphs 3, 11(e), 96-7, 109, 118-121 of Representations of 24th August.

We send you these documents because it must obviously be of concern to the Home Office to
have material which affects the correctness of its decision made in February 1998 that a
further full judicial inquiry was not required. A copy of this letter will be sent for information
to the Attorney-General, since the possible exercise of his powers under the Coroners Act
1988 was in question in the “Scrutiny”. If the Crown Prosecution Service decides not to take
over the case, the prosecution will be issuing witness summonses to the South Yorkshire
police to obtain most of the contents of the Sheffield archive, and will report further.

Yours faithfully


       Adhrteds**
Ann Adlington
Solicitor

                                                -2 -
