Jr    »




     FILE NOTE                                                   F ile Ref: m g :4:92




     The Director of Public Prosecutions and Dru Sharpling took advantage of their
     meeting at LSLO on 3 June to raise with SJW the problem of the Hillsborough
     case. The CPS has concluded that it should advise the South Yorkshire Police
     that there is no basis for reopening the criminal investigation. But it has been
     agreed that announcement of that decision should be deferred pending a
     possible announcement by the Home Secretary about a further enquiry. The
     Hillsborough Families Support Group seem aware that something is about to
     happen and the pressure on the CPS for an announcement is now intense.


     S Wooler said that he would speak to the Private Secretary to the Home
     Secretary to ascertain the present position. Following that commitment, S
     Wooler put out a call to David Redhouse (Colin Harnett having moved on) but
     before the call was returned received a copy of the submission by Paul Pugh
     of 23 May. Dru Sharpling also contacted SJW to say that the proposed terms
     of reference caused the CPS considerable anxiety.


     The submission overlooks the fact that firm views have been reached by the
     CPS and the Law Officers about the question of further investigation and an
     application under Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988. What is needed is an
     enquiry which will be directed towards ascertaining whether there is any
     further information available which would have affected the conclusions of the
     Taylor enquiry.


     S Wooler spoke later to David Redhouse. He indicated the DPPs difficulties on
     timing and also the unacceptability of the proposed terms of reference. He said
     that there was no difficulty about an enquiry in principle, but no

     S W /0 4 0 6 /1
 V




announcement should be made until there had been agreement as to the terms
of reference. Dru Sharpling was so informed.




S J WOOLER
4 June 1997




S W /0 4 0 6 /1
