ATTORNEY GENERAL
                                                                cc: Private Office




1.   My note of 11 February covered the letter of complaint from
Messrs Russell Jones & Walker who act on behalf of the Police
Federation,        inviting    you    to    take    action      against   the    Daily
Telegraph     in    relation     to a      news    report      and editorial     about
actions for damages being brought by some of its members against
the South Yorkshire Police.                These actions are for psychiatric
illness     resulting     from   their      exposure      to    the   events    of   the
disaster.


2.   My earlier submission is at flag A, the editorial at flag
B and the news report at flag C.


3.   My preliminary view was that the circumstances with which
we are here concerned fail substantially of what we would need
to show in order to establish that the publications in the Daily
Telegraph constituted an improper interference with the rights
of the plaintiffs.


4.   As requested by you, I wrote to the Editor of the Daily
Telegraph.         That   letter      is    at     flag   D.      The   response      is
immediately beneath this note at flag E.


5.   The Daily Telegraph assert that their article and their
arguments were well-balanced on a matter of public interest.                         The
crux of their arguments are the sidelined passages at the top of
page 5 of their letter.              They assert that they do not believe
that there was the remotest likelihood of the plaintiffs being
improperly influenced by what was said in the Daily Telegraph.
They add:
     "In our view, it is reasonable to suppose that police
     officers as a class are not only resolute and
     rational,   but also well able to resist critical
     comment."


6.       They also assert that the arguments they advance on the
social consequences of a certain type of litigation are a matter
of public importance which prevails over individual interests.


7.   I    find   those   views   persuasive.     I    recommend     that   you
conclude that this is not an appropriate case for the institution
of   proceedings for      contempt.   If   you       agree,   I   will   write
accordingly to the Daily Telegraph and to Messrs Russell Jones




5 J WOOLER
6 March 1995




                                                                             2
