                                                           p u t ,/f
     ATTORlp^GENERAL
     copy to Solicitor General

     This note covers a formal application made under section 13 of
     the Coroners Act 1988 for your consent to the making of an
     application to the High Court for an Order quashing the inqui­
     sitions in respect of six of the victims of the Hillsborough
     disaster.   The formal letter of application is at flag A. It
     is supported by a memorial which is at flag B. Appendices A and
     B to the memorial contain the detailed material relied upon in
     the individual cases.

     Although the applications are supported by a joint submission,
     you must consider each one on its individual merit.      My advice
     is that your authority should (fl6tT)be granted in five out of the
     six cases.   The application relating to Kevin Williams is more
     difficult and may justify consent.
                 - —                 ■       ...........




      1.  Relevant provisions and general approach
3.   Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 provides as follows:
           (1)   This section applies where, on an application by or
          under the authority of the Attorney General, the High Court
           is satisfied as respects a coroner          ("the coroner
          concerned") either -
          (a)   that he refuses or neglects to hold an inquest which
                ought to be held; or
          (b)   where an inquest has been held by him, that (whether
                by reason of fraud, rejection of evidence, irregula­
                rity of proceedings, insufficiency of inquiry, the
                discovery of new facts or evidence or otherwise) it is
                necessary or desirable in the interests of justice
                that another inquest should be held.

4.   Section 13(1)(b) is material to the present application.      The
     grounds cited are "fraud", "rejection of evidence", "irregularity
     of proceedings", "insufficiency of inquiry", and the discovery
     of new facts or evidence or otherwise" emphasis added) and are
     thus sufficiently wide to enable you to give your authority when
     required in interests of justice.    The question of when it may
     be in interests of justice to order a fresh inquest was con­
     sidered in Re; Rapier (deceased) [1986] 3ALL ER 726, a case in

                                         1
which the High Court was considering fresh evidence.    The court
held that it had power to order an inquest where it was necessary
to consider a complaint as to the conduct of an early inquest or
to consider new evidence which might possibly have caused a
coroners jury to come to a different conclusion, even though it
could not be shown that there was a probability of a fresh
inquest producing a different verdict.     The general principle
which may be said to apply is that a new inquest will be ordered
when there is a real risk that justice has not been done.

2.   Structure of the Hillsborough inquest and details of the
application
The application is made by relatives on behalf of Paul William
Carlile, Ian Thomas Glover, Richard Jones, Michael Kelly, Peter
Tootle and Kevin Daniel Williams.     Each deceased person was a
spectator at the FA Cup Semi-Final between Nottingham Forrest and
Liverpool held at Hillsborough on Saturday 15 April 1989.    Each
was in either Pen 3 or Pen 4 at the Lepping Lane end of the
ground and died as the result of traumatic asphyxia.       As you
will be aware, a total of 95 people were killed and 400
physically injured.

In addition to the internal investigations carried out by the
authorities and agencies involved in the disaster, there was a
full public enquiry conducted by Lord Justice Taylor (as he then
was) and his criticisms of the police handling were so trenchant
that the DPP advised a full criminal investigation directed at
police conduct.      That was undertaken by the West Midlands
Police. The task of the coroner was a difficult one against this
background and the inquest in fact proceeded in three phases:
(1) T                   " sased were formally opened on or about
te                           little later) and then adjourned.
Formal opening of an inquest followed by adjournment is the norm.
(2) Between the 1 and 4 May 1990 the coroner held a series of
"mini inquests" covering the death of each victim.   Lord Justice
Taylor had in August 1989 delivered his interim report which
dealt with events at Hillsborough (but not the wider issues re­
lating to safety at sports grounds) and the criminal investiga­
     tion was in progress and it was likely to be some time before the
     DPP reached any decisions.     The coroner appears to have been
     motivated by an appreciation of the desire of individual families
     to know the details of the fate of their loved ones.    He decided
     to hear evidence in relation to each deceased confined to the
     statutory questions of "who" the deceased was and "when" and
     "where1* he met his death.   He indicated that he would postpone
     all wider investigation into the further question of "how" the
     deceased came by their deaths - and the extent to which fault
     played a part in that causation - until after tfte decision by the
     DPP on whether to initiate criminal proceedings.

7.   The form of the "mini inquests" was unorthodox.      In each case
      the coroner took evidence from the pathologist.      He took the
     balance of the evidence in two parts. First there was evidence
      from a police officer who summarised the evidence obtained from
     eye witnesses as to the movements of the deceased on the day of
      the disaster, the sightings made of them at the time of the fatal
      crush, the findings of their bodies on the pitch, any attempts
      at resuscitation made, the taking of their bodies to the tem­
      porary mortuary in the gym, and the certification of death. He
                                         In addition, a second police
      officer took the jury through all the dqcumentary evidence re­
      lating to the individual, i.e. the sightings of them on
     photographs and videos recovered from the media plus positions
     marked on plans by the various witnesses.

8.   This procedure does not appear to comply with rule 37 of the
     Coroners Rules which require that before documentary evidence is
     put before an inquest the evidence should be summarised and the
     consent of interested parties sought.       It does not however
     follow that such irregularity renders a fresh inquest necessary
     in the interests of justice.     It is one of the factors to be
     considered later.

9.   (3}   The evidence taken in the mini-inquests was heard by the
      jury. The inquest was then adjourned until November 1990 when



                                     3
      evidence relating   to the incident as a wholewasheard.      The
      jury returned verdicts of "accidental death".

10.   There has been one previous application under section 13 of the
      Coroners Act 1988.    It came in the form of a letter from the
      parents of Kevin Williams to Mr Malcolm Thornton MP who wrote to
                  —       ---

      your predecessor.Your predecessor      declined to grantconsent
      but left the door open for reconsideration on the basis of a
      properly prepared submission such as that now before you. There
      has in fact been a significant evidential change in relation to
      Kevin Williams since the correspondence with Mr Thornton.

      4.   Basis of the present application
11.   The matters specifically relied upon at paragraph 4 of the
      memorial are "irregularity of proceedings", "insufficiency of
      enquiry", "wrongful rejection of evidence" and a failure to
      direct the jury correctly as to the verdicts available to them.
      It is said that the coroner should have given directions as to
      the alternative verdicts of "lack of care", "accidental death due
         —   >                              —   •

      to lack of care", and "accidental death aggravated by lack of
      care".     In addition, it is said that in the case of Kevin
      Williams there is "discovery of new facts or evidence".

12.   The contentions which the applicants rely upon in order to bring
      the particular case within the legal grounds set out above can
      best be summarised as follows:
      (1) There was clear evidence that police blunders and negli­
           gence was responsible for the fatal crush which caused the
           deaths of those who were subject of the inquest.   The jury
           were therefore entitled, as a matter of law, to reflect
           that negligence in a verdict of "lack of care" or some
           similar formula.
      (2) There were some serious deficiencies in the response of the
           police and the emergency services to the disaster. Although
           many of the deaths were inevitable once the fatal crash had
           built up, a more effective response by the emergency ser­
           vices might have saved some of the lives.The jury should
           have been invited to consider the circumstances of indivi-

                                      4
             dual deaths to see whether they had in some cases been
             aggravated by "lack of care" in the sense of a failure to
             respond swiftly enough to the plight of the injured and
             provide them with the necessary medical care to avert
             death.   The allegation of "wrongful rejection of evidence"
             relates mainly to this issue because the coroner declined
             to call evidence in the second or third phases of the
             enquiry from some of those present who were critical of the
             emergency arrangements.
      (3)    The need to investigate "lack of care" in the context of
             the response to the emergency meant that the coroner was
             wrong to confine his evidence relating to the incident
             overall to what occurred up to 3.15.pm.

              Much emphasis has been placed on the "3.15.pm cut off
              point".    The coroner did not decline to receive evidence
               relating to matters after 3.15.pm; on the contrary, he was
            (  careful to ensure that all evidence about what happened to
             I individual deceased persons was drawn together and
            I presented to the jury during the course of the mini inquest
            * relating to that individual.

13.   I have highlighted at flags C and D the relevant parts of the
      transcript. It is apparent that the coroner took the view that
      the question as to "how" the deaths occurred should be considered
      by reference to the substantive incident i.e. the fatal crushing.
      He took the arrival of the first ambulances as a convenient point
      to delineate that phase.     Representations were made to him to
      the effect that:
             "There has been no investigation directed to the global
             organisation of what happened immediately after they were
             brought off the terraces."

14.   It was urged upon him that
             "The families ... are not convinced at all that had there
             been a far more sensible, logical organisation of the
             rescue services, of the major disaster team being brought
             in, proper medical equipment being available, of proper

                                        5
»
           triage being carried out, that those measures, had they
           been there, in several cases, would not have resulted in
           the survival of their loved ones.   They cannot - obviously
           they were not there - produce through me concrete evidence
           to that at this stage but at every stage of an inquiry into
           this disaster, and this is certainly true even in the
           Taylor inquiry, that particular aspect of the disaster has
           never been properly gone into."

15.   The coroner heard submissions and maintained his position drawing
      an analogy with a road traffic accident and stressing his inten­
      tion to treat the inquest as far as possible as "normal" notwith­
      standing the number of deaths involved.     He said:
           "Throughout, and in fact almost from the word "go" on the
           15 April 1989, when I first learned about this incident,
           one of the underlying criteria which I tried to apply in
           thinking how to set about dealing with the inquests was to
           as far as possible treat the inquests as if they were com­
           pletely standard, if I can put it like that - it is a
           horrible word - but completely normal inquests.     The fact
           that it was national news, that it was 95 young people,
           that it created a terrible amount of anxiety, pain and so
           on, in some ways is unique because of the numbers, but each
           individual death I deal with families are in exactly the
           same situation, and I tried to think and I still try to
           think, what and how would I set about if I had a road
           traffic incident or a works accident as opposed to an
           incident in a football stadium.      I have thought back on
           many occasions to say a road traffic act incident where
           somebody might have suffered a serious head injury. That
           person may well have been at the road side for x number of
           minutes while one was waiting for the ambulance services to
           attend. They may then have been taken by an ambulance to
           a hospital.    They may have gone into the resuscitation
           room.    They may have been worked on by the doctors. They
           may have gone into hospital and may then have died two,
           three days may be longer after the incident. Or alterna­
           tively, you could have it where by chance the road traffic

                                      6
           incident occurs in a place where a doctor happens to be.
           He walks up to the wrecks and says, "I am sorry, the injury
           is so severe the person is dead."      Or you could have a
           situation where the person has this road traffic incident
           and is taken into hospital and certified dead on arrival.

           In none of those instances would I as a matter of routine
           take evidence of what happened after the incident itself
           was concluded and, indeed, the pathologist in the example
           which I used would have given as cause of death serious
           head injury for instance, or multiple injuries with frac­
           ture of the skull, or something of that nature.    It seems
           to me that the fact that the person may survive an injury
           for a number of minutes or hours or even days, is not the
           question which I as coroner have to consider.    My task is
          /to establish who the person was - I am sorry to repeat this
         I - where he died, when he died and how he died. It is from
           my understanding of the pathological evidence the overwhel­
           ming pathological evidence is and was that people died as
           a result of crushing or traumatic asphyxia.       Different
           words were used, but the sense was always the same.     The
           underlying problem which these poor men and womenwere
           subjected to was inability to breath.

           That does not mean to say that some of them did not in fact
           respire for a period of time or even have a heart beat
           thereafter, but the damage was done, and in deed both
           Doctor Gumpert, Doctor Slater, Professor Usher who dealt
           with this question in an overall point of view, all in fact
           said, as I understand is exactly the same.

16.   The coroner went on to make the point   that it would be illogical
      to assume that a person was actuallyalive until the point that
      death was certified by a medical practitioner.



17.   You may feel that the adoption of this cut off point by the
      coroner was no more than a manifestation of a view that issues

                                     7
      relating to the response of the emergency services were not to
      be left to the jury with a view to consideration of a verdict of
      "lack of care".    To that extent points 2 and 3 stand or fall
      together.

      5.    The relevant law
18.   The availability of a verdict of lack of care was established in
      R v. Surrey Coroner ex parte Campbell [1982] 2ALL ER p 545. The
      High Court has subsequently considered its scope and applic­
      ability on a number of occasions.     The most helpful exposition
      came from Lord Justice Croom-Johnson in R v. Southwark Coroner
      ex parte Hicks [1987] 2 ALL ER p 140 when he expressed it in
      these terms:
            "Whether such a verdict is either permissible or appro­
            priate depends first on the meaning to be given to the word
            "care".   The prime meaning is that of physical attention,
            preventing death from starvation, exposure or bad nursing
            or medical care.    Since the great extension in this cen­
            tury of the concept of a legal duty of care, breach of
            which may lead to an action in tort for negligence, there
            is now growing up the notion that "lack of care" means also
            a breach of such a duty.   We have had cited to us a recent
            case reported in the Times for the 19 September 1985. A
            boy aged 6, a non swimmer, was taken to the Serpentine Lido
            in Hyde Park in a party of children.    It seems the excur­
            sion was not properly supervised. He drowned and his body
            was recovered under a diving board.     The jury returned a
            verdict of "an accident aggravated by lack of care" ... the
            history of the verdict "lack of care" indicates that it is
         I appropriate only to the physical condition of the deceased
         I as causing the death and should not be used to indicate a
         \j breach of duty by some other person. Questions of criminal
            negligence amounting to manslaughter were always a
            different problem, now that they are out of the way the
            verdict of "lack of care" can be given its original and
            proper meaning.    It should generally be regarded as the
            other side of the coin to self neglect, and consequently
            was an inappropriate verdict in the case to which I have

                                      8
           referred of the child who drowned in the Serpentine. The
           verdict in that case of "an accident aggravated by lack of
           care" was, in any event, illogical.    The lack of care in
           supervising the bathing party may have been the cause of
           the accident, but it did not aggravate anything at all.
           Junior Counsel for the applicant, in his speech in reply,
           submitted that the lack of care which could form the basis
           of the verdict could be a legitimate method used by the
           jury of expressing a view that there was a culpable breach
           by someone of a legal or moral duty to take care of the
           deceased which would be distinct from the general duty of
           care on which the modern law of negligence is based.     He
           listed a number of special relationships where the deceased
           would be dependent upon that other person.         Being in
           prison was one of them.     There is no need to presuppose
           the existence of such a range of duties.   What the verdict
           of "lack of care" presupposes is that some other persons
           had at least the opportunity of rendering care (in the
           narrow sense of the word) which would have prevented the
           death.    There is no need to go beyond that, although in
           many circumstances such persons would have a duty, either
           legal or moral.    The opportunity should have been a real
           opportunity of doing something effective.      This verdict
           should not be used as a means of levelling disguised
           criticism at people who do not act in an emergency or take
           wrong or inadequate decisions in such cases."

19.   You may feel that the final two sentences of that dicta are
      highly material to the Hillsborough situation.

20.   The scope of the verdict of "lack of care" was further considered
      in R v. Portsmouth coroner ex parte Anderson [1988] 2ALL ER p
      604.      The facts of that particular case were that the
      applicant's son, a sapper in the Royal Engineers, died of a heat
      stroke while participating in a training exercise during a diving
      course which involved him undertaking strenuous exercise while
      clad in a sealed rubber suit.    The Naval surgeon who conducted
      the post mortem examination stated in his report that the risks

                                      9
      of heat stroke and death in those circumstances should have been
      understood and foreseen by the sapper1s instructors.       At the
      inquest the surgeon stated that if the sapper had received intra­
      venous rehydration and further medical help to cool him when he
      first collapsed death might have been avoided.        The coroner
      directed the jury that the possible verdicts open to them were
      either death by misadventure or accidental death.      He gave no
      direction as to a rider that the death was aggravated by lack of
      care.

21. The Divisional Court held that although the cause of death could
    be aggravated by lack of care in the case of accidental death,
     the coroner had been correct in not directing the jury on that
     issue, since the absence of rehydration equipment and medical
    help only resulted in a deterioration of the deceased's condition
    after his collapse and did not affect the initial cause of death.

22. It is apparent from the above two cases that the circumstances
     in which "lack of care" can be left to an inquest jury are quite
     rare.    The Divisional Court revisited "lack of care" in R v.
    Birmingham Coroner ex parte Home Secretary (The Times 6 August
     1990) and reiterated the test adopted in R v. Southwark Coroner
     ex parte Hicks. It said that the inquiry whether there had been
     any lack of care "bore no relation to the question whether there
    was a duty of care of the type mentioned in Donoghue v. Stevenson
     and whether that duty of care had been breached."

23. It was a prison suicide case.     The Divisional Court (per Lord
     Justice Watkins) said :
          "Lack of care could be relevant only to the opportunity the
          deceased had to be able, while in custody, to kill himself.
          His Lordship doubted whether that, supposing there was
          evidence of lack of care in allowing the opportunity to be
          available to the deceased, could be said to have a cause or
          connection with "how the deceased died"."

24.   The most recent consideration of this issue is in the unreported
      case of R v. H. M. Coroner for Poplar ex parte Thomas (13 April

                                     10
*
      1992).   The essential issue in that case was whether the death
      could properly be classed as natural or unnatural.     The cause
      of death was a severe attack of asthma but there was evidence of
      delay in response by the ambulance service.     There was expert
      medical evidence that prompter treatment could well have saved
      the life because asthma is not ordinarily fatal.    Two passages
      in that judgement may be relevant to the Hillsborough situation:
      first, Tudor Evans J said:
           "In my opinion, where the medical cause of death is
           accompanied by concurrent events which themselves may be a
           cause of death, then there is a case for considering that
           the death is "unnatural" and an inquest should be held.
           The coroner himself conceded in paragraph (d) that the
           intervention of a wholly unexpected and exceptional cir­
           cumstances might make the death "unnatural".  He therefore
           accepts that non medical causes may turn a "natural" death
           into an "unnatural" one."

25.   ifhe Judge went on to say:
            "The evidence shows that this may well be a case in which
            failures by the ambulance service to provide an ambulance
            more quickly to a person who was in extremis was a cause of
            the death which might have been avoidable if the ambulance
            had been available earlier.        In my view, in these
            circumstances, there is a clear public interest that the
            facts should be investigated by means of an inquest."

26.   Neither of these two passages specifically suggest that slow
      response by the ambulance service would amount to "lack of care"
      although they recognise that possibility.      Even if one takes
      this case at its highest, there are two important distinctions
      between its facts and those arising at Hillsborough:      (1) The
      traumatic asphyxia which caused the Hillsborough deaths was
      unquestionably the major cause and we are not dealing with the
      situation in which an ordinarily treatable condition proves fatal
      through lack of timely medical care.     (2) R v. Poplar Coroner
      concerned a total failure of response by the ambulance service
      to a specific 999 call.       That is very different from the

                                     11
*
      situation where the emergency services are overwhelmed in the
      initial minutes following a disaster of wholly exceptional
      proportions.

      6.   Application of the law to the Hillsborough facts
27.   I revert to the three category summary of the contentions
      advanced by the applicants which I adopted above.  Dealing with
      them in the same order I comment as follows:

      (1) I regard the suggestion that the negligence of the police
      in allowing the fatal crush situation to develop justifies a
      verdict of "lack of care" to be ill founded.    I accept for this
      purpose that there was serious negligence on the part of the
      police:   the criticisms made in the Taylor Report undoubtedly
      amount to negligence; moreover the South Yorkshire Police have
      accepted civil liability in the proceedings brought against them.

      The weakness of the applicants contention is that they rely on
      precisely the sort of breach of duty of care (in the tortious
      sense) which the Divisional Court said in R v. Southwark Coroner
      should not found a verdict of "lack of care".      The situation
      seems to be one where the lack of care in supervising the crowd
      at Hillsborough was the cause of the accident but did not
      aggravate anything at all.

      If a verdict of "lack of care" were appropriate whenever
      liability for negligence was established, it would be the
    / commonest verdict of all in inquests.
      practically every road death.
                                               It would apply to



      (2) I do not think in the light of the authorities cited above
      that "lack of care" is appropriate in the context of the alleged
      slowness of response by the emergency services.       The Taylor
      Report found "insufficiently close cooperation between the police
      and the emergency services" and also that "the South Yorkshire
      Metropolitan Ambulance Service and the Fire Brigade should have
      been called earlier than they were".   He also found that it was
      "improbable that quicker resource to emergency services could

                                     12
*
      have saved more lives" but did not exclude that possibility
      completely.

      in addition to the above, there were individual criticisms by a
      doctor and a nurse who were present in the crowd and tended many
      of the dying and injured as well as some doctors at the Sheffield
      Hospitals as to the speed of response generally, the organisation
      and availability of equipment.    It is undoubtedly the case that
      the response was not perfect but we live in an imperfect world.
      The sort of criticisms made do not measure up to the straight
      forward failure to take an opportunity to provide care which
      seems to underlie the Divisional Court thinking towards this
      verdict.

28.   The following    considerations    also   fall   to   be   taken   into
      consideration:

      (a) Each verdict has to be considered separately, especially
      where questions such as "lack of care" arise.   It would be quite
      impossible to consider the issue of "lack of care" in the context
      of any one of these six deaths without considering the totality
      of the response by the emergency services and the manner in which
      resources were deployed.   One must consider not only the 95 dead
      but the 400 injured who survived;      presumably many of those
      benefitted from emergency treatment at the scene.     The reality
      is that the scale of the disaster made it impossible for every
      casualty to have immediate treatment.      Many passages in the
      memorial seem to suggest that the response of the emergency
      services should be judged by the standard applicable in the
      resuscitation room of a hospital dealing with its ordinary
      caseload.

      The litmus test of this would be the situation where two
      ambulance men were confronted with three seriously injured
      patients.   If they were to work on the two patients whom they
      judge to be most likely to benefit from the attention, would
      there be a "lack of care" towards the third patient who died?



                                        13
»




      That, on the    much   larger   scale,   is   the   harsh   reality of
      Hillsborough.

      (b) The evidence which is said to have been "wrongly rejected"
      on this issue (i.e. Dr Philips, Dr Ashton and Mr Eccleston) must
      be only a microcosm of the totality of the evidence which would
      have been available.    One should not, therefore, attach great
      weight to the fact that the coroner did not call it even if the
      response of the emergency services were felt to be relevant to
      the verdict.

      (c)   The circumstances were wholly exceptional.

      (d) The sort of inquiry urged upon the coroner would certainly
      have been "a means of levelling disguise criticism at people who
      ... in an emergency ... take a wrong or inadequate decision".
      R v. Southwark Coroner ex parte Hicks excludes that situation
      from "lack of care".

      7.   Approach to the application and general considerations
29.   The test generally adopted in relation to section 13 applications
      is whether there is a realistic likelihood that the High Court
      will hold that the interests of justice make a fresh inquest
      necessary or desirable for one of the statutory reasons.

30.   In my view the common arguments advanced on behalf of the
      applicants do not establish either "insufficiency of inquiry" or
      "a failure properly to direct the jury".      There may have been
      an irregularity in that the coroner accepted documentary/hearsay
      evidence without proper consent.     That irregularity is not, in
      my view, sufficient to make it likely that the High Court would
      direct a fresh inquest.   The court would undoubtedly have regard
      to:
      (1) The fact that the inquest was, taken overall, by any
           standards a thorough one.
      (2) It had been preceded by a scrupulously thorough public
           inquiry by Lord Justice Taylor (as he then was).



                                       14
      (3)   There had been a full criminal investigation and con­
            sideration of the results of that investigation by the DPP.
      (4)   The South Yorkshire Police I    admitted liability in civil
            proceedings.

31.   All legitimate interests had therefore been met.

32.   The question of "fresh evidence" is best considered in the
      context of individual cases.    This note now considers whether
      there are any factors (including fresh evidence) particular to
      individual cases which would make an order directing a fresh
      inquest a realistic possibility.

     8.   Paul William Carlile (deceased)
33. Paul Carlile was 19 years of age and went to the match incompany
    with friends.     He took up a position in Pen 3 but it is not
    known whether he was still in company with his friends. Sometime
    before 1503 he climbed over the fence between enclosure 3 and en­
     closure 4. This seems to have been an attempt to get out of the
    crush.    The witness Hollinghurst describes how he became aware
    of Paul Carlile on the floor unconscious and tried to resuscitate
    him.    Hollinghurst is a nurse.    He began his resuscitation as
     soon as the crush had eased sufficiently to permit that and that
    was a space of several minutes.    He came to the conclusion that
     Paul Carlile was beyond help.   He went to assist another youth.

34.   The evidence showed that two police officers saw Carlile being
      carried from the stand about 1515 hours.      There were further
      unsuccessful attempts to revive him.   There is then a gap in the
      evidence as regards Paul Carlile until he was located at 4.35.pm
      behind the Lepping Lane stands and certified dead.

35.   Hollinghurst (the nurse) gave oral evidence at the inquest.   It
      is suggested that there was a marked difference between his
      written statement and his oral testimony.        In his written
      statement he apparently described becoming aware of Paul Carlile
      when he felt him trying to climb up his own legs.    He tried to
      help him up and lost him.   That is contrasted with the evidence

                                      15
p
      of Dr Usher that the crush injuries would have quickly taken
      effect.

36.   Examination of the transcript of Hollinghurst's evidence (pages
      25 and 26 of Appendix A) there is no real inconsistency.    The
      questions and answers run as follows

      Q.   I think you were rotated once or twice, is that right?
      A.   Certainly once, yes.        At one stage I had my back
            completely to the pitch, facing upwards towards the stand.
      Q.   Did you see people being pulled up at that point?
      A.   Yes.
      Q.   Then did you manage to turn round again or were you moved
            round?
      A.   I just remember that ... I did get back the other way. I
            don't know how I managed to do it.
      Q.   You had lost your friends by that time?
      A.   Yes.
      Q.   What happened then?    What did you see or notice?
      A.   The crush got worse rather than better and after a few
           minutes I was aware that somebody was on the ground right
            by where I was standing, by where I was positioned.
      Q.   Was the match still in progress when you became aware of
            this or can you not remember?
      A.   Yes the match was going on.
      Q.   This was in fact a young man?
      A.   That's right.
      Q.   Being a Charge Nurse you checked to see whether his pulse
           was going and things like that as soon as you could?
      A.   Yes, but not at that particular moment.
      Q.   I realise that.
      A.   As soon as the crowd cleared ...
      Q.   That is in fact my next question. How long did       it take
            before you were able to get at this lad?
      A.   I really could not put a time scale on it because it just
            seemed like forever.      It seemed like it wasgetting
            tighter and tighter and you were fighting for your breath.



                                     16
#



         It was probably only a matter of 10 minutes at the most,
         five or ten minutes.
    Q.   I presume the match had stopped bythen?
    A.   By that stage, yes.

    A little later the witness continued:

    Q.   Most people can remember bits but they do have great
          difficulty with timing so don't be concerned about that
          what you are saying is that the pressure eased after
          several minutes, it is difficult to say how many but after
          several minutes?
    A.   Yes the pressure began to ease and a space.
    Q.   You were then able to get down?
    A.   People were in more and more space and that is when I
          actually saw someone on the ground below me.
    Q.   As I say, at that point that is when you had a look to see
          whether there was anything that could be done for this lad?
    A.   Yes.
    Q.   In fact I think you came to the conclusion there wasn't.
          Is that right?
    A.   I tried, as well as the lad who was immediately below me.
          There was somebody just a couple of feet further away. He
          was also in the same condition.

    He confirmed that the young man (i.e. the first one he tried to
    help) was Paul Carlile.     He describedhow peopletriedto pull
    down the perimeter fence    to get out.   He describedthe gates
    being opened and went on:

    Q.   And how did you get out yourself?
    A.   Through a hole in the fence eventually.
    Q.   You went frontways?
    A.   Somebody picked me up and said: "It is time for you to get
          out yourself".    By that time I think two ambulance men
          had arrived and taken over from me trying to resuscitate.
    Q.   Somebody had come into the pen?
    A.   Yes.

                                   17
37.   The criticism is made that (according to the written statement
      of Hollinghurst) the person who told him to leave did not himself
      check Mr Carlile to see if there were any signs of life, before
      instructing some supporters to carry him to the back of the
      terrace.    On the basis that Mr Hollinghurst was passing Paul
      Carlile over to be attended to by ambulance men that criticism
      hardly seems justified.    The applicant's submission is that Mr
      Hollinghurst was given sufficient time to resuscitate Paul
      Carlile.    That aspersion of callous indifference really is
      unjustified and, regrettably, characterises the application.

38.   The final criticism is that the applicants understand from the
      police that Paul Carlile was the first casualty to have been
      taken off the terraces.  They feel that he should therefore have
      been one of the first persons to be placed in an ambulance and
      taken to hospital.    Such an approach does not take account of
      the reality: all those who had been involved with Paul Carlile
      were satisfied that he was beyond any medical help.

39.   Finally, there is a suggestion that Dr Monaghan asked for some
      sort of machine when certifying Paul Carlile dead.   It is said:
      "This possibly indicates that he believed that he could only be
      certain that Paul Carlile was dead or alive by using machine or
      that alternatively efforts to save Paul may have been successful
      had a machine been available."    This does seem rather specula­
      tive when taken in conjunction with the evidence of Dr Usher, Mr
      Hollinghurst and the police officers.

40.   One recognises that the family would have wished to have every
      I dotted and every T crossed and there was perhaps scope for the
      coroner to have taken more oral evidence in this case.      There
      is not in my view any evidence which would be in to found a
      verdict of "lack of care".      The question of "sufficiency of
      enquiry" must be judged against the legal issues and it cannot
      fairly be said that the coroner failed to enquire into a relevant
      issue,



                                     18
      9.   Ian Glover (deceased)

41.   Ian Glover was 20 years of age and attended the match in company
      with his brother Joseph.    Both were in Pen 3 towards the front.
      Following a crowd surge Joseph Glover managed to get out onto the
      pitch by a gate in the front perimeter fence but the deceased
      remained trapped in the crowd about 4 feet from the front of the
      enclosure.   His brother saw him being pulled from the enclosure
      about 20 minutes later by two unidentified police officers.
      Joseph himself attempted to resuscitate his brother who was taken
      on a temporary stretcher to the gymnasium.

42.   Although he did not put it in his initial written statement,
      Joseph Glover told the coroners officer at the inquest that his
      brother was examined by a doctor (who he could not identify) at
      the gymnasium.   He found a pulse and endeavoured to resuscitate
      him for about fifteen minutes but was unsuccessful.

43.   Professor Usher was asked to deal with the possibility of a pulse
      at that stage of events having regard to his earlier evidence
      that death was likely to have supervened in between 4 and 6
      minutes.   He said that that could have happened if the youth had
      sustained severe brain damage but not quite to the point where
      the respiratory impulse centres faded out.

44. The evidence summarised above provides no basis for a verdict of
     "lack of care".     The submissions on behalf of the applicant
    contained generalised assertions such as the difficulty
    experienced by ambulances in getting to the gymnasium because of
    the presence of crowds and supporters trying to leave the
    stadium.    That seems inevitable given the need to evacuate some
     50,000 people.

45.   There are no special circumstances justifying consent in relation
      to Ian Glover.




                                     19
      10. Richard Jones (deceased)
46.   He was 25 years of age and attended the match in company with his
      sister (Stephanie) and one Tracy Cox.         All three were in
      enclosure 3.    There was photographic evidence of Richard Jones
      in company with Tracy Cox at 2.56.pm; they had by then already
      become separated from Stephanie Jones.    Tracy Cox also died and
      there is therefore no evidence as to what happened to Richard
      Jones after 2.56.pm.   It is known that sometime later PC Bromley
      joined a group of supporters carrying Richard Jones to the North
      Stand on a make shift stretcher.           PC Bromley attempted
      unsuccessfully to resuscitate him.   He was taken to the mortuary
      where he was certified dead at 4.pm.

47.   The main plank of the applicant's case is that there was no
      evidence put before the inquest disclosing that Richard Jones
      received any medical care whatsoever.    That is however as much
      attributable to the lack of evidence as to anything else.     The
      inference must be that the police officer who attempted to
      resuscitate him recognised that he was beyond help.         It is
      reasonable in the circumstances that he should give his attention
      elsewhere - assuming that is what happened.

48.   One recognises that the lack of evidence is unsatisfactory from
      the point of view of the family but the reality is that there is
      nothing which would have assisted in establishing a verdict of
      "lack of care".

      11. Michael David Kelly (deceased)
49.   Michael Kelly was 38 years of age.   He died of crushed asphyxia
      although the pathologist (Dr Clarke) reported that the signs were
      rather mild.    He suggested that it may have been the case that
      Mr Kelly's heart stopped for some particular reason very very
      quickly and he died but that is something which is impossible to
      prove.

50.   There was photographic evidence of Michael Kelly at 1508 hours
      alive in Pen 3.   PC Maughan had attempted to resuscitate a man

                                     20
»




      at the Lepping Lane end of the pitch believed to be Michael
      Kelly.   He helped carry him to the Spion Kop end of the ground
      where he left him in the charge of a St Johns Ambulance Officer.
      PC Maughan said in evidence that he returned towards the Lepping
      Lane end to assist other injured persons but received a radio
      message to form a cordon on the halfway line.       The applicant
      places considerable emphasis on this suggesting that this
      reflects wrong priority on the part of the police. There does
      seem little doubt that senior officers were initialling uncertain
      as to the scale of the disaster and were also fearful of crowd
      control difficulties.   Be that as it may, PC Maughan had already
      made up his mind to leave the deceased Kelly with the St Johns
      Ambulance Service and was intending to seek other spectators to
      assist.   His diversion to form part of a cordon does not appear
      to have affected Michael Kelly.

51.   Once again, there is no special reason for believing that the
      High Court would find that a further inquest was necessary in the
      interest of justice.

       12. Peter Tootle (deceased)
52.   Peter Tootle was 21 years of age and attended the match with a
      friend, Colin Frodsham, and both were in enclosure 3.       Colin
      Frodsham became separated from Peter Tootle when the crowd in the
      enclosure surged forward, after which he (Frodsham) fell
      unconscious.   During a brief interval of consciousness Frodsham
      saw Mr Tootle lying on the ground with a police office attempting
      to resuscitate him.   The next evidence relating to Peter Tootle
      was when PC Friend saw him on the pitch, examined him and took
      him to the temporary mortuary where he was certified dead at
       3.54.pm.  This is a situation where there was simply no evidence
      as to what befell Peter Tootle in that time.       He was clearly
      removed from the pen but by whom and how is unlikely ever to be
      known.

53. One sympathises with the families wish to know more but it is
    unlikely that, even if the coroner had taken direct instead of
     indirect evidence, any further evidence would have emerged.

                                     21
      13. Kevin Williams (deceased)
54.   This is the mo^b^difficult case.        The submissions by the
      applicant are at pages 175 to 187 of Annex A.    This particular
      case was the subject of an earlier consideration in January 1992
      by the then Attorney General following a letter from Mr Malcolm
      Thornton MP.   I have prepared a folder containing the exchange
      of correspondence and the note prepared then which was the basis
      of the decision by the then Attorney General.   I also draw your
      attention to the press cutting from the Liverpool Echo.    Taken
      in conjunction with the meeting held with Merseyside Members of
      Parliament a few weeks ago, it demonstrates the depth of feeling
      relating to this particular case.

                                                  ■s '

55.   The evidential position has changed in(thre^sways since the
      matter was considered in February:     —

      (1) Mrs Williams has consulted her general practitioner who has
      written expressing an opinion that the uttering of the word "mum"
      by her son would not have been a medical impossibility.   He does
      so on the basis of the autopsy report. The weight to be attached
      to this opinion against those of Dr Slater, Professor Usher and
      Dr Gumpert who was called by the coroner specifically to deal
      with the issue.    If any weight were to attach to Dr Crosby it
      could only be after he had seen and commented on the expert
      evidence given at the inquest.

      (2) We have been provided with a note of a meeting between Mrs
      Williams and PC Bruder.    If that note is a fair record of his
      observations he has resiled from his second statement and is now ,
      asserting that when he attending to Kevin Williams the latter was
      convulsing, had a pulse and had vomit in his mouth. He states
      quite clearly that the reason behind the West Midlands visit was
      to persuade him to change his mind.     That is significant but
      interestingly PC Bruder remains adamant that Kevin Williams was
      dead by the time he left him._




                                     22
      (3) Former Special Constable Martin has made a statement (in her
      own hand writing asserting that her original statement i.e. May
      1989) was true and correct.        She asserts that her further
      statement made in March 1990 was made after considerable P^£ssur<s
      had been exerted upon her by the West Midlands Police.     It was
      prepared and signed by her under that pressure.     Interestingly
      the March 1990 statement did not specifically rebut the crucial
      aspects of her earlier statement although it did provide the
      coroner with a sound basis for treating her evidence as
      unreliable.

56.   This is the most unsatisfactory of all the cases because tjie
      evidential position was confused at the inquest and has become
      even more confused subsequently.         I remain very doubtful
      however, whether the uncertainties flowing from the confusing
      evidence do have any bearing on a legal issue.      Even assuming
      that those doing their incompetent best for Kevin Williams did
      lose an opportunity to save his life, it is doubtful whether that
      would come within the proper approach to a verdict of "lack of
      care".   Be that as it may, the desire of the Williams family to
      have as clear a picture of the final fatal minutes is understand­
      able.    It is questionable whether taking oral evidence- wou^d-
      have enabled the issues to be resolved more satisfactorily. The
      coroner would certainly have been wise to take more oral evidence
      in this_narticular case.

57.   Although Sir Patrick felt that an application for a new inquest
      could not be justified because it seemed unlikely to clarify the
      matter, it is difficult to justify that approach in the light of
      what has now been said by PC Bruder and Special Constable Martin.

58.   I would welcome a discussion with vou^ on the case of Kevin
      Williams.   It may be that we should endeavour to firm up the
      position as regards PC Bruder by inviting the applicants
      solicitors to take a witness statement from him, possibly in the
      presence of a senior officer of his own force.      Likewise, Dr
      Crosby ought, if his evidence is to be material, to comment on
      the expert evidence given at the inquest.                    ^ ^

           c^_                v>    • 23
      14. Conclusions
59.   (1) The decision by the coroner not to leave "lack of care" to
      the jury in respect of matters leading up to the fatal crush is
      in accordance with law.      It does not therefore amount to a
      wrongful direction.
      (2) His decision not to direct the jury as to "lack of care" in
      the context of the response of the emergency services was also
      lawful.
      (3) It follows that his rejection of the evidence of Dr Ashton,
      Dr Burns and Mr Eccleston was not improper.
      (4) The irregularity in terms of breach of rule 37 (receiving
      documentary/hearsay evidence) is not such as per se to render a
      fresh inquest necessary or desirable in the interests of justice.
      (5) There is nothing relating to any of the individual cases
      save possibly that of Kevin Williams which makes a fresh inquest
      necessary or in the interests of justice.
      (6) You will wish to consider whether the evidential position
      in this case is so unsatisfactory that it would be in the
      interests of justice for there to be a fresh i n q u e s t          ^




      S. J. WOOLER
      31 July 1992




                                    24
