    George Howarth Esq., M P ,
    House of Commons,
    London, SW1A OAA                                21 February 1992




                6 \/\s




    Thank you for coming to see me with Peter Kilfoyle on the 12
    February to discuss the matters raised with you by constituents
    who had been affected by the Hillsborough disaster.


    I thought it would be helpful to send you a note of that meeting
/   and enclose a copy.
                     NOTE OF A MEETING HELD ON

                WEDNESDAY 12TH FEBRUARY 1992 AT

                         9 BUCKINGHAM GATE



Present:   Attorney General
           Solicitor General
           Mr George Howarth MP
           Mr Peter Kilfoyle MP
           Mr S. J. Wooler (LSLO)
           Miss Gillian Harrison (Home Office, E Division)


The purpose of the meeting was for the Law Officers to receive
representations from Mr Howarth, Mr Kilfoyle and Mr G. Bermingham
MP,   on behalf of   constituents   who had been affected by the
Hillsborough Disaster.    Mr Gerald Bermingham was unable through
professional commitments to attend and sent apologies.         The
Attorney General had previously set out in a letter dated the 11
February 1992 to Mr Howarth the scope of his responsibilities as
regards coroners to provide a basis for discussion.    The letter
had explained that overall policy responsibility for the law
relating to inquests, including the statutory framework within
which they are held, is a matter for the Home Secretary.      Miss
Harrison was in attendance in order that she might report back
as appropriate to Home Office Ministers on general issues.


Mr Howarth said that he and Mr Kilfoyle had been greatly involved
with numerous constituents who had lost relatives or otherwise
suffered through the Hillsborough disaster.        They shared a
general feeling that justice had not been prevailed.     Many had
consulted solicitors to look after their interests.        Actions
taken by solicitors had initially been reasonably well coordi­
nated as the result of the efforts of Miss Steel of the Hills­
borough Steering Committee.       But she had received a judicial
     appointment.        Action had become fragmented with little progress
     and the families had become frustrated.


3.   Turning to the inquest, Mr Howarth said that it had been conduc­
     ted by the Coroner in good faith.              But he (Mr Howarth) did not
     feel that it was an appropriate way of dealing with an incident
     of this nature.       The multi "mini inquest" system had not worked
     out as he had hoped.          It had been largely inconclusive and done
     nothing to allay the feelings that justice had not prevailed.


4.   The Attorney General said that the Taylor inquiry had been very
     thorough and wide ranging and the families had undoubtedly taken
     note of the critical report of Lord Justice Taylor with its
     criticisms of the police and other authorities.                  That report,
     together   with the      results    of   an    investigation     by   the   West
     Midlands Police, had been considered by the Director of Public
     Prosecutions.   He was bound by the Code for Crown Prosecutors
     with its twin requirements:  first, that the evidence should be
     sufficient     to    afford    a   realistic    prospect    of    conviction;
     secondly, that a prosecution was required in the public interest.
     The Director had decided on evidential grounds that criminal
     proceedings were not justified.


5.   It was open to the relatives to initiate a private prosecution:
     that possibility was however more theoretical than real.


6.   He recognised that there was a strong feeling amongst relatives
     that   justice had been denied;           but    that was   accompanied by
     recognition that the coroner had acted fairly.              The shortcoming
     was perceived as emanating from the procedures.                       This was
     relevant to his function under section 13 of the Coroners Act
     1988, which enabled him to authorise a publication to the High
     Court for a new inquest.
7.    Such an application could only be made if there was something
       which made the holding of a new inquest necessary or desirable
      in the interests of justice.              The onus rested on those who
      sought his authority under section 13 to point up something which
      had gone wrong so as to bring the case within section 13.
      Nothing in what the material so far submitted to the Attorney
      General had that effect.


8.    It was doubtful whether the Attorney General could initiate an
      application    for   judicial    review    by   the   High   Court.    The
      references in the'adjournment debate to a judicial review had
      been a little misleading.


9.    Mr Howarth    said that   he    recognised the difficulties.          The
      expectations   of many    people    in Merseyside       had however   been
      raised.   He had obtained details of a good solicitor and Counsel
      and passed them to certain of the relatives.                  There seemed
      however to be no prospect at present of any judicial review.


10.   Mr Kilfoyle said that attitudes varied amongst his constituents.
      Some were determined to press the issue whilst others simply
      wanted to get on with their lives.          There was unquestionably a
      feeling that justice had been denied.


11.   The Attorney General suggested that an assertion of injustice
      needed to be analysed by reference to the "justice" actually
      sought.   There had been a major inquiry and a criminal investi­
      gation.   There had also been the inquest.              Those were public
      actions. Private interests could only be pursued on an indivi­
      dual basis. Individual circumstances would determine whether any
      cause of action existed, but that really had to be a matter for
      individuals.


12.   The Solicitor General said that he fully understood the diffi­
      culties of Mr Howarth and Mr Kilfoyle in advising constituents.
      For some, the question of financial
      They needed to achieve something whj
      for death directly to bear.         He fe3
      properly be assured that they hac
      pressures, caused all avenues to b


13.   The Attorney General          invited Mis
      issues being addressed by the Wc
      disasters.       Miss Harrison did £
      objective was to identify areas of
      duplication between the public inc


14.   The Attorney General summed up tt
      profound     sympathy   for    those   whc
      relatives or been injured in the c
      very limited one and no basis
      application to the High Court fo
      inquest.      He shared the view of t
      steps possible within the existii
      taken by or on behalf of those af.




      S. J. WOOLER
      20 February 1992
