n c o .   6 W - . Q 8       ■




                           Pu
                          :=>

             S(J ppO?*                                                                O F F ! C £ ^ ppo*
                                   Hillsborough Family Support




                                                                                                           I D
                                                                                                                 C
          26 November 1999


          Stephen Parkinson
          The Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers
          Attorney General’s Chambers
          9 Buckingham Gate
          London SW1E 6JP


          Dear Sir

          Regina v Duckenfield

          Please find enclosed copy letter to Winckworth Sherwood. You will note that despite their
          assertions that they have not been provided with copy enclosures, they have been in
          possession of all enclosures for quite some time.

          You will note from paragraph 12 of our letter of 11thNovember that Hooper J has set aside
          time on 20th December to hear argument on this matter should the application for a nolle
          prosequi fail. Further, he has ordered Mr Duckenfield’s legal team to lodge a skeleton
          argument by 6th December should their application to you fail.

          In the circumstances I trust that you will rescind the extension previously granted to
          Winckworth Sherwood.


          Yours sincerely




          Ann Adlington
          Solicitor




                           Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151 236 1936. E Mail info@hfsg.org
                         1st Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
    St/ppo^                                                                                   Sf/ppO?*
                        Hillsborough Family Support Group




  Winckworth Sherwood
  35 Great Peter Street
  Westminster
  London SW!P 3LR

 DSM/24332/1/SBE

 26 November 1999

 Dear Sirs

 The Queen v Duckenfield and M urray

 1 uef6u t0 y° Ur faX ° f 25th November- 1 haye just received from you a copy of the enclosure
 which you should have sent with that earlier fax. I am astonished that you request copies of
 t e enclosures sent by me to the Attorney General. When you wrote to the Attorney General
 you failed to provide him with the documents referred to in, and forming part of, our
 representations to the Crown Prosecution Service of September and October 1998. The
 Prosecution provided them to the Attorney, at our own expense so that he had full knowledge


 You already have a copy of the indictment which was signed at Leeds Crown Court on 3rd
 bept ember.

You were provided with a copy of Graham Kelly’s statement when the CPS gave voluntary
disclosure in Januaiy this year.                                                    y

                  Lueedl CrOWn CoUrt with Ieading and junior counsel on 3rd September
when Hooper J made his observations. You must accordingly have a careful record of the
Hooped J 8S        y°ur jumor Counsel was allocated the task of drawing up the order by


Kirton’s statement was served upon you in June as part of our committal bundle. (See Tab


A copy of Mr Cadbury’s ruling was supplied to prosecution and defence on 15thJulv I note
.ha, solicitors for South Yorkshire Police Authority have obviously been p ro vid ed tith "


                                              -1-


           1sf ^ ne ° } 51 236 ,919-    0151 236 1936. E Mail info@hfsg.org
               Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
copy. They have written to Trevor Hicks confirming that they have sent a copy of the ruling
to members of the Police Authority. Presumably members will consider this ruling when they
meet today to consider further funding your client for the hearing on 20“l December next and
4th January 2000.

Since you already have all the documents and information you seek, your letter to us can only
have the effect of causing further delay. At the hearing on 20th December, we shall be inviting
the court to find that counts 4 and 5 of the indictment are properly laid, if the Attorney has not
entered a nolle by that date.

We will of course be copying this letter to the Attorney General and would invite you to
contact him immediately to set the record straight.

Finally, we are being pressed by Mr Manning to provide him with a CD Rom of transcripts.
As we pointed out in our letter of 19thNovember, our IT consultant is unable to proceed with
the transfer of transcripts onto CD Rom until you inform us what transcripts you already
posses through junior counsel. We have been seeking this information from you since 2nd
November.

I invite you again to particularize the suggestion in your letter of 13th October that I have been
guilty of “factual inaccuracies” in representations that I have made about this case.

Yours faithfully




Ann Adlington
Solicitor
