                                                           THE LEGAL SECRETARIAT TO THE LAW OFFICERS

                                                                           ATTORNEY GENERALS CHAMBERS

                                                                                          9 BUCKINGHAM GATE

                                                                                            LONDON SW1E 6JP
General enquiries 0 1 7 1 -8 2 8 7155
D irect line        0 1 7 1-8 2 8


        Messrs. Russell, Jones, & Walker,
        Quebec House,
        9 Quebec Street,
        Leeds,
        LSI 2HA.

        Your ref:              SJA/TEK/HILLS                                               30th May 1995




        Dear Sirs,
                                                                                /
        THE HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL TRAGEDY                                  /
                                                                            /

        Thank you for your letter of 21st march. I apologise for the delay in replying.

        You asked me to outline the explanation given to the Attorney General by the Daily Telegraph
        for the articles published on 3rd February 1995. The letter from the Daily Telegraph was a
        long one and I attempt only to draw attention to theii/JTiain points. You should understand that
        the Attorney General’s decision does not mean that lie necessarily accepted all or any of the
        specific points made by the paper.                /

        The paper recognised the constitutional right of the plaintiffs to have unhindered access to the
        courts for the determination of disputes as tp their legal rights but rejected the suggestion that
        the publication of the two articles complained of constituted an impediment to those
        proceedings. The paper saw the complaint as essentially concerned with the effect or potential
        effect of alleged pressure on the plaintiffs themselves rather than on the judge or any witness.
        Each article was dealt with separately:
                                               /
        Hillsborough police may get £?50,000 for trauma

        The report comprised news of^he settlement (in principle) of 14 of the cases coupled with
        non-prejudicial speculation ofn possible levels of compensation together with some reaction to
        the news. The subject of the article was of wide public interest. Given that interest, the fact
        that there remained to be4ried a further series of actions by separate plaintiffs does not curtail
        the freedom to commejn fairly on the settlement. The paper cited Lord Reid at page 296 C of
        the Thalidomide case/4nd The Sunday Times -v- United Kingdom [1979] 2 EHRR 245 in
        support of this proposition. The paper pointed out that there was no suggestion that the report
        was in any way inaccurate but was fair and balanced and contained comment sympathetic to
        the whole group of plaintiffs.
Moral blackmail

Although news of the settlement was the immediate spur for the editorial, it was not conceived
as a means of influence nor calculated to interfere in any way with the conduct of the residual
cases. It contained only one passing reference to the outstanding set of claims where, in the
opening paragraph, it expresses the hope that the claims would be defended “to the hilt”.
Urging a defendant to resist a civil claim without expressing any opinion on the legal merits or
otherwise of the case cannot, in the papers view, constitute a contempt of court. News of the
settlement had already appeared in the 2nd February issue of The Independent whose report
predicted public controversy. The paper’s own investigation led it to believe the settlement
was already of public concern. The decision to settle involved a potentially very high cost to
the defendants and ultimately, the public. Accordingly, it was a matter which the paper
considered it could legitimately voice an opinion.

The paper was mindful of the need to be fair. In particular it recognised the obligation to avoid
creating any substantial risk of serious prejudice to the residual actions. It was not a campaign
to heap moral pressure on a party to settle (as in Thalidomide) or to vilify a sole plaintiff with
the ulterior motive of causing that plaintiff to withdraw - Attorney General -v- Hislop & anr
[1991] 2 WLR 269. The paper’s aim was to focus in a responsible way on the much wider
issues of legitimate public interest previously addressed in their editorial columns, namely the
working of and threats to the legal system. The paper had consistently resisted what it
considered American excesses by holding out against the extension of litigation into new areas
which it believed worked against the public interest.

Having regard to the fact that many of the plaintiffs’ colleagues (or former colleagues) had
already withdrawn their claims, they did not believe at the time that they went to print that
there was the remotest likelihood of the remaining plaintiffs being improperly influenced by
anything the paper had to say on the subject. In the paper’s view, it was reasonable to suppose
that police officers as a class are not only resolute and rational but also well able to resist
critical comment. However, reasonable persuasion was another matter. It is within the proper
function of a newspaper to point out to active and potential litigants what it honestly thinks
about the social disadvantages or consequences of a particular course of action. The paper
cited Lord Diplock’s obiter comments in the Thalidomide case report at page 313 A-B and
how his views are mirrored by section 5 of the Contempt of Court Act 1981.

The paper concludes that on a true construction of the editorial the references to the
settlement and the pending litigation were merely incidental to a wider discussion. The robust
views, which did not abuse the plaintiffs, were directed at the wider issues, primarily the
perceived tendency among some judges, jurors, lawyers and claimants to allow themselves to
be led down “the deplorable path of America’s victim society” especially when taxpayers or
insurance companies are footing the bill.

I hope this is of assistance but repeat that the above is merely a precis of the paper’s detailed
comments as requested and should not be considered necessarily to be the reasoning behind
the Attorney General’s decision.


Yours faithfully




S. J. WOOLER
