DB/LW

17th April   1989


Rt Hon Margaret Thatcher MP
The Pri me Min ist er
10 Downing Street
London



Dear Pr ime Mi n i ster

What happened at Hillsborough on Saturday was a national tragedy
and for those of us who were brought up within the sound of the
Hillsborough Stadium, it is a personal and emotional trauma which
is difficult to describe to those from outside.

I was pleased that you were able to take the time to come both to
the Hillsborough Stadium and the Northern General Hospital, both
of which are within the Brightside Constituency.    I was somewhat
taken aback to be told that as well as the Home Secretary and the
Sports Minister you were accompanied into my constituency by the
Conservative MP for Sheffield Hal lam, Irvine Patnick.

Given the fact that we had a national tragedy on our hands and
that no-one was going to stand on their dignity or be concerned
about pr ot oc o 1 , I was unc oncerried t hat no c ont ac t had been
attempted with me, by your office.          This was not a matter of
Pairty politics, but of human concern.         I was therefore surprised
to find that this view was not reflected by those either invited
to, or able to accompany you on your visit.           1 very much regret
that Party politics should have entered into this matter and
would be grateful for your observations.

I hope that the enquiry will be both speedy and thorough and that
we can learn the lessons and take action from what hats happened
in a way which will prevent any such occurrence ever happening
again.     I am sure that all of us would want to ensure that Party
politics does not colour our view of what needs to be done and I
will do my best to contribute to an outcome based on this
p r esumpt io n .

Your s sincerely




David B1unke11
MP FOR SHEFFIELD BRIGHTSIDE
                       H O U S E OF C O M M O N S
DB/fr
                          LONDON    SW1A OAA

2nd May 1989



The Rt Hon Margaret Thatcher MP
The Prime Minister
10 Downing Street
London
SW1A   2AA




Dear Mrs Thatcher


Thank you for your letter of 21st April in response to mine.

There is no point in prolonging our private correspondence and
I have no intention of raising this matter publicly.

However, I would like to put on record that I visited the
Northern General Hospital in my constituency without taking
any TV cameras or journalists with me, on the morning of Sunday
16th April, and at that time I found out that you were to visit
the constituency.  Visiting the ground and the hospital with
you, when I had already undertaken my duty as a constituency
Member in private, would have been nothing short of publicity
seeking.


Yours sincerely




David Blunkett
MP FOR SHEFFIELD BRIGHTSIDE
                     lO DOWNING STREET
                         LONDON SW1A 2AA


THE PRIME MINISTER                            21 April 19 89




                                                               %
                          le d *

        Thank you for your letter of 17 April.    As you say
  Hillsborough was a tragedy for the nation as a whole and I
  can readily understand the terrible poignancy of it for you
  and others brought up in Sheffield.


        You suggest that party politics entered into who
  accompanied me.    This is simply not so.   I was pleased,
  though had not expected, to see Irvine Patnick there, as I
  would have been to see you and other Sheffield MPs.      I am
  only sorry that the sad and unusual circumstances of my visit
  last Sunday prevented constituency MPs being notified in the
  normal way.


         I welcome your view that party politics should not
  colour what needs to be done next and I share with all my
  heart your hope that we can prevent any occurrence such as
  Hillsborough ever happening again.




  David Blunkett, Esq., M.P.
