                   S ou th Yorkshire
                   Fire and Civil D efen ce Authority
                    E m ergency Planning Unit
                                                                                  PO Box 37
S J Turney                                                                        Regent Street
Director of Emergency Planning                                                    Barnsley
                                                                                  South Yorkshire S 7 0 2PQ
R C J o h n s to n BA IPFA                                 23   AUti jggj
Clerk and Financial Officer                                                       * Barnsley (0226) 7 3 3 2 2 2 Ext:
                                                                                  Fax: (0226) 7 3 0 4 4 2
Please reply to:          S J Turney

Our Ref:        P I .H B /S J T /K K      Your Ref:                               Date:         16 August 1989




           D Blunkett MP
           St Paul's Chambers
           St Paul's Parade
           SHEFFIELD
           SI 2 U




           Dear Mr Blunkett

           Thank you for sending me                   Earl Ferrers'      letter of 24              July     about     the
           correspondence you had from                    and             ^and my
                                                                                ‘ reply.

           I feel a mixture of frustration, indignation and disappointment at the attitude
           inherent in    the civil servant in the Private Office or somewhere else in the
           Home Office who drafted the Minister's letter.    Frustration because it is all
           very well for the Hcxne Office to discuss matters with the Department of Health
           which produces Trent Regional Health Authority's address for you.        If the
                's suggestions are "interesting" in the way you, I and most people use the
           word, then they deserve wider consideration than one 'Regional Health Authority.
           However, I suspect "interesting" to Whitehall means "would disturb the status
           quo" or "if we take this seriously, it will mean a lot of work".

           Indignation because my letter to you went nowhere near dismissing the potential
           role of volunteers. I made three points

           1.   the mis-match          between        skills/resources      and   needs       in     the      immediate
                aftermath.

           2.   lists get cwt of date

           3.   voluntary organisations with Social Services and the Churches have a role
                in medium and long term victim support.

           Disappointment  because,   however  remote  the   probability,  there  was  an
           infinitesimal chance the Home Office might change its stance on Section 138. I
           should have known better.


                                                                                          F in a lly ,   I w a s /.


                                                           ^ 'xl;
D Blunkett MP                                                   16 August 1989

Finally, I was sardonically amused at the Hcxne Office sending you their review
of peacetime disaster arrangements.   "Much to be done on Emergency Planning -
Hone Secretary" was the press release headline.   Hie reality is one more civil
servant - the Civil Emergencies Adviser - and a change of name for the Civil
Defence College outside York.

Yours sincerely




S J Turney
Director of Emergency Planning
                                                                QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                                LONDON SWIH 9AT




Our Ref: CD/89 1/27/30 (S)

Your Ref: DB/LW




                                                                        24 JUL 1989



Thank you for your letter of 19 June to Douglas Hurd enclosing correspondence
frortj     fand          of                 ~| Hillsborough, Sheffield and
Simon Turney, Director of Emergency Planning for the South Yorkshire Fire and
Civil Defence Authority.

Mr and Mrs \    offer some interesting suggestions in connection with
organisation of hospital and volunteer response to disasters. These have
been discussed with the Department of Health whose advice is that your
constituents should take up the various points with the Regional General
Manager of Trent Regional Health Authority, Fulwood House, Old Fulwood Road,
Sheffield S10 3MH.

Much of Mr Turney's letter concerns clinical and organisational medical
matters which are, in fact, the business of the health authorities and
therefore not for ine to address. I would however take the opportunity to
comment on two areas.

Firstly I think that it would be a shame to dismiss the potential role of
volunteers. Our experience is that many volunteers have skills and
enthusiasm which should be utilised if possible. I agree that uncontrolled
volunteer effort might be counterproductive but there is no reason why a
controlled use of voluntary skills should not provide a very useful aid to
the standing emergency services. In many cases, of course, organisations
such as the WRVS already have a specific role planned.

Mr Turney mentions that Fire and Civil Defence Authorities (FCDAs) have no
discretionary power under Section 138 of the Local Government Act 1972 to
incur expenditure to avert, alleviate or eradicate the effects of peacetime
emergencies in their area. This was a power which, on abolition of the
Metropolitan Authorities was not given to the new Joint Fire and Civil
Defence Authorities in view of their more restricted responsibilities.




                                            /The constitutent
                  T
David Blunkett Esq MP
The constituent borough or districts of FCDAs do have Section 138 powers, and
I can see no particular reason why they cannot use these powers to fund the
FCDA to carry out a co-ordinated role if the Boroughs feel there is a need
for it.

You will be aware that, over the past 12 months, the Home Office has been
conducting a review of the way in which civil emergencies are handled. On
15 June, the Home Secretary announced his conclusions including the
appointment of an adviser whose role will be to consider matters of current
concern in the field of civil emergency planning.

I enclose a copy of the announcement and supporting document for your
interest.




                                            FERRERS
     M r. Lester: To ask the Secretary of State for Home
 Department what conclusions he has reached following his
 Department’s review of arrangements for handling major
 civil disasters in the United Kingdom.                          SIS                    Written Answers                   15 JUNE 1989
     Mr. Hurd: Our emergency services have shown                       To help meet these objectives I shall be appointing a
  repeatedly how effectively they respond to widely differing      civil emergencies adviser, charged with oversight of the
  disasters, but a number of suggestions have been made as         whole subject and reporting directly to me. I shall
  to ways in which central Government could provide better         announce a name as soon as I can.
 support for those with operational responsibilities.                  The adviser will consider matters of current concern in
     The whole field of emergency response has therefore           the field of civil emergency planning in peacetime, with a
 been reviewed. Consultations have involved the emergency          view to helping those with operational responsibilities to
 services, local authorities, professional emergency plan­         achieve the highest standards of co-ordination and
ners, voluntary bodies and interested individuals, as well        compatibility between their contingency arrangements. He
as other Government departments. A senior levefseminar             will not have an operational role during an emergency, but
for those with operational responsibilities was held at the        will be closely concerned with general questions of
civil defence college, Easingwold, last November
                                                                   planning and training and with drawing out the broad
    Our main conclusions are:
                                                                   lessons to be learnt from particular incidents. To achieve
                                                                   this he will work closely with senior officers o f the
                                                                  emergency services, local authorities, voluntary bodies,
                                                                  safety inspectorates, Government Departments and others
                                                                  directly concerned. He will be supported by a small civil
                                                                  emergencies secretariat within the Home Office, working
                                                                  in association with the Cabinet Office. The secretariat will
                                                                   begin preliminary work immediately.
        co-ordination of ,he various s e r ^ s ^
                                                                      A number of specific issues have been identified in the
                                                                  course of the review which I shall want the adviser to take
                                                                  forward as a matter o f priority. These include the handling
                                                                  of casualty inquiries, psychological damage to survivors
                                                                  and relatives, assistance for foreign disasters, training and
                                                                  exercises. He may wish to draw on the work of existing
                                                                  groups which are already looking at some of the issues, or
                                                                  to convene interdisciplinary expert groups to address
                                                                  detailed questions.
                                                                      To support the adviser's work I am giving the civil
                                                                  defence college at Easingwold a wider remit and will expect
                                                                  it also to address questions of peacetime emergency
                                                                 planning irrespective of any wartime connections. This will
                                                                  be reflected in a change of name to “emergency planning
                                                                 college".
                                                                      In the course o f the review local authorities argued
                                                                 strongly for a duty to be imposed on them to plan for
                                                                 peace time emergencies. I have noted their views, but I am
                                                                 not at present convinced of the need for legislation. Much
                                                                 can be done without it. I will, however, keep the position
                                                                 under review as work progresses.
                                                                     The arrangements I have set out here do not alter the
                                                                 relationships or responsibilities of central Government
                                                                 Departments. The Department with the closest involve­
                                                                ment acts as “lead department” co-ordinating the central
                                                                Government response, organising the necessary executive
                                                                action and keeping Parliament and the public informed.
                                                                The lead department is supported by arrangements for
                                                                collective discussion should that prove necessary. The new
                                                                arrangements are complementary to existing arrange­
                                                                ments and will provide as a new element, a central focus
                                                                for the shared views and experience of the emergency
                                                                services, local authorities and voluntary bodies.
                                                                     I am placing in the Libraries of both Houses a more
                                                                comprehensive statement about the conduct and outcome
                                                                o f the review.
REVIEW OF ARRANGEMENTS FOR DEALING WITH CIVIL EMERGENCIES IN
THE UK

INTRODUCTION

Over the last few years the UK has faced an unprecedented
number of major civil emergencies - both natural and man made.
Bradford, Zeebrugge, Piper Alpha, King's Cross, Clapham
Junction, Lockerbie, Kegworth, Purley, Hillsborough have
become inextricably linked with events involving major loss of
life, injury and trauma. These events, together with other
problems such as the storms which hit Southern England in
October 1987, have tested in extreme conditions our ability to
respond to major disasters. The first-line response of the
emergency services has been widely praised but the scale of
these and other disasters has nonetheless focussed attention
on how effectively the present - largely decentralised -
response can meet the needs of major incidents and whether
anything could be done to improve it.

2.      During the course of 1987 and early 1988 many
individuals and organisations were considering the
implications of recent incidents. Seminars were held at
Bradford University and the Royal Military College of Science,
Cranfield, involving participants from a wide range of
disciplines and interests. The views and recommendations
arising from these were considered by the Home Office together
with a large number of opinions expressed by individuals
anxious to register their views. Detailed submissions were
produced by many with an active professional interest in
emergency planning, and many were also received from
interested members of the public.
3.      The ideas and proposals put forward were varied and
wide ranging. Some suggested only minor refinements or
additions to existing structures, while others proposed a
radical shift from the local response to a new centralised
control over the planning for, and response to, emergencies in
the UK.

4.    It was clear that there was a wide diversity of opinion
not only about the merits of existing arrangements but also
about the need, or methods, to improve them. It was also
apparent that most of the more far-reaching suggestions had
not been explored in detail with the emergency services and
local authorities who currently have the operational
responsibilities for dealing with any disaster and whose views
and practical judgments would be essential. There were also
questions of finance and existing statutory responsibilities
which had not been addressed.

5.    Accordingly, in April 1988 the Home Secretary asked
officials to conduct a thorough review of the current
arrangements for dealing with civil emergencies. He asked
that all the suggestions and criticisms which had been
received should be explored fully and discussed formally with
the emergency services and others, with a view to seeing what
practical improvements could be made to the existing systems.

CONDUCT OF THE REVIEW

6.     The review was carried out in two distinct phases: the
first was a wide consultative exercise, the second a senior
level seminar at the Civil Defence College.
7.     In June 1988 the Home Office produced a discussion
document which sought to bring together many of these
disparate strands (copies of this were placed in the Libraries
of both Houses). The document identified seven main areas for
discussion. These covered:

            1.   the role of central government;

            2.   statutory requirements for civil contingency
                 planning;

            3.   national co-ordination;

            4.   public information/casualty bureaux;

            5.   the collation of technical and operational
                 information;

            6.   the role of voluntary bodies;

            7.   provision for aftercare.

8.     In each case the document set out the existing
procedures, identified the gaps which some contributors felt
existed, detailed the general thrust of the varied suggestions
made, and drew out some of the implications, it was made
cleaj; that the suggestions discussed were without prejudice,
and were offered for open discussion to ensure a full debate
of the issues; the document did not constitute Government
policy proposals.

9.    The discussion document was widely circulated.
Initially it was sent to the associations representing police,
fire and ambulance services, emergency planners, local
authorities, and voluntary bodies; central government
departments were also asked to consider the implications for
them. This initial distribution involved some 130
organisations and associations. Additionally the document was
sent to many others who had carried out substantial work on
the subject, or were involved in a less immediate way (eg.
professional training colleges). The document was freely
available and was sent to anyone requesting a copy.

10.    When the consultative exercise was formally concluded
in August 1988 about 70 full responses had been received.
Officials analysed the responses, and the information obtained
served as a basis for the second phase of the review.

11.     In producing both the discussion document and papers
for the seminar officials took account not only of the
individual contributions made but of some larger issues. The
experience of all recent disasters was taken into account as
far as possible. The position in other countries was
considered to see whether their experience could be of help,
or whether their different systems, infrastructures, and,
indeed, the nature of risks faced, meant that their
arrangements for responding to an emergency were necessarily
different. Particular attention was paid to Belgian systems
in view of their able handling of the Herald of Free
Enterprise disaster at Zeebrugge.
    *
.Civil Bffigrggnglw gtainar

12.    The analysis of the responses to the discussion
document identified four main areas for thorough discussion.
These were:
            1.   the collation of information and access to.
                 expertise (including the role of computer data
                 bases); •

            2.   the local authority dimension (involving
                 planning responsibilities and the longer term
                 needs of those affected in a disaster);

            3.   casualty bureaux (both manning and technical
                 communications issues);

            4.   administrative structures necessary to achieve
                 an effective fully co-ordinated response (both
                 centrally and locally) to any incident.

13.   A seminar was held at the Civil Defence College
Easingwold from 23-25 November 1988 to discuss these issues in
detail with those with operational responsibilities. Nearly
80 individuals took part, representing - at a senior level -
the police, fire and ambulance services; HM Coastguard;
various local authority associations; emergency planners;
voluntary bodies and government departments.

CONCLUSIONS OF THE SEMINAR

14.   There was a wide-ranging and open discussion about the
issues under consideration. While there were naturally
differences of emphasis the broad conclusions of the seminar
were as follows:

       1.   the operational response to a disaster should
            remain at the local level; there was no support
            for an interventionist "national disaster squad";
       2.   more could be done to encourage and develop co­
            ordination at local level between the various
            services and authorities involved, especially in
            terns of joint planning;

       3.   although the case for legislation imposing a duty
            on local authorities to plan for peacetime
            disasters was strongly argued by a number of the
            local authority representatives present, the
            prevailing view was that on balance there was no
            immediate need for such legislation and the
            general view was that there was room for
            improvements in co-ordinated local planning which
            should be explored fully before reaching a view on
            the need for legislation;

       4.   in terms of central government co-ordination the
            "lead Department" concept remained valid although
            it was not well understood outside Government and
            should be more clearly explained;

       5.   there was considerable support for (and no dissent
            from) propositions that arrangements to give a
            national oversight of the progress of co-ordinated
            planning could lead to improvements in our
            response to emergencies.

CONCLUSIONS OF SHE REVIEW

15.   Taking account of all the views expressed at the
seminar, the ideas put forward in the course of the review,
and the experience of recent incidents, the Home Secretary has
reached the following conclusions.
16.    The basis of the response to particular disasters
should remain at the local level: it is here that expertise
and knowledge exists, that the best information is available,
and it is at this level that co-ordination between the various
agencies or individuals involved can provide the most
effective response. There had been no support from the
practitioners for a 'national disaster squad': it was felt
that a dedicated unit of this type would not assist in making
the existing response more effective and could in fact cause
problems in co-ordination and control. Such a squad would of
necessity be inactive for most of the time and in many
instances not be able to arrive on scene until the immediate
response was well underway. As the UK has emergency services
with considerable resources dispersed throughout the country,
able to call on colleagues for general or specialist
assistance, there is no operational need for an additional
body.

17.    Although some local authority representatives had
argued for a statutory duty to plan for peacetime emergencies,
the Home Secretary is not convinced of the need for it at
present. Local authorities are able to plan for peacetime
emergencies using their own resources under s.138 of the Local
Government Act 1972 (and the equivalent legislation for
Scotland and Northern Ireland) and there was no evidence to
suggest that local authorities were not generally already
undertaking a planning function (in former metropolitan
countries it is the boroughs/districts which have the
necessary s.138 powers, and can either plan individually or
arrange for the joint Fire and Civil Defence Authority to
carry out such planning collectively as their agent). While
this position will be kept under review it is clear that much
can be done without legislation and this should be pursued as
far as possible as the immediate priority.
18.    A clear need has been identified for new arrangements
to give national oversight to the development of co-ordinated
emergency planning, and to address specific practical issues
raised by recent disasters. Additionally more needs to be
done to encourage and develop co-ordination between the
various services at the local level.

19.    Co-ordination of the central Government response can
most effectively be carried out by the lead department,
supported where necessary by arrangements for collective
discussion organised under Cabinet Office auspices in the
normal way. But the linkages between this machinery, the
various inspectorates and the operational emergency services
are not well understood and need to be more clearly explained.

20.    To meet these needs the Home Secretary has decided to
appoint a Civil Emergencies Adviser, to work closely with
senior representatives of all the groups which have
operational or administrative responsibilities in this field.
In addition there will be an enhanced role for the Civil
Defence College (to be renamed the Emergency Planning
College).

CIVIL EMERGENCIES ADVISER

21. ' The Civil Emergencies Adviser will be charged with the
oversight of the whole area and will be reporting directly to
the Home Secretary. He will draw together the wide range of
administrative, operational and inspectorate interests
involved with major disasters, and encourage and promote co­
ordinated planning both locally and centrally. He will be
likely to travel widely to assess the state of civil emergency
planning on the ground and to recommend changes where this
will lead to increased effectiveness of the response as a
whole. He will not have operational responsibilities in the
event of a major emergency, but would be closely involved in
scrutinising the lessons to be learnt and ensuring they are
disseminated and applied.

22.     He will work closely with senior representatives of
the emergency services, local authorities, voluntary bodies,
safety inspectorates, Government Departments and others
directly concerned, and will be assisted by a Secretariat
within the Home Office working in association with the Cabinet
Office. His task will be:

     To consider matters of current concern in the field of
     civil emergency planning in peacetime, with a view to
     helping those with operational responsibilities achieve
     the highest standards of co-ordination and compatibility
     between their contingency arrangements.

23.    The Adviser will not be empowered to override existing
statutory or other formal responsibilities, but will explore
relevant issues with all those concerned, to establish the
most effective way of resolving problems. His particular
concerns will be with:

     1.    the development and dissemination of good practice
    '      and information, in particular about local co­
            ordination;

    2.     ensuring that the lessons of recent and past
           experience are learnt and applied;

    3.     assistance with exercises and training;
     4.     liaison with all inspectorates concerned with
            public safety;

     5.     liaison across central Government Departments,
            local government, the emergency services, the
            voluntary bodies and others with a direct
            interest;

     6.     development of technical arrangements in
            conjunction with users and suppliers.

24.    A number of specific issues have been identified in the
course of the review to which he will be asked to give
priority. These include the handling of casualty enquiries,
psychological damage to survivors and relatives, assistance
for foreign disasters, and training and exercises, in a
number of cases work on particular issues is already taking
place and this will continue. The Adviser may wish to consult
the bodies concerned and draw on the results of their work to
ensure that the maximum benefit can be drawn from current
studies. In other cases he may wish to convene groups of
experts to assist him in the examination of detailed
questions.

Emergency Planning College

25. ' To support the Adviser's work the Civil Defence College
at Sasingwold will be given a wider remit and will be expected
to address questions of peacetime emergency planning,
irrespective of any wartime connections. This will be
reflected in a change of name to "Emergency Planning College".
The College will particularly focus on inter-disciplinary
needs and will work in conjunction with the Police Staff
College at Bramshill and the Fire Service College at Moreton-
in-Marsh. It will act as a centre for studies, exercises and
seminars, and as a focus for the development of an
understanding of the vide issues involved. Further seminars,
such as the one held in the course of the review, will be
arranged to provide senior personnel with an opportunity to
focus on the major issues collectively. In some respects the
College will act as a study facility for issues identified by
the Civil Emergencies Adviser. The necessary skills and
expertise to develop this additional role for the College will
have to be developed over a period of time.

OVERALL STRUCTURE

26.    Under the proposed new arrangements this country's
response to major emergencies will continue to have two main
elements, each with distinct responsibilities. These are:

     The emergency services, local authorities and others with
     operational responsibilities at local level.

     The "lead" Government department, supported through
     Cabinet Office machinery where necessary.

Both will be assisted and supported by the Civil Emergencies
Adviser.

27. « The emergency services and others at the scene of a
disaster are responsible for dealing with the immediate
effects, deciding on the need for additional resources and
asking for them, and keeping relevant Government departments
and the public in the surrounding area informed about progress
in dealing with the effects of the emergency and any measures
necessary for public safety.
28.    The "lead" Government department is, whenever possible,
identified in advance and is responsible for co-ordinating
both the necessary central contingency planning and the
implementation of the plan should a disaster occur. The
"lead" department is also responsible for keeping Parliament,
other departments and the general public fully informed on
measures for dealing with the effects of the disaster. Any
problems which cannot be resolved under "lead" department
auspices are referred to the Cabinet Office. Should a
disaster occur for which no "lead" department has been
nominated the Prime Minister, as Chairman of the Cabinet, can
decide quickly which department should take up this role.

29.   The Cabinet Office is responsible for supporting the
Cabinet and Cabinet Committees in the conduct of Government
business. Arrangements for dealing with civil emergencies
are, like any other business, organised within this framework.
Specifically the Cabinet Office provides the machinery within
which Ministers can collectively discuss and reach decisions
on issues that need to be settled, eg the priority for
allocation of resources or matters that have not been resolved
by the "lead" department.

30.   The Civil Emergencies Adviser will review the
effectiveness of the co-ordinated local response. He will
consider any practical or inter-disciplinary problems raised
and arrange further study or research as necessary. He will
review the broad lessons to be learnt from incidents at home
and overseas and will help in the development and
dissemination of guidance on best practice in association with
the Departments or services concerned.
     REVIEW OF ARRANGEMENTS


FOR DEALING WITH CIVIL EMERGENCIES


            IN THE UK




           HOME OFFICE


            June 1989
     t




                                                                 H   ome   O   f f ic e
                                                                QUEEN ANNE'S GATE
                                                                LONDON SWIH 9AT




Our Ref: CD/89 1/27/30 (S)

Your Ref: DB/LW




                                                                               24 J U L 1989



Thank you for your letter of 19 June to Douglas Hurd enclosing correspondence
from I     and[          lof                   Hillsborough, Sheffield and
Simon Turney, Director of Emergency Planning for the South Yorkshire Fire and
Civil Defence Authority.

Mr and Mrs      offer some interesting suggestions in connection with
organisation ofhospital and volunteer response to disasters. These have
been discussed with the Department of Health whose advice is that your
constituents should take up the various points with the Regional General
Manager of Trent Regional Health Authority, Fulwood House, Old Fulwood Road,
Sheffield S10 3MH.

Much of Mr Turney's letter concerns clinical and organisational medical
matters which are, in fact, the business of the health authorities and
therefore not for me to address. I would however take the opportunity to
comment on two areas.

Firstly I think that it would be a shame to dismiss the potential role of
volunteers. Our experience is that many volunteers have skills and
enthusiasm which should be utilised if possible. I agree that uncontrolled
volunteer effort might be counterproductive but there is no reason why a
controlled use of voluntary skills should not provide a very useful aid to
the standing emergency services. In many cases, of course, organisations
such as the WRVS already have a specific role planned. ‘

Mr Turney mentions that Fire and Civil Defence Authorities (FCDAs) have no
discretionary power under Section 138 of the Local Government Act 1972 to
incur expenditure to avert, alleviate or eradicate the effects of peacetime
emergencies in their area. This was a power which, on abolition of the
Metropolitan Authorities was not given to the new Joint Fire and Civil
Defence Authorities in view of their more restricted responsibilities.




                                            /The constitutent

David Blunkett Esq MP
The constituent borough or districts of FCDAs do have Section 138 powers, and
I can see no particular reason why they cannot use these powers to fund the
FCDA to carry out a co-ordinated role if the Boroughs feel there is a need
for it.

You will be aware that, over the past 12 months, the Home Office has been
conducting a review of the way in which civil emergencies are handled. On
15 June, the Home Secretary announced his conclusions including the
appointment of an adviser whose role will be to consider matters of current
concern in the field of civil emergency planning.

I enclose a copy of the announcement and supporting document for your
interest.




                                            FERRERS
                   S ou th Yorkshire
                   Fire end Civil D e fen ce Authority
                   E m ergen cy P lanning Unit
                                                                  PO Box 37
S J Turney                                                        Regent Street
Director of Emergency Planning                                    Barnsley
                                                                  South Yorkshire S 70 2PQ
R C Johnston BA IPFA
Clerk and Financial Officer                                       * Barnsley (0226) 286141 Ext:
                                                                  Fax: (0226) 241135
Please reply to:   Simon Turney

Our Ref: PI.HB/ST.DM              Your Ref:   DB/LW               Date:   9 June 1 9 8 9



    Mr D Blunkett MP
    House of Commons
    LONDON
    SW1A OAA

     Dear Mr Blunkett

     Thank you      for your letter of 24 May     1989 enclosing a letter you received from
           and

    Please do not think I am being bureaucratic or over cautious in saying it would
    b e inappropriate (impossible, actually) for me to investigate their suggestion
    because the FCDA does not have the statutory powers or responsibilities possessed
    by Sheffield City Council, other Met and shire Districts/London Boroughs and
    County Councils in relation to planning for and mitigating major peacetime
    disasters.   This discretionary power (Section 138, Local Government Act 1972) was
    specifically taken away from the new joint boards by the Abolition Act.     It has
    been a bone of contention between the AMA and the Home Office ever since and I
    regret that the Home Office show no sign of moderating their intransigence.    So,
    having set out the limits of the competence and authority we operate under, let
    m e try to be more helpful and offer some observations and suggestions based on
    what this Unit has come across in the limited amount of peacetime disaster
    research it does.

    On call-out lists of particular skills and expertise, at one end it was only
    because six plastic surgeons were at a Leicester Conference during Piper Alpha
    that they were able to charter a plane and fly to Aberdeen.     At the other end,
    there are    properly organised call-out lists of staff on standby who are being
    paid to be available during the standby period.    Shift based occupations in the
    public and private sectors seem by and large to have got their act together but
    the sudden impact of a disaster tends to destroy even the most efficient of
    schemes because of its demands on people and resources.   It is self evident that
    in the immediate aftermath there is always a mis-match between skills/resources
    and needs.  After Kings Cross, University College Hospital used the system where
    as hospital staff arrived (I do not 'know whether they were called in or whether
    they saw it their duty to come in), they picked up a pre-positioned task
    notification and went away and did it.      This obviously did not apply to eg
    anaesthetists     who went to their oWn specialist work stations.    This sort of
    system comes near to what          and             are suggesting with their Red
    skills etc.   However, I would be sceptical about the operational utility of over
    sophisticated lists of people and skills because they quickly get out of date and
    may actually impede effective disaster response rather than aid it.




                                                      1 -
 There is also some evidence to show that recovery operations whether in a
 Hospital or at the site of the disaster itself can be impeded by too many people
 trying to do too much.   In that sense        and           did exactly the right
 thing by telephoning in and saying where they were m case they were needed.

Medium and long term victim support for people who were at Hillsborough and their
families and those of the dead is an open ended commitment by Social Services,
the Churches,   and voluntary organisations.      The allocation of individual
Counsellors to people obviously has to take continuity into account and is
therefore a more measured response than coping with the immediate aftermath.  The
organisation and processes of victim support are comparatively recent phenomena
(Bradford in particular) and I expect that Hillsborough will produce further
lessons for the next major disaster - whenever and wherever it occurs.

I would like to end with the apology I started with but it really is difficult
for a Unit with very limited direct responsibilities for peacetime disasters to
offer much more than a commentary.     In Mr and Mrs       [s case, the hospitals
themselves are responsible for implementing their Major Incident Procedures with
the DHA and Trent RHA having complementary co-ordinating responsibilities.
Equally, I am sure Mr Kay in Family and Community Services would let you know how
his department and staff responded.

Finally, I understand that the Trent RHA report on Kegworth was due out on 6
June. We have not seen it yet but if you would like a copy, please let me know.

I hope this helps.

Yours sincerely




oxm on T u rn e y
Director of Emergency Planning
                   D HAY m
                                                 "H»lotfvtriAqW.




                                                    ll+H Aa^l^ i^fi*0},
        TbeoJ M/‘Biui4\OcL,
     I a w tw^^sj -tr>                            -h> xuvaic.
   01 *K<\CW^\Ai'               IVll^ lAtiih^tdOLlAcl O U A d
    I       krxd         a+U-V      ~ f w L -^O/uviate.

                                 i^^\SAo^VT?VscjV\, Totd/Ujall

  Civt\A.         | wcMc           as, a        p^curzje+Tic

              \AlAVle. ^pC5UV4--Kwifl,                        WVa^ V aL

               a V       +VJ2,      KJtfVtue-w Q Z            vu   Lv ^ U
             Ul/uVi CU/^ci f t n 1tfVUUaj C^ +*w £.
 w&W£         $4/ w M a J U          KrxJ       Urx-^paiAi2_d

  I 4-e^£Jfwu7VLfi_J                wvif \a JZx a s H       ^ V L “i w L

^SvtvA^av^ w v ^ w u l v c j                C livAi^ u\. 4-ii/l£~

  bovDvc^W w£-                  ia£-v£      -+trvd> u a v -fo
 U C C - f W 2 ^SVUJVU2S               it^CtVu^ClCM^ -ft?

             wuj         K c J U p 1i£ H->vj2a&            LAjts£
   <^\A\w^t\A»’vv^ V CcruA^j dp, FVlif
   CVVOLvOlC             V/VUY^G. /                                      ^

lA /C X C   \£ > U ^ j   O jV ’C U jG sh A 'U   C V V ^d    Ia j O £ >
  v ^ a c tu ^ a " h i u ' s i people. u5Vv>' —
             l^tp,         as          a    i+euAjia^                       £-t^»
  -fir/ H w j i e         cUTcotlc,                   i^sJcA\x£                i'I?
  6-e-vM/\S£l|lJ\^> O L w i                 atCCTVWJ^CMuHKQ S '
  jA€-Vea.v-exl           - f c m \ M \ i d % l tXe..          l-te,        iaj&S.
 txvuxsjzJ JoCcCLuie I a X o t,\e<i
^ T \ l c L so^ c r w ^ ^ % l               c^rvuk3            e a O u j        o^ju
-+o                                 \ vaojs*          vxMLdUui,

  ^     ^       Ia o i | ^ 2    a   ^ _    c(     i     iAO.Cvct             caJlexJ
CA^flvy     J+t>     otO         C U A - C ^ ' W \VV^> | v\oV                 uJ&€.
O J^K \ G ti,                       ©-*fVULA <T
                                              VA                              £ Vi^l,
 IdrvtU      I fe(L             I lAD»oci H~vve3 "to c$b
 r^MA^viiUc). \                      \cXM2jk           S^aaI                s^ss/vul.
• ^ V W C - "fasUlCivv^ -+D                     Wl^j                \ Q « y *_
 0v\    oUt^v]            uJV\d                          iaa -c a   ^   o   (4 Sd\\j\\

       C ^ S t\ a V K ^ C cU^s^rvte-                   i m x   O uvp
       Kj    A^t                    KJ f) Ht>                               WQXsp.

   "TUg. H ^ u A A q k i .             t<,,-tlAaJL 7C ‘tiAOvC.

 kfa£       a                          J U ^ S A jSax^ & L                  c^e+hVo
                U       ^e£r^ru2.                ia^tKv - + w l

V\£J2-jzkJu£>                        , ^WXx^lc^C-              €Laj£^v{H\»va^
 m T ^ v a          la £x \£-       jus^ c h a        i j e ^ ivou^vv^csSXL
-ftV” i V v C T ^ e        q    ^j2x * X c v v ^
                                                                 l7LcL±^v\- ^ J V             &KC\SMS$A& >
                                              .;                     vJL ^e.         CeOUuJ -to            cev*&      |i\,
     -   .   '   •   .............
                                                   M e j& p u t -fv& M                C E u , 'i^C’cS O o e s ,e fc .
                                                                 otAacrvU- T L          c*      c^yvvcjaru.U2-i^fei         m   £U
                                                   was.      (AAQwsLe. u$>            &4,      «   ju   VD^uvvVeiv^
.   ■'   :           -                   ■ ; .i
                                         • '•*          rpejy^e.                             -ha IA£X^, u ttH \
                                                   SOWC. ScaA- ©4                      ccnouJ           CS-2AG-frr/
                               ■','k.-
                                                   “+ w a l v     ^sd^KoUAoi                   ? Tke**
                                                                       p S v | C W > c c H ^ - yM\V%C& v\Za £-
                                                    r&jujjuk ,T t v ^ X M                    toe- O u l A W C n A V A ^

                                                   H   v v OA-                Sfe^"&                                  <=2
                                                    m o j k m )     s t e m    s ,   - f *

                                                                                     K i K e u ^            w*   O W t f J

                                                       ^p,             -hru^          TO       0(0




                                                    ,                                 v ' C v ^ H        uM^qsecp**-

                                                    ■^ M S ^                          »«n»^ *

                                                       -?^                                                        tr7
                                                       S ^ .* ^               V^ L u               K ^J laft




                               . v->^-;. :.


                              /*     -   -
/T t f e . <3V li2,         * + V \< 5 S <2

jf&uxAA -fa fi teoJ** ccrvu^d -tvVm lc aiaoLiM
cxC cxia I & j e a -fo\/ c u u                                    '“to    iaojsl

£<7WU2,         TdLsa                         IaJVvO     mJETUUu^        l^QXP
            (X v \    e ^ A A jG ^ v /D iC ^ u C c f ,                T v& ^f

 1/vOe, Ciw) i*
              JV\c
                 x»-S.tTWi tvtttMui*4.

            / W l l J l A O ^ ( i tfc-                   Ol " t w c U ^ U.L.

        I    iatztW     ^       l-'lfle.'to                K   ttvO   v w h c w   .
        I c*clw\ii2. i. u£2^ect                           kcjvi/cuaJ
       ^ s l          w a v e         i^criA ocmz- d c a ‘n«\
                      LoJLocjulV < p c u ? M '

                               u[<r<A          we-ii
              ^jx^uas ~f& V twa. -i*vc+vu£.

                         ^ T j W S            - f t u - W W I ^
