     While acknowledging that the DPP is independent
     of the Government, we urge the Attorney General
     to make it clear to him that this delay is adding
     to already considerable public anxiety over
     transport and safety and is fuelling suspicions
     of official indifference towards safety standards
     in the various transport industries.

     In this connection we deplore the refusal of the
     Department of Transport to publish the names of
     ferries which, in line with a recommendation of
     the Sheen Inquiry into the loss of the Herald of
     Free Enterprise, should be phased out of service
     because they fail to meet stability standards
     introduced in 1980.

     We further deplore press speculation that
     individual crew members of the Herald of Free
     Enterprise might face criminal charges, and urge
     that the DPP be strongly reminded that the Sheen
     Inquiry concluded that the "cardinal faults"
     behind the disaster rested with the management of
     Townsend Thoresen, a subsidiary of P&O.

     We regard this whole issue as a crucial test of
     the commitment of the relevant authorities to
     enforce proper standards of safety in public
     transport and to ensure public accountability for
     any lapses in these standards.   Public
     confidence in this commitment has already been
     badly damaged by the Transport Secretary's claim
     in July 1987 that no statutory offence had been
     committed by the owners of the Herald of Free
     Enterprise, despite the fact that merchant
     shipping legislation requires employers to
     provide safe systems of work and makes it an
     offence to put a ship to sea in an unseaworthy
     state.

     We urge the Parliamentary Labour Party to pursue
     this matter vigorously and to condemn the failure
     to bring charges against those ultimately
     responsible for the loss of nearly 200 lives in a
     disaster for which blame was clearly apportioned
     by the subsequent official inquiry."

130. EMERGENCY MOTION:   "Hillsborough Stadium Disaster"

Consideration was given to an emergency motion, moved by
Hannah Sell, relating to the recent tragedy at Hillsborough.

Discussion followed during which general agreement was
reached that it would not be appropriate for the committee
to make comprehensive recommendations until after the
official public inquiry into the disaster has taken place.
It was further AGREED that the issues covered in the motion
be referred to the Home Policy Committee for consideration
and that Hannah Sell be invited to attend the relevant

                              7
meeting.

It was also AGREED that, in the meantime, the committee
endorse the following motion, moved by Neil Kinnock and
seconded by the Chair:

     "This NEC expresses its great sadness and concern
     at the injury and loss of life inflicted in the
     horrific Hillsborough disaster.   We send our
     deepest sympathy to the bereaved and injured,
     their relatives and friends and to the people of
     Liverpool and elsewhere affected by this tragedy.

     We recognise, however, that condolences are not
     enough and we therefore reaffirm our view that
     everything possible must be done to ensure that
     such a disaster never happens again.

     To that end we further resolve that detailed
     consideration of this matter be undertaken when
     the immediate period of mourning has ended and
     that we then seek a comprehensive statement of
     the policy steps which should be taken to achieve
     high standards of crowd security and proper
     attention to the interests of football fans and
     communities near grounds to be submitted to the
     Home Policy Committe and that such a statement
     takes account of the views and proposals put in
     this Emergency Motion."

131. INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE

  {i ) International invitations

A number of international invitations were before the
committee for consideration.

It was

                      RESOLVEti

                      That the office recommendations be
                      endorsed as follows:

         (1) Italian Socialist Party congress, Milan, 13-18 May

                      That Tom Sawyer, who attended the PCI
                      congress last month, should represent the
                      party.

         (2) PSC-PSOE congress, Barcelona, 6 May

                      To send a warm message of regret.

         (3) North Korean Government/Workers1 Party of Korea,
             world youth festival, Pyongyang, 1-8 July

                      To decline the invitation.

                                  8
