D B /ab


22nd November 1990


Martin Flannery MP
House of Commons



Dear Martin

Thanks for sending the material on Les Steele.

With all good wishes




DAVID BLUNKETT
MP for Sheffield Brightside
     From M artin Flannery, M.P.               Sheffield, Hillsborough


                       HOUSE OF COMMONS
                           L O N D O N SW1A OAA
  FAX:                    Phone:                         FAX:
         London                                                 Sheffield



David Blunkett M.P.
House of Commons,
London SW1A OAA                            18th November 1990


Dear David,

     As you know, there is still a belief throughout
the general community, that the Hillsborough Football
Stadium is in the Hillsborough Constituency, and I still
receive many letters and documentation from people,
especially in Liverpool, who believe that I am the M.P. for
the area where the Stadium i s .

     I enclose a recent batch of documents from a Mr Les
Steele, whose son,Philip died at Hillsborough, and he raises
a most important point,that the opening of those tragic
terraces where the deaths occurred would be a violation of
the Taylor R e p o r t .

     You will of course, make your own mind up on this,
but I personally agree with Mr Steele, and the Taylor
Report in all its recommendations, and have consistently
done so, throughout, from the very beginning.




                                      Yours ever,




                                   - T n    c ^ n j c   5

                                                    cj-}<£\jzS              .
                                                      Ainsdale,
                                                        SOUTHPORT,
                                                          Merseyside


                                                    23rd July 1990




       I am the father of Philip Steele who died, at Hillsborough.
No doubt you will be aware of the report in the Liverpool Echo dated.
14th July 1990, which I consider to be another discredit to the
memory of our loved, ones. You will find enclosed, a copy letter which
I have sent to Colin Moynihan, The Hone Office, the Football Assoaiation,
the Football League and Mr Ronnie Fearn M.P, It is also my intention
to campaign with a National Newspaper towards the start of the football
season.

       All I ask of you is that you would send me a letter of support
if you agree with this action and hopefully this will help to show
Sheffield Wednesday F.C. they are causing insult to the precious lives
lost at their ground.




                         Yours sincerely,




                                L.STEELE.
                                                        Ainsdale,
                                                         SOUTHPORT,
                                                          Merseyside



                                                      23rd July 1990




       It was with disgust and upset that I read the enclosed copy
newspaper report on Saturday 14th July 1990» as I lost my lovely fifteen
year old son and his two brothers were very lucky to escape with their
lives while my wife and myself were left to look on helplessly as the
whole disaster unfolded. We have been left with a loss we will never
recover from but we had hoped that the victims* deaths would not be in
vain if all grounds were put to rights as per Lord Chief Justice Taylor’s
report - from that we could salvage a ray of hope in knowing that other
families would not go through the same dreadful time that all the
families of the Hillsborough Disaster have and are going through.

       We have as yet seen nothing in reply to this outrageous and
totally insensitive action being taken by Sheffield Wednesday Football
Club who should surely be leading the way as far as improvements to their
ground are concerned especially Leppings Lane. Why are they being allowed
to ignore the suggestions of Lord Chief Justice Taylor? Or is it that
precious lives still do not matter as much as money? Sheffield Wednesday’s
action or lack of action can only be taken as one more insult to the
people who died and their families. It is high time someone took the
responsibility for that fateful day, I wonder what use tha Taylor report
and the Government and Football legislation if Sheffield Wednesday can
ignore both. I feel they should either not be allowed to play airy League
games or enter the F*A. Cup until they put their ground in order.

       Let the deaths of the ’ninety-five' not be a waste, let us see the
emphasis laid on ground safety and the Taylor recommendations carried out
quickly. We still see the big transfer fees going on so let us also see
a united effort from all parties concerned to carry out what needs to be
done without arguing and let the families left to mourn see something good
arising because of the Hillsborough tragedy.

       We have suffered enough, we have heard slurs on our loved ones’
names but if the football grounds are not made safe NOV/ surely this must
be the biggest insult of all. To do nothing about ground safety is to
say nindgr-five people died and it does not matter - yes, that would be
the biggest insult of all. We want some positive action now.


                         Yours sincerely,


                                L.STEELE.
                        THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                                      L IM IT E D
                                                       Founded 1863

                                      Patron: H e r M a j e s t y T h e Q u e e n
                                    President: H.R.H. T h e D u k e o f K e n t
                                          Chairman: F. A. M i l l i c h i p

     Chief Executive:                                                                    Phone: 071-402 7151/071-262 4542
                                                                                                  Telex: 261110
 R. H. G. K e l l y   f c is
                                                                                             Facsimile: 071-402 0486


                               16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW
   Our Ref:
                ART/AS/2866




Mr L Steele

Ainsdale
Southport
Merseyside




Dear Mr Steele

HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM

I am in receipt of your letter of the 20th July regarding the suggestion that Sheffield
Wednesday FC are to re-open the terraces at the Leppings Lane End.

I am copying this correspondence to the club as I have no direct knowledge of the matter.
However, I would point out that Lord Justice Taylor’s recommendations do involve a phasing
period for all-seater stadia which, for clubs in the First and Second Divisions, is by the
commencement of the 1994-95 season.

I will write to you further when I have received the club’s reply or, indeed, they may take it
upon themselves to communicate with you direct.

Yours sincerely




For Chief Executive




                                   Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Gate, London W2 3LW
                                   Incorporated in London Registration Number 77797
                                                         &BAl>
                                                         °tyVD£D

                              THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED
Lytham St. Annes, Lancashire, FY8 1JG. Telephone 0253 729421. Telex 67675. Fax 0253 724786                          Secretary |. D. Dent



5/8342                                                                                             10th August, 1990.




L. Steele, Esq.,

Ainsdale,
SOUTHPORT,
Merseyside,




Dear Mr. Steele,

     I write further to my letter of 30th July in reply to yours
of 20th July.

     I have taken the matter up with Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club who have confirmed to me that the story in the
Liverpool Echo was not accurate. They have never stated that
they are going to re-open the Lepping Lane terraces.

     The club have undertaken to write to you personally and
they have said that they will keep me advised as and when any
plans for the Leppings Lane end of the ground are finalised.

     I am sorry that you have suffered distress as a result of
this ill-informed newspaper report.


                                                 Yours sincerely




              All correspondence to be addressed to The Secretary. Registered Office as above. Registered in England 80612
                              THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED
Lytham St. Annes, Lancashire, FY8 1JG. Telephone 0253 729421. Telex 67675. Fax 0253 724786                           Secretary I. D. Dent



5/8310                                                                                                   30th July, 1990.




L. Steele, Esq.

Ainsdale,
SOUTHPORT,
Merseyside ,




Dear Mr. Steele,

                              SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB

        I acknowledge receipt of your letter of 20th July.

     I am making enquiries into this matter and I will let you
have a full reply shortly.


                                                  Yours sincerely,




                                                         secretary.




              All correspondence to b e addressed to The Secretary. Registered Office as above. Registered in England 80612
            T h e F o o t b a l l L ic e n s i n g A u t h o r it y
                                    C hairm an: Mr Norm an Jacobs



Our Ref:                                                                     c/o The Home Office
Your Ref:                                                                     Room 957 A
                                                                               50 Queen Anne's Gate
                                                                               London, SW1H 9AT
                                                                                  Direct Line:      071-273 2869
                                                                                  Enquiries:        071-273 3133


                                                                                 u*                        kfto.




                                               JOS)    fev   JCOl           C>(     <i\(       4 5 ^


               vo\KV\ v»rs                                   oi\k^




                                                                     of   rW s        flv )rK o « *^ N j   »5 Ipo



                viAl      «vcT    *S\                   <s\»^<\x^vV ^ bv;>' *(|-
                 ( V 'A    _L c < m \              v jo o    rW r          *\[      A 'v ^ s       oo\     ^ Ir ic v
                 v^\^            ^o5'Vi>K. .
/               HOME OFFICE
                Queen Anne's Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                              Direct line 01-273   071 -273 2582
                                             Switchboard 01-273 3000


                                                                    Your reference
        Mr L Steele
                                                                    Our reference
        Ainsdale
        SOUTHPORT                                                  Date
        Merseyside                                                          August 1990




        Dear Mr Steele

        You wrote on 20 July to Mr Moynihan about the newspaper report on
        the re-opening of Leppings Lane Terrace,  Your letter has been
        passed to me for reply.

        The scenes of terrible tragedy at Hillsborough will live with us
        all, but I know that for many like you and your family, the events
        hold a deeper and greater sorrow.  I do not underestimate how long
        a task it will be for you to come to terms with the loss of someone
        so dear to you.  I understand therefore how you and others who lost
        loved ones at Hillsborough must feel about the reports of the re-­
        opening of the Leppings Lane Terrace.

        Lord Justice Taylor made firm recommendations for the safety and
        comfort of those who go to watch football matches. He thought that
        the way forward for football was to provide better facilities
        including all seated accommodation.  He thought this should be
        achieved progressively and by fixed dates.  The Government accepted
        that recommendation and remains committed to its implementation.
        However, Lord Justice Taylor recognised that the work needed to
        improve the standard of accommodation for spectators cannot be done
        overnight.  Nevertheless, it is intended that improvements are made
        and that all seated accommodation is introduced at football grounds
        in line with the timescale recommended by him.  The Home Secretary
        will, if necessary, use the powers under the Football Spectators
        Act 1989 in order to ensure compliance.  In the meantime, local
        authorities, police and emergency services have been acting on
        other safety recommendations made by the Taylor Inquiry, for
        example reviewing the requirements of safety certificates reducing
        the number of people who are allowed to stand at matches and
        requiring improvements such as better first aid facilities.

        I can understand why people feel that it is an insensitive move by
        the football club to re-open this terrace which, I understand, has
        been closed since the disaster occurred.  But Lord Justice Taylor
        did not say that standing accommodation should be banned
        immediately.  What he suggested was that until such time as the
        standing accommodation is phases out there should be a reduced
        limit on crowd density, particular safeguards to ensure that the
        new lower authorised capacities of terraces should not b e e x c e e d e d
        and that there should be exit gates in perimeter fences.
        Hillsborough, in common with grounds of other football clubs in

CR.10 S363
Divisions 1 and 2 of the Football League, will be expected to phase
out all standing accommodation by August 1994.  We understand that
the present proposals for Leppings Lane Terrace will restrict to
between 500 and 1,000 the number of spectators who may occupy the
terracing and that the perimeter fence has now been removed.  If
the local authority is satisfied that these revised arrangements
provide an acceptable degree of safety, then the club is not
prohibited from using the terrace again.

                                        Yours sincerely




                                        MISS M SHARP
                                        G2 Division
                     HOUSE OF COMMONS
                         LONDON    SW1A OAA



                                               Southport.


                                               September 13th 1990.




Mr. L. Steele,

Ainsdale,
Southport.



Dear Mr Steele,


      As promised, I now enclose the letter from the Home Office
Dept responsible for the Safety of Sports Grounds for your
information.

      It would appear that action is being taken anda sad lesson has
been learned.

      I hope you find this letter reassuring in its pointer to
safety.

                                           1
                                                     H   ome   O   f f ic e

                                                    QUEEN ANNE'S GATE
                                                     LONDON SW1H 9AT




Our Ref: FEP/90 35/48/170 (S)
Your Ref: Rf/OMH




 .      .   v                                     1 1 SEP 1990
        tVA V 12XvXY\


Your letter of 26 July to Robert Atkins enclosing this one
from Mr L Steele of P A i n s d a l e ,          Southport,
Merseyside         has been forwarded to this Department for
reply in view of our responsibilities for the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act.  I am replying in Lord Ferrers' absence from the
office.

I can understand your constituent's concern over reports about
the re-opening of the Leppings Lane terrace. Perhaps I can
explain the present position.

Lord Justice Taylor made firm recommendations for the safety
and comfort of those who go to watch football matches.   He
thought that the way forward for football was to provide
better facilities including all seated accommodation and
that this should be achieved progressively and by fixed
dates. The Government accepted that recommendation and
remains committed to its implementation.  But, like
Lord Justice Taylor, we recognise that the work needed to
improve the standard of accommodation for spectators cannot be
done overnight.  We nevertheless intend to see that
improvements are made and that all seated accommodation is
introduced at football league grounds in line with the
timescale recommended by him.  That is why we are providing up
to £100 million for football ground improvement over the next
five years.  The Home Secretary will, if necessary, use the
powers under the Football Spectators Act 1989 in order to
ensure compliance.

In the meantime, local authorities, police and emergency
services have been acting on other safety recommendations made
by the Inquiry, for example by reviewing the requirements of
safety certificates, reducing the number of people who are
allowed to stand at matches, and requiring improvements such
as better first aid facilities.



                                                 /Hillsborough,



Ronnie Fearn Esq OBE FCIB MP
Hillsborough, in common with grounds of other football clubs
in Divisions 1 and 2 of the Football League will be expected
to phase out all standing accommodation by August 1994. We
understand that the present proposals for Leppings Lane
terrace will restrict to between 500 and 1,000 the number of
spectators who may occupy the terracing and that the perimeter
fence has now been removed.   If the local authority is
satisfied that these revised arrangements provide an
acceptable degree of safety, then the club is not prohibited
from using the terrace again.

I am sure that the local authority will look very carefully at
the revised arrangements before permitting Leppings Lane to be
re_0pened.  That said, I do understand why you should feel
that it is an insensitive move by the football club to re-open
this terrace.




                                          B NICHOLSON
                                  Assistant Private Secretary
                      Ronnie Fearn, OBE, FCIB, MP.




■J
                          HOUSE OF C O M M O N S
                           L O N D O N SW1A0AA

                                              Please reply to:-


     Ref: RF/OMH
                                              Southport

                                              7th August, 199U7
     L Steele Esq.,
                                                                      %
     AINSDALE,
     Southport

                                                             n/oH d
     Dear Mr Steele,                                              n-o flo)
     I enclose copy of communication I have received
     from the Department of the Environment for your
     perusal - I will, of course, forward the Home
     Office report when same comes to hand.

     Kind regards,

     Yours,, sincerely.




     (Dictated by Mr Fearn and
       signed in his absence)

                                                      /end
JH

                            departm ent           of   t h e e n v ir o n m e n t

 «^\AMEN7^£                 2 M A R SH A M S T R E E T L O N D O N SWIP 3EB
                                             01-276 3000

                            My ref :
 SCaetak*                   Your ref :



                                                         E 2 AUGm o



You wrote to Mr Atkins on 2 6 J u l y enclosing
correspondence from Mr L Steele about
p      i fans being allowed to stand on
 S S tS p o in ? ;   LaSe     ’t e r r a c e s   a t   S h e ffie ld   U n ite d
 Football Club.
 However, as the matter seems to be Primarily
 for the Home Office, I am passing your letter
 to that Department asking them to reply
 to you direct.

 Yours sincerely




 ALASTAIR MCINTYRE
 Private Secretary




  Ronnie Fearn Esq OBE FCIB MP
                    RONNIE FEARN, OBE,   FCIB, M P .




                      HOUSE OF COMMONS
                          LONDON    SW1A0AA


                                                       Please reply to:-
REF: RF/OMH


                                                       Southport


                                                       26th July, 1990.

L Steele Esq.,

AINSDALE,
Southport



Dear Mr Steele,

Thank you for your letter of the 23rd July 1990.

To too think it is heartrending that such a tragedy has not been
fully acted upon and that Government legislation has not laid down
firm rules.   Sheffield Wednesday are way out of line in their new
actions and I have spoken out already on their misguided policy.

I do agree with the sentiments and directions of your letter and I
know that the terrible experience your family, and others, suffered
should not be ignored in future actions on ground safety by all
Clubs.

I can assure you your communication will definitely find it's way
onto the Ministerial desk.

/fours sincerely,
L IV E R P O O L FOOTBALL CLUB
                                          AND ATHLETIC GROUNDS P.L.C.
                                         AIMFIELD ROAD, LIVERPOOL L4 OTH
                                                  051-263 2361/2
   Official Sponsor                      Telex 627661 LFC G                        Fax 051-260 8813
                                                              Registered No. 3 5 6 6 8 , England
       Candy
                                          Match Information Service Only      Match Ticket Office. Enquiries Only
                                                 0 5 1 -2 6 0 SSSS                     0 5 1 -2 6 0 S6SO




        PBR/MG

       Mr. L. Steele,

       Ainsdale,
       Southport,
       Merseysid e ,
                                                                              31st July 1990


       Dear Mr. Steele,

               Thank you for forwarding to me a copy of the letters
       which you have sent concerning a report in the newspapers that
       the Chairman of Sheffield Wednesday is considering re-opening the
       Leppings Lane End of the Hillsborough Ground as a standing area.

               We are very sympathetic to your feelings in this matter
       and agree that it would be totally insensitive toeveragain   use
       this area of the Ground for standing spectators.

               Unfortunately it is something over which we as a club
       have no control, but we sincerely hope that the Sheffield
       Wednesday Club will re-consider the matter and the Leppings Lane
       terraces will be converted to an all seater area if and when they
       are ever re-opened for public use.

                          With kind regards.

                                                      Yours sincerely,




                                          Chief Executive/General Secretary




                f                    K.M . OALGLISH. M.B.E.                      P.B. ROBINSON
4.F.C.                               PLAYER/TEAM MANAGER                         CHIEF EXECUTIVE/GENERAL SECRETARY
 Registered Trade Marks
Sheffield Wednesday
           Football C lub PLC




 Our Ref:     GHM/JB/D19/4940

 22nd October 1990


Mr. L. Steele,

Ainsdale,
Southport/
Merseyside.



Dear Mr. Steele,

Thank you for your letter dated 15th October 1990.

Hie situation quite simply is that the Club have no definite plans for the
Leppings Lane end.

Relegation from the First Division last season has meant that additional
visiting capacity is not required at the present time and therefore the existing
3,840 seats within the West Stand are sufficient for visiting clubs. Should
promotion be achieved at the end of the current season we will be looking at the
probability of extending the visiting capacity, and as we will be required by
1994 to be all seater it is most likely that we would go down this path.

I trust this clarifies the situation.

Yours sincerely,




G.H. MacltEell
Secretary—




          Hillsborough, Sheffield S6 1SW.
Tel: (0742) 343122 Grams: Wednesday Sheffield 6.
                Fax No. 0742 337145

              Chairman: D. G Richards, Secretary: G. H. Mackrell, F.C.C.A., Manager: R. F. Atkinson
        Directors: C. W oodward, K. T. Addy, E. Barron, G. K. Hulley, R. M. Grierson, F.C.A., J. Ashton, M.P.
                                         Registered in England No. 62478
Sheffield Wednesday
           Football C lub PLC




Our Ref:      GHM/JB/D19/4852

13th September 1990


Mr. L. Steele.

Ainsdale,
Southport,
Merseyside.



Dear Mr. Steele,

Further to correspondence you have had with the Football Association and the
Football League, I am writing to clarify the situation whereby at no stage have
Sheffield Wednesday F.C. indicated that they are seeking to re-open the Leppings
Lane terrace for standing spectators under its existing configuration.

My Chairman was quoted out of context and, of course, there are always members
of the media and Parliament who are quid? to seek an opportunity for cheap
publicity.

I have been in conversation with Barry Devonside of the Hillsborough Support
Group and have assured him that prior to any alterations to that end of the
ground he will be advised in order to circulate the information to his members.

I welcome this opportunity of clarifying the situation.

Yours sincerely,




          Hillsborough, Sheffield S61SW.
Tel: (0742) 343122 Grams: Wednesday Sheffield 6.
 Telex No. 547709 WEDNES Fax No. 0742 337145

                  Chairman: D.G. Richards, Secretary: G.H. Mackrell, F.C.C.A., Manager: R.F. Atkinson
         Directors: C. W oodward, K.T. Addy, E. Barron. G.K. Hulley, R.M. Grierson, F.C A , J. Ashton, M.P.
                                           Registered in England No. 62478
   34,256                                            SATURDAY, JULY 14, 1990                                                           20p




                                                                                                                                                                                hovers

 KEEPS TERRACES
 15 heSd                                                                                        mm
                                                                                                                   GRIEVING families of victims of the
                                                                                                                   Hillsborough tragedy were horrified
                                                                                                                   today to discover that football fans
                                                                                                                   could again be STANDING on the Lep­
                                                                                                                   pings Lane terraces next season.
                                                                                                                                                                                bnnk
                                                                                                                                                                                   By Lesley Hussefl,
                                                                                                                                                                                 Political Correspondent
                                                                                                                                                                                NICHOLAS Ridley today

                                                                                                                                                                                clfffhanger.
                                                                                                                                                                                   Time wds ;<a> lORnins
                                                                                                                                                                                out for the Trade end
                                                                                                                                                                                In d u s try S e c re ta ry ,
                                                                                                                                                                                whose Hitler clanger has
                                                                                                                     Sheffield Wednesday Football Club has                      left his W estminster
                                                                                                      ■it!         revealed there are plans to re-open the part                 colleagues convinced h*
                                                                                                                   of the ground where 95 Liverpool                             must quit
                                                                                                                   supporters died — and it will not even be
                                                                                                                   converted into an all-seater area, as
                                                                                                                   recommended in the report Into the


 swoop
                                                                                                                   tragedy.
                                                                                                                     But today Secretary of      By Val Woan
                                                                           I M m                                   th e   Hillsborough           the pens and fences on
                                                                                                                                                 the terraces.
                                                                                                                     arry                           Mr Devonside, who lost
                                                                                                                   will be writing to all the    a son in the disaster,
            By Paid Byrne                                                                                          a u th o ritie s concerned    added: “I am not alone in
 NINE people were still I       quizzed                                                                            urging them to refuse to      saying I am absolutely
 by police today after a diramatic                                                                                 allow this move.”             horrified and disgusted
 drugs raid on a Liverpool pub,                                                                                                                  by these plans.
* Fifteen people were arrested at                                                                                         Re-opened                 “All o f the families are
 the Bow and Arrow pub iri Princess                                                                                   Sheffield FC Chairman,     realistic enough to know
 Drive, West Derby, following a big                                                                                Dave Richards, has been       that the area will have to
 police undercover operation.                                                                                      reported as saying that       be reopened one day but
   Drugs suspected of including                                                                                    he bel i eves many            it was generally assumed              Grim-faced
 heroin, LSD, cocaine, cannabis and                                                                                supporters still want to      that it would be trans­               Mr. Ridley
 amphetamines were recovered after                                                                                 stand at football             formed into an all-seater.
 plain clothes police backed up by                                                                                 matches.                         “If any football ground       And Mrs Thatcher was
 uniformed officers raided the pub at                                                                                 And although it flies in   in the land should be          today closetted in her
 8pm last night.                                                                                                   the face of the recom­        changed into a shining         Chequers country house
                                                                                                                   mendations of the Taylor      example of safety it is        puzzling out a forced
               Experts                                                                                             I n q u i r y , he h a s a    Hillsborough.”                 reshuffle to fill the gap
                                                                                                                     erso n a l aim to see          Only the ticket office
     Detectives had been watching the
  pub for a number of weeks before                                           ''A i' ? <u                           E eppings Lane re-opened
                                                                                                                   as a standing area, so he
                                                                                                                                                 at the ground was open
                                                                                                                                                 today and no-one was
                                                                                                                                                                                when he does resign.
                                                                                                                                                                                  But Ironically, opinion
: giving the go-ahead to raid the
: premises.                                           My hero . . . Jean Baines and Minter                         has decided to demolish       available to comment.          polls showed his Ger-
     The nine people being questioned                                                                                                                                           man-bashlng remarks In



                                           Wonderdogsores family UH]M|
  were being held at Eaton Road police                                                                                                                                          the Spectator magazine
  station.                                                                                                                                                                      were popular In homes
     The substances seized are to be                                                                                                                                            up and down Britain.
  examined by forensic experts over                                                                                                                                               Mr Ridley astonished
  the weekend.                                                                                                                                                                  MPs when he said
    Two people were arrested for                                                                                                                                                Germans wanted to take
  alleged public disorder offences at                                                                                                                                           over Europe and handing
 the pub. One man was charged and         MINTER, the wonder dog,                                             British middleweight cham­
                                                                                                                                                                                sover ei gnt y t o the
 will appear at court at a later date.    was the undisputed cham­
                                          pion of the Baines family
                                          today after saving them from
                                                                                    By flay Kelly
                                                                              Her son, Billy, 25, asleep
                                                                                                              pion, Alan Minter.
                                                                                                                The family had just fin­
                                                                                                              ished decorating work.
                                                                                                                                                    tragedies                   European Co  'om m unlty
                                                                                                                                                                                was tantamountt toi handl-
                                                                                                                                                 THREE young children           ng powar over to Hitler.
BEACH WARNING
THE huge Mersey oil clean-up oper­
                                          their blazing house.
                                             The 14-year-old family pet
                                           raised the alarm at breakfast
                                                                           In the next bedroom, was
                                                                           woken by his mum and
                                                                           helped fight a battle against
                                                                                                                Mrs' Baines said the fire
                                                                                                             has taught her a hard lesson.
                                                                                                                She said: “It Is all my fault,
                                                                                                                                                 and a man died In separ­
                                                                                                                                                 ate fires today.
                                                                                                                                                    In Bldeford, North
                                                                                                                                                                                        Hang on
                                                                                                                                                                                    He was expected to
ation continued today as thousands                                         the first-floor blaze until the   I had a quick puff on a ciga­       Devon a man and a girl,        quit last night but his
                                          time as the family slumbered     fire brigade arrived.
of people headed for the Wirral           while choking smoke spread                                         rette when 1 woke with a bit        two, died when Are raged       plane back from
Show.                                                                         The upstairs of the house,     of pain early on and I was          through their home as          Budapest was six hours
                                          through their Skelmersdale       In W o l v e r t o n , O l d
  As more than 300 workmen toiled         home.                                                              stupid enough to drop It.           they slept                     late. He is highly unlikely
in spectacular sunshine to clean the                                       Skelmersdale, was ruined by          “Smoking In bed Is asking           One neighbour said: ”1      to hang on past this
oil-ravaged beaches, organisers of            Minter began whimpering      fire and smoke.                   for trouble.                        could hear a child crying
the big summer event pledged “The                                             Mrs Baines said : " I                                                                             weekend.
                                           and barking but the family                                                                            but could not get to tier.         The party would be
Show will go on!”                          slept on.                       thought I could hear Minter.      • A woman from the Mid­
  The WirraFs Mersey coastline was                                         barking at me In my sleep. It     lands became trapped and            That will stay with me for     tom apart a he tried to
hit hardest by Thursday’s disaster in        The fearless dog, a Lhasa     was all a dream until he          died after raising the alarm        a long time.’1                 insist on staying for the
which 30 tonnes of crude oil spilled      Apso, then ran up the stairs     started scratching aK my          and another was seriously              Two brothers, aged          thorny Issue o f Europe
fropm a tanker moored at Tranmere.        Into the bedroom of Jean         face.”                            Injured In a tower block blaze      two and three, died In a       spots the Conservatives
  Today the public were warned to         Baines, 53, and started lick*       Minter, who looks like the     p r o b a b l y s t a r t e d by    fire which broke out as        down the middle and has
stay away from the beaches south of       Ing and pawing at her face       Magic Roundabout’s Dougal,        arsonists.                          they slept In Milton           a l r e a d y e o i t Mr s.
Fort Perch Rock at New Brighton           ufjtll lie brought her round.                                      • Full story Page Two.              Keynes, Bucks.                 Thatcher             Cabinet
down to Seacombe,                                                                                                                                                               ministers.
