u O 1^1
                                                                                                       C o u n c illo r C. J. C . Betts,
                                                                                                         8 A (C a n ta b .)
                                                                                                       Leader
                                                                                                       S h e ffie ld C ity C o u n c il
                                                                                                       Leader's Office
                                                                                                       T o w n Hall                   >
                                                                                                       SHEFFIELD
SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL
                                                                                                       S1 2HH Tel. 734701




                                                              F A X         F R O N T      S H E E T


                cjcb/fax/




                Date       .JS'I'.'Jfl.1.


                Time
                1 X liiC   • • •I
                                • ""
                                  • • • • • £prr\
                                              • • • • • •




                No. of pages               (including this one):
                                                                                 *1


                Enquires to:                Kate Sheldon er— Lisa T 1.1m<?rr-



                Addres s e e : ...                                    J.*           ....



                Co mpany:                                   (P.QT?i . . .      U40.C4-A



                Fax No:



                Re:                                         .. rte... (Yk .^ a comeo.d.

                Message:
      Telephone:            (0742) 726444

                                                                                                                          SlafSfiifSfS
          Facsimile:        (0742) 735003


lecom Gola 79.              LLA 3020


                   Teiex:   255371 VIONREF G (quo:? rer LLA 3 020)                                                     c       1  T    Y
                                                                                                                       c o     U H C 1 L
Vcur reference:             SLP/JT

Our reference:               MW/ JM
                                                                                                                       Administration & Legal
                   Date:     14th November 1991                                                                        Departm ent
                                                                                                                       Head of Department
                                                                                                                       Mark Webster, city senator
                             Hr P Hammond
                                                                                                                       Town Hall
                                                                                                                       Sheffield
                             Aigburth                                                                                  SI 2HH
                             LIVERPOOOL
                             L17 6BX



                             Dear Mr Hammond

                             RE;         HILLSBOROUGH TRANSCRIPTS

                             1 refer to your letter dated 13th September, 1991 and apologise for, the
                             delay in replying to you.  I have been gathering together the relevant
                             information relating to the provision of transcripts.

                             The issue of the cost of transcripts has obviously been the subject of
                             previous correspondence.  I enclose a copy of a letter dated 4th
                             February, 1991 which was sent to the Hillsborough Steering Committee
                             which sets out the position.

                             I understand that the relevant regulations provide that a fee of 80p per
                             photographic sheet shall be payable and that the special arrangements to
                             provide further copies of the transcript at the reduced rate were only
                             made on the basis that legal representatives of individuals requesting
                             the reduced rate copies had already purchased a copy at the statutory
                             rate.

                             Everyone was aware of the costs involved and these special arrangements
                             were made to assist those individuals who wanted their own copy of the
                             transcript in addition to the one being provided to the families’
                             solicitor.

                             In the circumstances, within the limitations of the regulations and
                             having regard to the points that have been raised, I believe the Council
                             has done everything possible to assist with the cost of transcripts.

                             If you have not already done so, have you considered making application
                             for these costs from the charitable trust7

                             1 regret I cannot be of further assistance.

                             V n u i-g   g in r p rp 1v




  „ ., ,,          City So'iicittac-errtT
  Keith T re ifa    „  j   r
  $en.ordistanth«ks Head or Administration                                                                                                     Elizabeth Bashforth
  (A d m in istra tio n )
                                                                                                                                               A ssistant Head (U o a l)




  ■2 2 2 0 * 1 4
                                                          For telephone enquiries on      734018 —
                                                              this m atter o>ease ring:              (STD Code 0742)
                                                                                 OuUM?
     Telephone:       (0742) 726444


       Facsimile:     (0742)735003


elecom Gold 79:       LLA 3020


             Telex:   265871 MONREF G (quo:e ref LLA 3020)
                                                                                                                            U N
Your reference:            SLP/JT

 Our reference:        M W /JM
                                                                                                                  Administration & Legal
             Date:         14th November 1991                                                                     Department
                                                                                                                  Head of Department
                                                                                                                  Mark Webster,   City solicitor
                           Mr P Hammond
                                                                                                                 Town Hail
                                                                                                                 Sheffield
                           Aigburth                                                                              S1 2HH
                           LIVERPOOOL
                           L17


                           Dear Mr Hammond

                           RE;      HILLSBOROUGH TRANSCRIPTS

                           I refer to your letter dated 13th September, 1991 and apologise for the
                           delay in replying to you.  I have been gathering together the relevant
                           information relating to the provision of transcripts.

                           The issue of the cost of transcripts has obviously been the subject of
                           previous correspondence.  I enclose a copy of a letter dated 4th
                           February, 1991 which was sent to the Hillsborough Steering Committee
                           which sets out the position.

                           I understand that the relevant regulations provide that a fee of 80p per
                           photographic sheet shall be payable and that the special arrangements to
                           provide further copies of the transcript at the reduced rate were only
                           made on the basis that legal representatives of individuals requesting
                           the reduced rate copies had already purchased a copy at the statutory
                           rate.

                           Everyone was aware of the costs involved and these special arrangements
                           were made to assist those individuals who wanted their own copy of the
                           transcript in addition to the one being provided to the families’
                           solicitor.

                           In the circumstances, within the limitations of the regulations and
                           having regard to the points that have been raised, I believe the Council
                           has done everything possible to assist with the cost of transcripts.

                           If you have not already done so, have you considered making application
                           for these costs from the charitable trust?

                           I regret I cannot be of further assistance.

                           Yours sincerely
                                 A iv



   Keith Trelfa
   Senior Assistant Head    Head of Administration                                                                                            Elizabeth Bashforth
   (Administration)
                                                                                                                                              Assistant Head (Legal)




  R2220/XU                                         For telephone enquiries on    734018   -   M .W ebster
                                                      this matter please ring:                              (STDCode0742)
      MW/GJ

      4 February 1991



Hillsborough Steering Committee
Castle Chambers
Cook Street
LIVERPOOL
L2 9SH


For the Attention o f M i s s E M Steel


Dear Miss Steel

Thank you for your letter dated 21 January 1991.  Dr Popper has, as you say,
let me have copies of your exchange of correspondence of 4 and 17 January
1991.

The-present position, so far as I am aware', is that the costs of the Inquest
including the transcript service, falls to Sheffield City Council.   The
transcript service alone, excluding photo-copying costs, amounts to about
£900.00 per day.

As you will know, the C o ron er ’s Records (Fees for Copies) Rules 1982 as
amended by the C o r o n e r ’s Records (Fees for Copies) (Amendment) Rules 1990,
provides that the fee payable to the Coroner or other persons for furnishing
photo-copy shall be 80 pence for each photographic sheet.

At present three firms of Solicitors have requested transcript copies which
are available on the following day.

In November last year, the families concerned asked if they could purchase
copies of the transcript.  Bearing in mind many of the factors you have set
out in your letter, the Coroner agreed that in the special circumstances, if
the legal representatives of the individuals requesting copies of the
transcript had already purchased a copy at the full rate of 80 pence a sheet
a copy of the full transcript for the week could be obtained on a "next week
basis at a much reduced rate of £50.00 (£10.00 for each day), such a charge
being comparable to general photocopying charges.




                                      734018 - M r Webster
In the circumstances, therefore, I believe that we have done everything
possible to assist within the limitations of the regulations and h a v i n g regard
to the relevant issues.  If there is any way I can be of further assistance,
please let me know.

Yours sincerely




City Solicitor and
Head of Administration
                                                                   (^ C o t [ s b ^ ^ f L ^

                                     Hillsborough C om m unity Development Trust
                                                                1-13 H olm e Lane,
                                                                     Hillsborough,
                                                                  Sheffield S6 4JP
                                                                Tel: (0742) 322474


Our Ref:    PAW/LR

15 April 1991

Councillor C J Betts

SHEFFIELD
S6

Dear Cllr Betts

HILLSBOROUGH COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT TRUST - PROSPECTUS

Please find enclosed an advance copy of the Prospectus for our
newly formed Trust.  I hope you will find it interesting.
Perhaps too it may prompt you into considering ways in which
the Trust can help support your own efforts to serve the
community.

Best wishes




Faul Weston
Acting Director
Hillsborough Community Development Trust

Enc




                        t   J   * E C Y C L F.O PA T f.R
I I
H I L L S B O R    G H                                                              o             u



C O M M U N I T Y
p\
V JE V E L O P M E N T
        T R     T                                            u           s




A       R e g i s t e r e d                C h a r i t y ,             R e g i s t e r e d                    O f f i c e :

A n f i e l d H o u s e , 1- 13 H o l m e Lane, S h e f f i e l d S6 4JP. Tel : ( 0 7 4 2 ) 3 2 2 4 7 4
The H i l l s b o r o u g h   Community Development          T r u s t has b e e n f o r m e d f r o m t h e H i l l s b o r o u g h
N e i g h b o u r h o o d     R e v ita lis a tio n Scheme    (NRS)      to c o n t i n u e    and    fu r t h e r    its w o r k .
H I L L S B O R O U G H C O M M U N I T Y DEVELOPMENT TRUST
The Hillsborough Community Development Trust has been formed by
community groups, traders, businesses, and individuals who wish to see the
neighbourhood of Hillsborough continue to be a good place to live and work.
They believe that by working together they can help protect what is good about                   The Trust w ill work towards improving job prospects in
Hillsborough and ensure that what needs changing and improving is done to the                    Hillsborough. Community businesses w ill be set up to
benefit of those who live and work in the area.                                                  provide much needed local services. Building projects,
From its base at the heart of Hillsborough shopping centre the Trust is already                  energy conservation, a community caretaker service and
setting up a number of local services and enterprises.                                           gardening co-operative are just some of the ventures being
                                                                                                 planned.
ADVICE             The Trust provides an Advice Shop at 5, Holme Lane. There,
                   people can make contact with those who can help advise on                     Schemes sponsored by the Trust w ill be used to provide
                   housing repairs, welfare, legal and financial matters. In fact                training and employment for local people. Projects w ill be
                   any problem no matter how big or small can be shared with                     developed with the business community to help increase
                   the staff at the advice shop.                                                 local job opportunities.

ASSISTANCE         If you need more than advice a team of local professional            SOCIAI   Space is available for groups to use for activities and
                   people are supporting the Trust to provide assistance to sort
                                                                                        •   .    meetings. The Trust w ill also work towards increasing
                   out your problem.
                                                                                                 investment in the area on social facilities. The Trust w ill seek
                   The Trust will provide rooms, a shop-front and printing and                   particularly to provide opportunities for young people to make
                   typing facilities to help groups campaign and raise funds for                 positive use of their leisure time.
                   worthy causes. Expert advice will also be on hand to guide the
                   campaign.                                                                     Advice and assistance w ill be available to all home owners
                                                                                                 and private tenants wishing to improve their housing
DISPLAYS           The Trust will have display space available for public bodies and             conditions. The Trust w ill consider purchasing, improving
                   groups who have plans and programmes to put on public display.                and managing houses to provide nriore good quality rented
                   The public will have daily access to see what is going on or being            homes in Hillsborough. The Trust w ill also strive to ensure the
                   proposed for their area and the opportunity to comment.                       maximum financial support for home repairs is available.
SERVICES           Typing (CV's and Minutes a speciality), posters, leaflets and
                   community newspapers can be produced quickly and cheaply for                  The Trust w ill strive to improve the buildings, environment
                   individuals, groups and businesses.                                           and services available in Hillsborough shopping areas. The
                                                                                                 protection of local shopping areas is of prime concern.
FINANCE:           The Trust will provide a debt counselling service for those in
                   difficulty. A credit union will be set up to provide a simple and             The i mprovement of the physical envi ronment wi 11be a major
                   cheap way for individuals to borrow small amounts of cash when                objective. The positive use of vacant land and buildings, the
                   crises arise. For those seeking larger loans ready access to banks            need for a cleaner and tidier area and the reduction of traffic
                   and building society facilities is available.                                 problems w ill all be important aspects of the Trust's work.




c o m m u n i t y enterprise for community well-being
Objectives                                                                    How you can help:

► To benefit the community of Hillsborough in the                            The trust is established thanks to the generosity of
  City of Sheffield (hereinafter referred to as "the                         sponsors and donors and the support of many
  area of benefit") by the advancement of educa­                             local groups. It w ill only succeed in its objectives
  tion and the relief of poverty, distress and sick­                         if it gets widespread support form the people of
  ness;                                                                      Hillsborough.
► To provide facilities for information, recreation
  and leisure time occupation in the interests of
  social welfare w ith the object of improving the                           You can join the Trust as an Individual or family.
  conditions of life of the inhabitants of the area of                       Membership is free. By joining you are entitled to
  benefit w ithout distinction of race, colour, ethnic                       have a say in what the Trust does and how its money
  or national origin, sex, disability or political,                          is spent to benefit the area. You would also have an
  religious or other opinion;                                                opportunity to be elected to the Board of the Trust.
► To assist charitable institutions established for                          Your support w ill help ensure that all services and
  the benefit of the said inhabitants;                                       facilities are freely available to all the people of
► To bring together public, private and voluntary                            Hillsborough and district.
  agencies and organisations in a common effort
  to achieve the aforesaid objects;
►   To improve the environment (including the so­                             If you are a local group you are entitled to corporate
    cial environment) of the area of benefit in the                           membership. You would have the opportunity to take
    interests of the community;                                               a seat on the Board. You w ill have access to facilities
► To foster a greater community identity and                                  and services at a reduced rate.
  promote community stability and self-reliance;
► To establish community resource centres for
  provision of facilities for free advice, information,                       If you are a local business your support through
  recreation and social welfare for the inhabitants of                        donations or sponsorship and membership of the
  the area of benefit; and                                                    Trust's business support group w ill go a long way
►   To promote and encourage opportunities and                                to enabling the Trust to provide the services and
    facilities for children and young persons in the                          projects needed to ensure Hillsborough remains a
    area of benefit.                                                          neighbourhood to be proud of.




                                                               m
                                    HCDT acknowledges the help given by British Gas pic and UK2000
                                                                                                                UK2000
                                                                                                                Supported by DOE
                                                 in the preparation of this prospectus.



Founder Members                                                               Sponsors and Donors
The following local organisations have                                         •   A & K Plumbing and Heating
participated in the development and formation                                  •   British Gas
of Hillsborough Community Development                                          •   British Telecom
                                                                               •   Don Valley Training Services
T rust.                                                                        •   George Longden Estates Ltd
•   Hillsborough & District Environmental Association                          •   Graham Builders Merchants Ltd
•   Hillsborough NRS Residents Group                                           •   H illfo ot Steel (Forgers) Ltd
•   Hillsborough Traders                                                       •   Jenks & Cattell Ltd
•   M alin Bridge Community Association                                        •   National Home Improvement Council
•   M alin Bridge Traders                                                      •   Newtrain Ltd
•   Regent Court Residents                                                     •   Sheffield Chamber o f Trade
•   Stannington Community Association                                          •   Sheffield Insulations Group pic
•   Stannington Tenants Association                                            •   Sheffield Wednesday F.C. pic
•   Sutton Trust Community Association                                         •   South Yorkshire Transport
•   Wadsley Community Association                                              •   S.Y.P.T.E.
•   W inn Gardens Tenants Association                                          •   The Julian Melchett Trust
•   Wise wood Tenants and Residents Association                                •   Trebor Bassett Ltd
•   Langsett Advice Centre                                                     •   Yorkshire Electricity Board (YEB)
•   S.O.S                                                                      •   Yorkshire Television - Telethon 90
•   St. Polycarps Church                                                           at March 1991



                              Typeset & Printed by Sheffield W om en's Printing Co-op (TU) Ltd. (0742) 753180
                                                   GJCfe            J \ \ y J M ^ /c(


WNA/MLC   |                                                                                                   H

15 August 1991                                                                               Sheffield
Cllr C J C Betts                                                                            Insulations
Leader                                                                                     Group
Sheffield City Council                                                                     pic
Town Hall
SHEFFIELD
SI 2HH


Dear Clive
I understand that you will be asked on the Breakfast Show of
Radio Sheffield tomorrow about some form of remembrance of the
victims of the Hillsborough Disaster Appeal.

You may recall that, when we last spoke about the plans for the
Disaster Appeal to make some form of "memorial" or "gratitude"
payments from the charitable fund, one of the possible
beneficiaries was the Hillsborough Community Trust.          In
discussion they described a proposal to restore the "Walled
Garden" in Hillsborough Park, which seemed to be ideal.

The three main parties to the project, the Community Trust
itself, the Council who own the land, and the Disaster Appeal
whose funds can make if all happen, have now been talking for
about six months or so and a lot Of progress has been made.   In
addition we also have the support of Trevor Hicks and the Family
Support Group, the local police in Hillsborough, the business
community in the area, and some of the work is already underway
with the help of the Probation Service.
The aims and objectives are attached and the general idea is that
the "Walled Garden" should be both an active and a passive
memorial, making it possible for members of the community,
relatives of the victims, police and others to work together in
the Garden and also provide a quiet place of remembrance.

There is still a lot of work to do, but the form of licence from
the City Council has now been agreed, and it is likely that the
first funds from the Hillsborough Disaster Appeal will be paid
into the Trust in the near future.

Obviously anything you could say to encourage community support
and contributions, both in money and in kind, would be quite
helpful.

Yours sincerely




NORMAN ADSETTS
Chairman
                    Hillsborough Works, Sheffield S6 2LW, England
                    Telephone 0742 852852
                   Telex 54288, Fax Groups 1/2/3 0742 337191
                  Registered Office: Hillsborough Works, Sheffield SS 2LW, Registered in England No. 998314
C li/e

H 'U S   IS   1U   le tfe / w e
fzceivfel     b j f o K j pUiS

(X U ^T L e   KJUC^ lh jo


         Lise— .
Hillsborough Walled Garden Project
            A Proposal




   Hillsborough C om m unity Development Trust   M ay 1991
                     HILLSBOROUGH WALLED GARDEN PROJECT


A PROPOSAL

     Foreword

L.   Introduction                     Opening statement
                                      Background
                                      Brief description of proposals
                                      Position at May 1991

2.   The Site                         Location Plans
                                      Site Description

3.   The Proposer and Supporters      About H.C.D.T.
                                      The Project Working Group
                                      Participating local groups
                                      Advisory bodies and persons

4.   Aims & Objectives

5.   The Scheme                       Sketch Design of Plan
                                      Descriptions
                                      Users

6.   The Costs of the Project

7.   Income - Potential Sources       Funding Strategy
                                      Voluntary effort
                                      Donations in kind
                                      Local fund-raising
                                      Company donations
                                      Grants from trusts

8.   Maintaining the Garden

9.   Timetable

10. Structure and Management         Developing the project
                                     Overseeing the project
                                     Implementing the project
                                     Maintaining the project

Appendix                             Appendix A - Hillsborough Community
                                                      Development Trust
                                     Appendix B - Letters of support



Cover Picture:-     Existing gateway from Walled Garden (May 1991)
                    This portico is the only feature left of the original
                    garden built in 1779.


(c) Copyright: Hillsborough Community Development Trust - May 1991


                                   (1)
                       FOREWORD



I have observed with much interest the development
of this germ of an idea into the fully developed and
plausible project set out for you in this report.

I have been impressed with the way in which the idea
has developed, not      only the speed but also the
breadth of consultation and the extent of voluntary
effort and enthusiasm that have gone into it.

The proposal itself is of great merit.       It will
satisfy  the unmet need of providing a fitting
memorial to those who suffered so tragically at the
Hillsborough Stadium in 1989.   It will also provide
an opportunity for      those in Sheffield who   are
otherwise deprived of experiencing   the    joy  and
contentment that gardening activities can bring.

The proposal is for a true Community Garden that can
be enjoyed by all.      As such, it has my complete
support and I hope that those who are in a position
to help make it happen do all they can.




DAVID BLUNKETT
MP FOR SHEFFIELD BRIGHTSIDE

22 May 1991
                         FOREWORD



Many thousands of words are spoken and printed daily
about the importance of protecting the environment.
Actions do not often follow these good intentions. So
when something positive happens almost on your door­
step that belies    that  statement it has   to merit
support.

The idea of turning an overgrown derelict area of land
into something that will not only be beautiful but will
help satisfy some of the needs of the community in a
practical sense is superb.

This is what the   'Walled Garden', when completed,   will
have achieved.

The initiative shown by the community of Hillsborough
has my full backing..  Let everybody give their support
in whatever way they can to making this idea a reality
and a testimony to what a community can do when it
believes in what it is doing.




NORMAN ADSETTS OBE
Chairman Sheffield Insulation Group pic
Chairman Sheffield Partnership Ltd

23 May 1991
  1.    INTRODUCTION

 This report has been produced in less than 2 weeks. The Trust's
 Walled Garden Working Group were asked by Sheffield City Council to
 set out its proposal in detail before any agreement could be struck or
 permission given.   In order to meet the deadlines necessary to get an
 item before a Council committee, the Working Group had to bring
 together all the research and information it had carried out to date;
 refine its plan; and produce costings.   It has done so.  If anything
 should convince our sponsors and backers of the sincerity and
 determination of the Trust to bring this project to fulfilment then
 this Report should.

• Background

 In mid-1990 Sheffield City Council's Recreation Department disclosed
 an intention to create sizable parking areas within the boundaries of
 Hillsborough Park.  A licence to keep 10 goods vehicles and 5 trailers
 at an 'operating centre' within Hillsborough Park was applied for in
 the Summer of 1990.  Despite a significant reaction from the local
 community opposing any decrease in recreation/leisure space within the
 Park area, the City Council persisted.  As late as October 1990 it was
 still actively considering creating a car park on the site of the old
 nursery.

 The "old nursery" was at that time a    derelict site adjacent to
 Hillsborough Library.  It had been abandoned by the     City Council in
 1983.  It had served as a nursery and training centre for the
 Council's horticulturists for almost    80 years.   But the site did have
 a function before it was used by the    City Council.   Indeed it was the
 kitchen garden to Hillsborough Hall and had been used as such by the
 owners of the Hall throughout the 19th century up until the time that
 the Hall and its parkland came into the Council's ownership in 1903.

 The community was outraged-.at the suggestion that a part of the only
 public open space in Hillsborough was to be taken away. There was
 also a considerable reaction to the thought that this particular piece
 of Hillsborough's history could be lost.   The result has been a
 gathering of interested parties and a growing momentum locally which
 has resulted in the plans and proposals contained in this report.

 Brief Description of Proposals

 The whole proposition has been put together under the auspices of
 Hillsborough Community Development Trust.  It is proposed that:-

       the City Council allow this local charitable Trust to be given the
       right of access to the walled garden site and associated land and
       buildings (as defined elsewhere in the report);

       The Trust be allowed to reclaim the garden and in doing so create
       not only an attractive garden area but provide for active use by
       groups such as disabled gardeners and school groups;

       The Trust allow for access and use of the garden by the public at
       large in accordance with the by-laws for the park;




                                    (2)
    The Trust assume responsibility for its long-term maintenance and
    development as a community garden; and

    The Trust provide, within the project boundaries, a proper and
    fitting memorial to those who suffered as a result of the
    Hillsborough disaster in 1989.

 Position at May 1991

  From a regular but informal gathering of parents from Hillsborough
  School during the autumn of 1990 the project has developed rapidly.
  The Group itself has become a formal Working Group meeting in a
  regular and properly'organised manner as part of the Hillsborough
. Community Development Trust.  It has developed the ideas; discussed
  possibilities, options, problems and opportunities with a wide-range
  of organisations and individuals; secured specialist advice and
  support; commenced a major fund-raising drive; and recruited a large
  number of voluntary helpers ready to get involved as and when it is
  appropriate to do so.

 This report and its contents is very much a testimony to the efforts
 of the Working Group and the Hillsborough community to date.   If they
 c.an get this far in so short a time there should be no doubt as to
 their ability to turn what started as a dream into a reality.




 The Walled Garden.   View from main entrance looking towards the
 Library.


                                  (3)
                     N £~*>

    '»05L*±



                                                          SSs-              '''                  ,- M O V f L                 Jp
                                                                                                                                                  nPWDOil K v * *rtTV-*^ I \
                                                     Hillsborough Willed Garden                                                                           J^Ov -'*        t .
                       MflftBOnptKftl.                                                                                                                              tfyvwe- \
                          i^sKU                                                                                                                                a
                                                                                                                                       i          •ifiprfnCJO'Gnt
                                                                                                                                       \ Sports   clipper
                                                                                                                                                   r . m b t r p c »»'«
                                                                                                                                   r a Oriy/fxi
                                                    OWi^i
                      feyi:;r ‘™



                                                                                                                                                                                /* CO>!

                                                                                                                                                                           »              ^ *«>

                                                                                                                                                                           rr^Rr;’
                                                                                                                                                                                 ;


              walW                                                                                           % s SpTr s


                                                                                                        P



fa+Httt                                                                                                                                                                                            A 610S


                                                                                                                                                  65074




                                                                                                                                                             ?\Tr/A57




                      \
                                                                                                                                           TL/TOLlJj                      fTv,
                                                                                                                                                                             ~>£\£C\ LT
                                                    n w r'f
                                                          t

                                                               sTrffff ',
                                                                                              5-W®u?fWW=>'rZPiiA>ull
                                                                                     rw *’ ^ * .7 ^ ^ v 3 IS t -

                                         i^WitonPvIloso
                                                                                                                   ^ ? C 3S



                                                                   oynl
                                                              illam shire
              Is


                                                                                                                                                                                                B60/C >
                                                                                                                                                                    S
                                                                                                                                                                                       ACSch
                                                                             Wmhth                                                                                        t \>*+>l/t-/'"'w
                                                                                                                              “ nn1
                                                                                                                                                                          V H¥
                                                                                                                                                                            tfr0
                                                                                                                                                                              '» ''*<ypZZ)
                                                                                                                                                                                ,/m>
                                                                                                                                                                                           ✓%;<
                               rfT^ (jrtrtitltx i
                                         OARPj/M

                                                                                                                                                                                            ^ U S S *'v

                                                                                                                                                                               *£ « ? » r   Jh ( s n \ v >
                                                                                                                                                                               P %               »1fr
W illed
2.    THE SITE

The site, the subject of this proposal, is situated within
Hillsborough Park.  It comprises:

A)    the land bound by a wall which is referred to as the 'walled
      garden';

.B)   the main access path to the walled garden and outbuildings
      adjacent to the garden wall;

C)    the woodland fringe between the wall and Middlewood Road
      boundary; and

D)     the land between the path and the roadway which allows access to
       the park adjacent to the Lodge, 132 Middlewood Road.

The site in total (see map), with the exclusion of the woodland
fringe, is that which was once referred to as the Hillsborough Park
Nurseries. The condition of the site varies.

Site Description

Area A is derelict.  It was abandoned as a nursery some years ago.
There is still much evidence of its former use.  The site is strewn
with stone, brick, paving and artefacts usually associated with a
nursery garden.  It appears that there was, at one time, up to ten
glasshouses erected on the site - remnants of foundations are visible.
Only the frame of one glass house still remains as indicated on the
map.  The wall surrounding the garden requires considerable repair. A
section which adjoins the Library path to the south of the site is
shored up - it requires rebuilding.  Two or three new sections of wall
have been built one of which, again to the south of the site, is
cracked and requires rebuilding.  Reports suggest that much of the
rest of the wall will require the top one metre demolishing and
rebuilding, although a further inspection of parts of the wall is
still required. Much of the external face of the wall adjacent to the
Library path is currently masked by foliage.  The access points to the
garden are in a similarly neglected state. The main access wooden
gate at the north west corner of the site is broken down and lying in
pieces. The south east access wooden gate from a point close to the
Library is in poor condition and part hidden by ivy.  It is still
securely locked. The third access through the wall and into the
outbuildings is framed by a stone portico which is extremely weathered
and broken. Its wooden doorway is broken and barred, (see cover)

Area B is dominated by the single storey 'lean to' buildings which
served as a City Council Training Centre. An initial appraisal shows
evidence of routine maintenance and repair taking place when they were
in occupation. The quality and nature of repair however was not
always high or appropriate and the buildings will require considerable
attention as well as modification for future use.  The condition of
the access path is reasonable.




                                  (4 )
A-rea C is presently an overgrown grass strip with trees.  It is
infrequently maintained.   It is a small but forgotten strip of
parkland which is 'locked' between wall and fence.   Public access to
it is clearly discouraged.

A-rea D is an area of garden which shows clear evidence of once being a
fine feature of the park.   It contained ornamental flower beds, good
quality grass and is surrounded by a variety of shrubs and conifers.
It is maintained at present at a very low level and it appears the
brief to those responsible is just to keep it tidy.   Public access is
discouraged by a single bar gate which crosses the path.




View west over Area D.


                                (5)
3.   THE PROPOSERS AND SUPPORTERS


This proposal is being put forward by Hillsborough Community
Development Trust (A Registered Charity.)

About the Trust                                                     \

The Trust has been in existence since April 1990 when a broad grouping
of local community groups and individuals decided to support the
establishment of a Trust whose purpose was to improve the quality of
life of those who live in Sheffield 6. Hillsborough has suffered from
more than its fair share of problems during the preceding decade.   The
waves of economic recession and the cutback in the availability of
public funds have hit Hillsborough and its ageing population very
hard. On top of that it has had to face up to the stresses of the
terrible Disaster that happened on its doorsteps.  The Trust is seen
as a means by which the people of Hillsborough and district can get
involved and contribute to the future well-being of their
neighbourhood, (see Appendix A)

The Walled Garden Project was seen by the Trust as a project of
immense merit not only in helping to increase the amount of available
public open space in the area but also in creating a much needed
activity base for special needs groups. It has provided support to
the Project Working Group from its earliest days.

The Project Working Group

The Group became a formal entity in February 1991.   Prior to this
time, the development of the Walled Garden Project had been led by a
small group of parents from Hillsborough School who had become
involved with the Hillsborough Park Working Group and were keen to see
a programme of improvement works carried out on the Park. They had
also been quick to spot the opportunity afforded by the Walled Garden
and the imminent threat being made to its existence by the car park
proposals. Their strength of advocacy resulted in a rapidly growing
awareness of the problems and potentials of this site and a broad
expression of support for the principles embodied in this final
proposal. The Walled Garden Project became a cause celebre very
quickly and demanded a Project Group of its own, which the Trust
helped establish in February 1991. Its membership comprises (at May
1991):-

     Albert Simmons
     David Cooper - Sheffield City Council
     Denise Hesp (chair)
     Fern Newman (vice chair)
     Henry Smith - H i l l s b o r o u g h & District Environmental Association
     Jenny Lightowler (secretary)
     Lynn Robertson
     Paul Weston - Hillsborough Community Development Trust
     Peter Wood
     Roger Lloyd - Hillsborough School
     Tony Mead
     Vin Machin - Hillsborough Community Development Trust




                                     (6)
The Group has met regularly since its inception and has brought
together laypersons and local professionals to develop and promote the
project.

The Group has been very keen to consult with and recruit support from
a wide variety of local organisations and individuals.  It was through
this consultation process that the Group recognised the valuable role
the Walled Garden could play in serving the needs of disabled persons
and school-groups.  It also began to appreciate the value the garden
could have to those bereaved as a result of the Hillsborough Disaster.

Groups who represent the interests of those who are physically
disabled or with impaired vision have expressed whole-hearted support
for the proposal to create gardening opportunities within Hillsborough
Park for those they represent.  As a result the Group has been anxious
to ensure that proper provision is made within the proposals to
maximise the opportunity for the disabled arid schools to participate
in its planning, implementation and long-term well-being.   Expressions
of support have also been received from the Liverpool families who
have been invited to take part in the planning process.

The following have been consulted and participated in the planning
stages of the project to date:

    Boys Brigade
    Boy Scouts
    Christchurch Hillsborough/Wadsley Bridge
    David Blunkett MP
    Martin Flannery MP
    Girl Guides
    Hillsborough Baptist Church
    Hillsborough Boys Club
    Hillsborough Chamber of Trade
    Hillsborough Family Support Group
    Hillsborough Labour Party
    Hillsborough NFM School
    Hillsborough Sacred Heart School
    Hillsborough Trinity Church
    Hillsborough Ward Councillors
    Malin Bridge Infant School
    Malin Bridge Junior School
    Marlcliffe School
    Mencap
    Owlerton Ward Coucillors
    Probation Service
    Rivelin NFM School
    Sacred Heart RC Church
    Sheffield City Council - Recreation Department
                            - Countryside Management Unit
    Sheffield Disabled Forum
    Sheffield Institute for the Blind
    St John the Baptist Church Owlerton
    St Polycarps Church




                                (7 )
The following bodies and organisations have been approached for advice
and guidance in the preparatory stages of the project:

     BBC Gardeners World (Geoff Hamilton)
     Civic Trust UK 2000
     Construction Industry Training (CIT)
     David Bellamy
     David Hamerton ARICS
     Duke of Devonshire & Chatsworth Estate
     Friends of the Earth
     Gardening for the Disabled Trust
     Henry Boot Inner City Ltd
     Horticultural Therapy
     Sheffield City Council
     Sheffield University
     Sheffield Wednesday F.C.




View south from walled garden entrance.



                                ( 8 )
              HILLSBOROUGH COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT TRUST - 0742 322474


4.   AIMS AND OBJECTIVES




      To reclaim the Walled, Garden in Hillsborough Park.

.     To facilitate access to the garden for the public.

      To create opportunities for the public of Sheffield 6 to be
      involved in the planning, design and implementation of the
      project.                                                   '

     To create gardening experiences and opportunities for the public,
     making provision particularly for people with disabilities and
     school groups.

     To recognise and create within the walled garden project areas
     for;

      .   wild life study and appreciation
      .   visually disabled
      .   physically disabled
      .   a quiet area
      .   a rose garden

     To rehabilitate outbuildings as classrooms and a training area.

     To create a suitable memorial garden for the Hillsborough
     Disaster.

     To make suitable and adequate provision for the long-term
     maintenance of the walled garden.

     To establish a working partnership between public,            private and
     voluntary sectors.

     To maximise voluntary effort.

     to raise sufficient funds to ensure the project can be
     successfully implemented and sustained.




The above were adopted by the Working Group on 7 May 1991 following
consultation with Sheffield City Council and other organisations.




                                       (9)
THE SCHEME
Description of Plan

Formal and informal areas

The garden has two distinct areas, one surrounded by high walls, one
by hedges, giving rise logically to two different design approaches.
The walled, rectangular area will be mainly laid out in a formal
pattern, with straight, geometrical shapes, strong axes and focal
points; the spaces created are static, and peaceful.  The hedged area
will be informal and will include the 'wild area' and pond which would
be inappropriately placed in a walled enclosure.

Walled Garden

The walled area will contain a number of distinctive features, as well
as areas for different uses.   Features include a pergola, a central
pool with fountain, a wall-spout, rose arches, an arbour, a sundial
and possibly a piece of sculpture.   Designated areas are for: the
memorial garden (A), roses (B), a garden for visually disabled people
(C), a vegetable and nursery garden (D),.a herb garden (E), a 'safe
area' for small children (F; and of course the glass-house (G). There
will be raised beds of differing heights in various parts of the main
garden both for added interest and for easy use by disabled gatrdeners;
access to all areas for wheel-chairs; and plentiful seating,
especially in the memorial garden.

Hedged Garden

There is a main point of access through this part of the garden,
including for vehicles when necessary. This garden requires
considerably less alteration than the walled area, due to the simpler
functional requirements, its less formal nature, and also to the fact
that it has been partially maintained and has well-stocked borders.
The Middlewood Road end (I) will remain substantially as it is now,
except for the addition of paths and seats. The park end (J) will be
a 'wild area', with a pond, grass ('meadow') and a 'woodland' planting
of native trees and shrubs as the surround. By concentrating on
native plants, insects and in turn birds will be attracted. The pond,
which will include a marginal, boggy area, will be designed for ease
of access by both children and wildlife! - hopefully without either
being excluded. The classroom is conveniently close by. An
additional strip of land near the road (K) containing a number of
mature trees, will also rema i n substantially unchanged, and will
constitute a further natural or wild area.

Notes on some specific areas within the Walled Garden

l   ) The Memorial Garden (A)

This should be the quietest part of the garden, set as it is within
the walled area, and furthest away from the road.   It will be screened
to some extent from the res t of the garden by the pergola and the rose




                                 (11)
 garden, and thus be quite secluded. It is also the only part of the
 garden which does not require access through it i.e. it is not on a
 thoroughfare.  It will have a number of seats to enable people to sit
 in peace and contemplation, away from the world's bustle.   Plenty of
 scent will be provided by roses and clema;tis (for example) on the
 walls, pergola and nearby arbour, which provides further seating in
 the area.

 ii) Garden for Visually Disabled (C)

  Adjoining as it does, the memorial and rose garden, it should be seen
  as part of it rather than necessarily as an area with a separate use
  for separate people.  In this part of the garden as in the whole,
• scent will play an important part (in all seasons), but there will
  also be particular emphasis on plants for texture and sound, and
  perhaps bright colours for partially sighted people to enjoy.  The
  restful sound of water will be provided by a spout falling from a
  vall-mask into a pool or other receptacle below.

 iii) Square Central Area, of Walled Garden

 The main focus will be a central circular pool and fountain, with
 seating around it. Also of importance here are the main 'wall-
 borders', with an emphasis on climbers and wall-shrubs, and raised
 beds of varying heights.  The pool will be slightly raised and
 surrounded by plants to make it safer.

 iv) The other distinct areas indicated (D-G) are largely self
 explanatory. The level of initial design detail is to some extent
 dependant on how they will be developed and used, and by whom.  If
 allocated, specific groups may have particular ideas - in which case a
 framework and guidelines will only be necessary (eg vegetable garden,
 herb garden, raised beds.)

 Gates

 All existing gateways will be restored. Solid timber gates at all
 entrances and exits will provide security when it is needed and will
 provide the valuable function of keeping the heat in - as the original
 gates were designed to do.

 Additional gates will be erected at the main entrance to the site
 adjacent to the wildlife area.  These will be a replica of the Shankly
 Gates at Liverpool F.C., Anfield. They will provide an appropriate
 entrance to the site given what has gone before and given who and what
 the project is for.


 Please note With reference to the sketch plan, the design as shown is
 only approximately to scale, and does not constitute the final or
 definitive design. This will be presented at a scale of 1/100, with
 supplementary drawings for details where necessary, and will include
 alterations and refinements as user groups and others contribute their
 ideas within the overall framework.




                                  (12)
Users

As-previously stated, the proposal is to create a community garden
and, as such, it will be open to all, irrespective of age, colour,
creed or ability.   ,

The local schools, Disabled Forum and Institute for the Blind h a v e ai 11
shown great interest in the garden.  Church groups, scouts, guides,
the elderly and other local organisations also appear keen to play an
active part.  All the groups involved will have access to all parts of
the garden.

The greenhouse will provide opportunities for seed sowing, the
production of plants from cuttings and the growing of indoor pl-ants.

The utility area will be used for the production of vegetables and
bedding plants which will later be transferred to other parts of the
garden.

In the wildlife area activities will include pond-dipping and the
study of trees, plants, insects and birds.

The schoolroom will be available for the study of specimens w i t h books
for identification purposes and for the production of environmental
studies written work.

Of course, some of the groups will require special facilities.
Disabled gardeners will be able to work in raised beds of differing
heights to suit their needs.  Scented shrubs and flowers, tactile
plants and bright colours will be incorporated for those with impaired
vision.

These 'special' features will not, however, be exclusive.  All users
of the garden will be encouraged to work in and enjoy all parts of the
garden.

In short, it is hoped that the young will work alongside the elderly
and the able-bodied alongside the disabled to produce and maintain a
garden of which they, and the whole community, can be proud.




                                  (13)
6.   THE COST OF THE PROJECT

The Trust has taken expert advice on the costs involved to ensure the
scale of the task facing us has not been underestimated.  We have had
estimates produced which assume that the project would be carried out
by contractors on "a commercial basis".  (No account is taken in these
estimates of the possible contribution of free materials and labour.)


1 The W a U

                                                £
     1    Demolition                            2696.85
     2    Excavation                            1546.26
     3    Concrete work                         1084.15
     4    Brickwork                             8599.64

                                               T w z z rm   +
              VAT (17.5%)                       2437.21

                                                                T 6 3S 471i

2 The Outbuildings

     i)     External:

              strip roof and recover            4400.00
              remove stacks                      150.00
              lead abutments and flashings       560.00
              roof timbers (pc)                  500.00
              woodworm treatment (pc)            750.00
              renew gutters                      500.00
              concrete lintels                   150.00
              renew 2 windows                    350.00
              re-pointing                        300.00
              renew doors and frames (2)         600.00
              rebuild store walls               1600.00
              render external wall              1600.00
              provide DPC                       2000.00
                                               i'34'60V(T(T +
              VAT                               2355.50

                                               T58T5750'


     ii) Internal:

            clearance and preparation             50.00
            re-pointing                          400.00
            renew door and frame                 150.00
            provide handrail                      50.00
            provide new sink unit                300.00
            provide 2 kitchen units              300.00
            renew ceiling tiles and insulate    1025.00
            overhaul heating system-(pc)         300.00


                                    (14)
            overhaul electics (pc)              750.00
            level floors (pc)                   200.00
            decoration (pc)                    1000.00
            blockwork partition of toilet       250.00
            concrete floor to toilet            500.00
            plaster and skirtings to toilet     300.00
            wall tiling to toilet               100.00
            sanitory fittings                   750.00
            foul drainage (pc)                 1000.00
                                         •     7SZ57M
            contingency                        1000.00
            VAT                                1474.38

                                               9899.38

                                                           137TZT7M


3 The Garden

          (costs include VAT)
     Paving and paths: concrete slabs         20 000.0 0
                        concrete pavior         500.00
                        gravel etc             3750.00

     Brickwork (raised beds)                   1000.00

     Water features:      central pool         1000. 00
                          wall spout            600.00

     Structures:          pergola              20 00.00
                          arches               1000. 00
                          trellis              2000.00
                          arbour               1500.00
                          furniture (seats)    2500.00

     Ornaments:           sundial               120.00
                          planters and pots    1000. 00


     Wild Area:           pond                 1000.00

     Planting:            shrubs and trees    6000.00
                          herbaceous          3000.00
                          hedges               1000.00

     Glasshouse                               2000.00

    Topsoil                                     500.00

    Gates                                     1000.00

                                                           '51470.00

4 Tools and Equipment                                       3000.00



                                  (15)
          Summary of Costs:

          1   The Wall                           16364.11
          2   The Outbuildings                   25714.88
          3   The.Garden                         51470.00
          4   Tools and Equipment                 3000.00
          5   Administrative Costs               15000.00

                                               111 548.95




                                ■m .




The view east.   Site for the proposed rose garden and Memorial Garden.


                                     (16)
7.   INCOME -■ POTENTIAL SOURCES

The Trust fully appreciates that the project costs are considerable
and the task of securing such resources is not light. However the
worthiness of the cause is such that the Trust is resolved to 'go for
it' and it believes it has the necessary strength, experience and
propriety to attract potential donors and convince them of the merits
of investing of the project.

Preliminary work has been undertaken by the Trust and members of the
Working Group in investigating the ways and means and potential
funding sources.   We have tried hard to promote the concept amongst
likely donors.   Over 70 letters have been sent out to Trusts,
Foundations and Companies explaining what we are about and seeking
information from them. The text of our letter is set out at the end
of this section.   Many have responded and indicated a possible
interest in contributing to the project but, not unexpectedly, await
more detailed information and proposals.   It is hoped that this
publication will serve those needs.   In the meantime the Trust and the
Vailed Garden Working Group have refined and are now able to set out a
funding strategy.

Funding Strategy

To reclaim and re-establish the Walled Garden the Trust is aiming to
secure resources in roughly the following proportions:-

     .   voluntary effort            30%
     .   contributions in kind       20%
     .   local fund raising          10 %
     .   company donations           10 %
     .   grants from Trusts          30%

                                 W


Voluntary Effort            .                 .       .            .

The Trust considers the key resource in the Project to be the human
resource.  It intends to maximise the use of voluntary effort.  The
Walled Garden Working Group are all volunteers.  Most of the
professional advice and support we have received has been local and
voluntary.  We believe that much of the physical effort that will be
necessary to reclaim the Garden will be made by volunteers. We have
contacted a broad range of local groups and organisations and the
early signs are that we can expect the people of Hillsborough and
Sheffield to respond to the challenge. We will seek to heighten
peoples' awareness of the project during the late spring through a
media publicity campaign.  We will challenge groups and individuals to
give a little of their time and effort to the Project. We will divide
the Project up into tasks and physical areas and encourage schools,
groups, clubs etc to adopt a particular aspect or area. We hope that
in this way we can not only share the workload but also the fund­
raising efforts.




                                       (17)
  Donations in Kind

 Many of the products and materials required for the Walled Garden are
 either manufactured or supplied locally.  The Trust will invite such
 firms to provide the Project with suitable goods as a free donation
 and as a valuable alternative to making a cash donation.  It is
 expected also to secure the skill services of local tradesmen and
 professionals as appropriate.  We shall expect too a broad range of
 donations of goods by local traders which, as prizes, will help our
 local fund-raising efforts.

 Local Fund-Raising                                   Target = £10000

• The Trust has its own permanent Fund Raising Committee.   The Walled
  Garden Project Group will liaise with this Committee and co-ordinate
  properly the local fund-raising events and schemes.   A target figure
  for local fund-raising for the Project will be set and schemes devised
  accordingly.   Groups/schools/clubs etc who get involved with the
  Project will be encouraged to undertake their own fund-raising
  activities for those aspects of the Project with which they are most
  concerned.   Again the Trust will ensure such activities are ethical,,
  appropriate and co-ordinated with other similar activities locally.

 Company Donations                                   Target = £ 1 5 0 0 0

 About 150 of the top 300 companies listed in 'Major Companies and
 their Charitable Giving' are known to have some interest in funding
 environmental projects.  The Trust has established a 'hit list' and is
 taking advice from the Ethical Investment Research Service Ltd.   It
 will be writing to most of the major givers seeking assistance.   On
 top of this all sizable companies/firms in the Sheffield 6 area will
 be contacted.  As the Trust is a registered charity it is hoped that
 donations may be more forthcoming.  It is sad to record that we have
 been advised not to expect to raise more than 10% of our target income
 from this source.  But we hope the business sector will see this as a
 challenge to their integrity and philanthropy and respond accordingly.
 We shall, regardless of this advice, attempt to make the best case
 possible and continue our approach to companies.

 Grants from Trusts                                  Target = £35000

 There are over 300 potential grant-making charitable trusts on our
 list. We have already made initial contact with many.    It is our
 intention to follow this up with the more detailed information
 proffered by this document.  Most trusts seem to include environmental
 issues and projects amongst their priorities but they are undoubtedly
 swamped by meritorious applications.  In view of- this we are anxious
 that our case is made properly and is made to those most likely to
 respond. The Trust will invest time, and research properly the
 priorities and requirements of each of the trusts on its list and make
 a considered and quality application.




                                  (18)
       SAMPLE LETTER TO TRUSTS




       Our Ref:   JL/LR

       22 April 1991




•’    HILLSBOROUGH WALLED GARDEN PROJECT

      We are are a group of residents working under the auspices of the
      Hillsborough Community Development Trust (see enclosed leaflet).
      We are currently trying to raise funds for our *Walled Garden
      Project1 and I am writing to enquire if this falls within the
      remit of your Fund.

      The 'Walled Garden Project* is our first major project arid
      involves the conservation of the walled kitchen garden in
      Hillsborough Park.  T h e garden, once used by the Council as a
      Training Centre for its nurserymen, is now seriously neglected and
      requires major renovation work to the walls and buildings. When
      Council plans to bulldoze the garden and turn it into a car park
      were voiced we stepped in with a plan to reconstruct the garden.

     When completed the garden will have a wildlife area, flower beds,
     vegetable plots and greenhouses. It will serve as a centre for
     environmental studies for local schools and will also be used by
     local blind and disabled groups. It will also provide training
     opportunities for a small group of people with learning
     difficulties.  In fact, we hope it will be used by all members of
     the local community either to help with the maintenance or to just
     sit and enjoy the garden.

     We are currently taking expert advice and carrying out feasibility
     studies and have been advised that the cost of the project will be
     approximately £50,000.  Although our volunteer effort and local
     fundraising have achieved part of that total, we estimate that at
     least a further £30,000 for materials and equipment will be needed
     to realise our dreams.

     It has been suggested that the garden would be an appropriate
     memorial to the 95 p e op l e who died in the 'Hillsborough Disaster*
     two years ago. The Liverpool-based Hillsborough Family Support
     Group have shown great interest and discussions are taking place.
     Sheffield Wednesday F.C. is next to Hillsborough Park.

     If you feel this is t h e type of project your' Trustees would be .
     willing to consider, will you please let me know what form our
     official application should take. I would also be grateful if you

 would let me know what level of funding is normally given so that
 we may ask for a realistic amount.

 I    look forward to you r reply with interest and remain

Vours sincerely
8.   MAINTAINING THE GARDEN

The Trust is determined that once the Walled Garden is restored to its
former glory it should not be allowed to deteriorate once again.  The
essence of the project is that a voluntary body is creating a garden
largely through voluntary effort which will provide gardening
opportunities and experiences for the community on a voluntary basis.

However we do appreciate that for the garden to fulfil its potential
it will need an element of control and supervision and a degree of
continuity.  For this reason the Trust intends to employ a Garden
Manager.  She/he will be based full-time at the Garden and will be
responsible for:-

      .   implementing the Trust's policies;
      .   maintaining and improving the garden;
      .   managing the garden and its activities;
      .   security;
      .   managing the classrooms, workroom and training base;
      .   teaching and instructing;
      .   encouraging and developing community use;
      .   maintaining tools, equipment, plant and machinery;
      .   supervising junior and trainee staff; and
      .   providing gardening services within the community.

This is a key post.  It will be the energy and enthusiasm of the post­
holder and their personal commitment to gardening/horticulture as a
pastime for all, especially the young and old and disabled, that will
make the project a long-term success.

We hope to provide a small team of trainees and juniors to work
alongside the Garden Manager.  Their brief would be to help with all
of the tasks during their apprenticeship and also provide for garden
services to the wider community. In Hillsborough there are a large
number of elderly households (nearly 40% of the population) many of
whom have large gardens which they cannot cope with. The team will
help keep the gardens of Sheffield 6 in order.

The Trust recognises the value that this type of work and the project
could have in providing a rewarding work environment for those who may
have learning difficulties or disabilities.  It will seek therefore to
give every opportunity for such persons to find employment as part of
its Garden Project Team.

The Team will provide the foundation on which the Garden will be
properly maintained.  Although, we repeat, we expect and will
encourage groups and individuals to give some of their own time to
help improve and keep the garden special.

There is a cost to providing this maintenance team which we put,
roughly, at £25000 pa.  It is our objective to make the Garden self
sufficient in the longer-term (years 3 and beyond) but recognise that
it will require some subsidy in the first 2 years.

The Trust will take this fact on bo&rd and its general fund-raising
efforts will embrace the need to provide a contribution towards the
maintenance and up-keep of the Walled Garden.



                                   (19)
We have identified the following sources of revenue funds which we
hope will ensure the maintenance costs are met:

     . Sale of produce
     . Community gardening service
     . Employment grants
     . Sheffield City Council grants - education service
                                       recreation service
     . Donations
     . Hire charges (rooms/equipment/tools)
     . Covenants/subscriptions




The last remaining glasshouse - the frame appears salvageable.


                                 (20)
9.    TIMETABLE


In preparing the timetable the Group has been mindful of a number of
factors most noticeably:

     . the significance of the anniversary date of the Disaster and the
       aim of having a 'presentable1 project on April 15 1992 when it is
       intended to instal a replica of the 'Shankly Gates' and dedicate
       the Memorial garden.

     . the momentum that has gathered and the present enthusiasm of
       people to contribute in a voluntary capacity.  Any major delay or
       protraction of discussions and negotiations may see a reduction
       in the potential 'sweat equity' available.

     . the need to make use of the better weather of summer and autumn
       for the major building and outdoor work and the need to make full
       use of the planting seasons.

With these in mind the project timetable has been set as follows:


May 1991          Set aims and objectives
                  Sketch plans prepared and considered by Working Group
                  Training Centre and boundary walls surveyed
                  Rough estimates obtained
                  Draft Business Plan prepared

June 1991         Project Advisory Group established
                  Draft lease/trust deed investigated
                  Detailed plans, programmes and work schedules prepared
                  Recreation Sub Committee decision - 13 June 1991
                  Preparatory work carried out in garden and to
                                                      outside of wall

July 1991         Leisure Services Committee decision - 19 July 1991
                  Access agreement made
                  Rebuilding and re-pointing of wall commences
                  (18 weeks}

August 1991       Site clearance and hard landscaping commences
                  (26 weeks)

October 1991      Work to 'Training Centre' begins

March 1992        Permanent parking provision made

Spring 1992       Planting takes place


Gates installed and Memorial Garden dedicated 15 April 1992.




                                    (21)
10.   STRUCTURE AND MANAGEMENT


The Hillsborough Walled Garden Working Group is a sub-group of
Hillsborough Community Development Trust.  The following figure is a
representation of the structure of the Trust at May 1991.



                           Board


                    Executive Committee




        Office Services               Fund Raising                   Credit
           Committee                    Committee                    Union


 Employment               Housing                    Environmental
   Group                   Group                        Group




                                    Hillsborough               Hillsborough
                                        Park                     Buildings
                                    Working Group              Preservation
                                                                  Trust



                              Hillsborough Walled Garden
                                   Working Group




Developing the Project

The Walled Garden Working Group has a brief to develop the project;
raise funds; and to establish the means of implementation and long term
maintenance.  It remains nominally a sub-group of the Hillsborough Park
Working Group but, reflecting its current importance and the need to
speed up the response rate of the Trust to issues requiring a decision,
it now reports directly to the Trust's Executive Committee which
controls all Trust expenditure.

The Working Group is serviced as are all other Groups and Committees by
the Acting Director and Project Officer - both paid full-time employees
of the Trust.




                                     (22)
We are confident we have the appropriate structure and management
framework to maximise local commitment and involvement in a project
which will only be successful if it is seen from the outset as a
community garden and is adopted whole-heartedly by the people of
Sheffield 6.

Overseeing the Project

\ Project Advisory Group is to be established to reflect the broader
aspects of the Project and to enable those who are about to enter into
partnership with the community to provide moral support and guidance
and ensure that the wider objectives are recognised.  It will comprise
a minimum representation of:

     Norman Adsetts OBE - Hillsborough Disaster Appeal Trustee
     John Taylor         - Sheffield City Council
     Trevor Hicks        - Hillsborough Family Support    Group
     Paul Weston         - Hillsborough Community Development Trust
     Denise Hesp         - Walled Garden Working Group

     +2 others             - to be determined

It is intended that this Group will meet every two months or so.  It
vill receive reports from the Working Group on progress, finance,
problems, issues etc.  It will oversee the project and ensure it
achieves its aims and objectives.  It will intervene directly when it
considers it necessary to do so.

Implementing the Project

The Trust recognises the importance of ensuring that the work is
carried out in accordance with specifications.  It will recruit two
local clerks of work.  One will look after the building work for the
Trust, the other will oversee the landscaping.  The two clerks of work
vill not only inspect the contractors' work on a regular basis but will
be charged with ensuring that the volunteer labour force is properly
organised, briefed, equipped and adheres to practices that accord with
health and safety rules.  All who are offered contracts to work on the
Garden, particularly those whose labour force is predominantly
trainees, will be expected to provide adequate supervision and control.

Maintaining the Project

Following the successful completion of the Project by the summer of
1992 it is intended to disband the Walled Garden Working Group. The
Trust will discharge most of its responsibilities for the long-term
veil-being of the Walled Garden through a permanent Management
Committee. It will comprise representatives of the major partners
involved in its implementation and representatives of the user groups.

It is intended to employ a full-time Garden Manager who will be
responsible for the day to day management of the Garden. She/he will
report to the Director of the Trust, (see section 8)




                                   (23)
                                                                      APPENDIX A




Hillsborough Community Development TVust


                Objectives

                ►     To benefit the com m unity of Hillsborough in the
                     City of Sheffield (hereinafter referred to as "the
                     area of benefit” ) by the advancement of educa­
                     tion and the relief of poverty, distress and sick­
                     ness;
                ►    To provide facilities for information, recreation
                     and leisure time occupation in the interests of
                     social welfare w ith the object of improving the
                     conditions of life o f the inhabitants of the area of
                     benefit without distinction of race, colour, ethnic
                     or national origin, sex, disability or political,
                     religious or other opinion;
            ►        To assist charitable institutions established for
                     the benefit of the said inhabitants;
            ►       To bring together public, private and voluntary
                    agencies and organisations in a common effort
                    to achieve the aforesaid objects;
            ►       To improve the environm ent (including the so­
                    cial environment) o f the area of benefit in the
                    interests of the com m un ity;
        ►T o   foster a greater community identity and
           promote community stability and self-reliance;
        ► T o establish co m m unity resource centres for
           provision of facilities for free advice, information,
           recreation and social welfare for the inhabitants of
                    the area of benefit; and
        ►           To promote and encourage opportunities and
                    facilities for children and young persons in the
                    area of benefit.
   APPENDIX B


Letters of Support
          Peundid lltO




          RSIB
HU UAL M W H AP n w

          CM M M I
          T r« M irw i
                        n T lT im n tl


                         O.J.S. K AR L
                                         FOR THE BUND s m a w

                               W.1LUNCW ORTH r.CWk.
                                                                C harily No. 1151J7

                                                                        k     stm t.   Sh e f f ie l d SI « b T .T E i: 7 } J « * 7 M 1 H
                                                                                                                                                                       MALIN B R I D G E J U N I O R S C H O O L
                                                                                                                                                                       NORRIS ROAD. SHEFFIELD S6 *RH
          A d m ln lttriliri L.T» MILES                                                                                                                                H t t d U a c h t ' M(. P. M tc h in B.Ed. T « to p h o n t 345422



        d o t h Hay 1991
                                                                                                                                            Re I :   M/RD                                                                 8th      flay,    1 991

         Hr* I
                                                                                                                                            Dta* Deni**#                                                                                            •
         Sheffield
         S6                                                                                                                                        fiA^tly let me thank you {.<>* taking the time tc thou u4
                                                                                                                                            Aound the vailed garden' and outlining youA. idea-6 {.o a H a d i . e l o p -
                                                                                                                                            mcnt.  Ve ueA.e m o * t impAe.66ed with youA. c o m m it m e n t and the -tA.k
                                                                                                                                            that you have a l r e a d y got undeAuay,
         Dear Mra                                                                                                                                     S e c o n d l y t I u O u l d like tc a d d q u a . u>h ol e he a At e d tuppi ’.t
                                                                                                                                            ton thi* o u t s t a n d i n g pAcject*         I / e e l t h a t y o u * c on c ep t i o n k / a
                 Following my s e a t i n g w i t h you and your f r i e n d s I would                                                      fa cil i ty w h i c h c o u l d ie Ae s t v A e d to it 4 V i c t o r i a n 4 pl tn dou ' a n d
         I l k a to w r i t e to aay how imp res sed I was with yo ur pro po se d                                                           involve s c h o o l * in t h i s dev el o pm e nt a n d i n 4 t u d i e * in the y, \ d e n 4
         scheme to p ro vi d e a S c e n t e d Garden for th e R l l n d .                                                                  tt ul d p i u u i d e a q u i t e uni que und o u l u u t l e A e s o u A c e i*>hich 1
                                                                                                                                            quite 4uAe u o u l d C e u eA y ,ea g erl y u s e d t y t h e m a j c A i t y o/ 4 c * c o / 4
                 There Is a g r e a t need fo r sueh a garden, Hillsborough                                                                 in the city,'
         would be co n v e n i e n t a s many o f our members l i v e In t h e
         H il l s b o r o u g h and S t a n n l n g t o n a r e a . A s ee nt ad o a s i s f o r                                                     Ptc u At k e e p m e in touch vith d e v e l o p m e n t * >c that ut can tc
         p e a c e f u l s e d l t a t l o n wo uld n o t only be of Immense b e n e f i t to t h e                                         tnrvli'co in t h i 4 p/ivject at utt stages v / i t s d e ve lo p me n t,      I uill
                                                                                                                                            (.t /jfeayed ( o l e n d yo u any i up/a At thut / cun.
         B l i n d of S n e f f l e l d b u t a l s o f o r the C i t i z e n s o f S h e f f i e l d .
                   Your e n t h u si a s m f o r t h i s fo r t h i s e x c e l l e n t p r o j e c t l i
         i m p r e a i l v e , you d e s e r v e t o s u cc ee d, If the I n s t i t u t i o n or                                                                                       y c u >is A i n c e A C l y ,
         m y s e l f can h e l p we w i l l .
                 With b e s t w i s h e s .




                                               Y o u rs s i n c e r e l y ,




                                                  Adminls tr a to r
                                                                                                                                             fHEFFI ELD M £ I ROfULTTAN D ttTlUCT COUNCIL



                                                                                                                              Marlcliffe Primary School
                                                                                                                                                  MarlcllfTii Road • Shiffteld 56 4AJ
                                                                                                               H M t e k t t . T. a . Ih t ip . B.B4.                                           Tfttpkt**: 1 44 J 1 *   >
          «-1LL,|0 |Q U oi                     men.                    t      ti T „ r M n n |
                     U f lE T STREET. HILLEanpnnr.Hl s(| [ r r i c Ln.                 ?M||                                                                                                 ,    9th Kay 7997
                           T i l n h o n . Mai « h .« t lt l l1    < ■? « »                                    DtaA Ffo*. I
                                                                                                                       1 ua4 mo*i jA/>*L44ut ly lAt *HiUtloAough PoaA UalUd tjoAdtn'
                      ll»«attlflhtri I l f i     B » ra « r» t    k.   ^ » r«.    »■                           aua.       7A * poUnUal / oa a c o m m u n ity /td u c a tio n a l a u s i* t-ujundtut.

H r « . _________                                                                                                      Having 4aid Otat, Oil uoluntaAy input m c a a ta*y to ducLop lAi
                                                                                                               t i l t uiLL t i fuigt and no doult uitl nud to It 4/vuad out* 44 many
Hlllaborough,                                                                                                  gAoup* a4 poatlh.
SHEFFIELD 6.
                                                                                                                   I am 411*t /1uAlcfi//t School including paAtntt anil tinJ.it/
                                                                                                               community ytuupt uoutil it />it/iuA*d to yivt thui cumitm*nl.
                                                                                        la th   H ay,   1991
                                                                                                                     I A01it. o /tu pAt.liminany thought* tut uould liJtt to tuny my
O u r R a f i H A B /N T /2 9 1
                                                                                                               it a(/ dtiun 11 look at Oit / u c ilitiii tut it in tht ClAm.
Your R tfi-
                                                                                                               I. Tht undttcoutA fu c ilititi ait tty/ impcAjtant initiulti. h \
                                                                                                                     iioAuyt und At-luytt LtnytA turn u i a cla46Aoom'.ito^~i
Daar Hr*.                                                                                                            uAtu. Vi huvt Aomi la tie /uAnituAt i>hicA might ii
                                                                                                                     uppAOpAiutt.
H I L L 8 IQBQUQH WALL QARDEH
                                                                                                               J•     Tht /tiling 0/ ' ountA4hi/>‘ might it tnAanctd Ly tacA jipjuiti
                                                                                                                      OAgannuliun having a c Ctu\iy dt/intd g u o to dtudhp und
                                                                                                                      taAt continuing HAtpontiliXity fo* t.g.
                                                                                   •"rfin Htil,b«>*‘ouoh
                                                                                                                       7ht fla*lcfi4/t Judo* t/utdtn
th. .hlWr..B.nddl..bl.d p.opi:
r m l l y lntaraatlno «nd 1 aa aura thi ShLi.                                    ,ound th» *i»lt
                                                                                                                      flatin OiAily* </***nhou4t p'lojtc.t
                                                                                                                      Hitt*io*ouyh ScAooi Duamu patio
                                                                                                                      Unifonmul onganitation* Ht*X Qaidtn
ha»a ^lt<voulty*takin0noh tldrentfurther        llf* " r"“ *nd *•
athar iraia In IfcaffXiS.                       *• « l v l l n and                                                     I ammtAtty thinking aloud at out a itAuttwu.'.
ohlldran in our School to hava thia rl. or**t ««lvantage to tha
Park.  Wa ara ragular u.ar. o5
fa.lllar .ith thi «r,.“
                                              in " m - b o r o u g h
                              * Hill.borou„h Park and Library
                                                                                                               1.       7hi hiitoiu.c.at atptd 0/ Hilltloncugh Hall and ialt Itth and
                                                                                                                       19tA CtnLmu lif t could t i 4uptnlly dtutloptd. 14 O11 tip
                                                                                                                       /loon 0/ thjt hall 4HJLI untoucAid 04 it ua4 a /tu ytu'.i ugc.*
and « * “ uld‘Ili;* t r o f ^ ^ y o ! no" ’ firi’^ p p ^ ^ "                           t h * projBCt           V.      A langt tnough cAnOiat anta to occcmmodott gavltn pant+i on
                                                                                                                       conctnt/lund mtnLi might I t incon/xinaLtd. A tniud r^tio
^****       ua inioraad a n d l a t ua kn». t.                                                                         conn*a in VictoAiwt StyI a might 44ala at a plot/ 0Am.
aupport in tha davalopaant             S l ? I
                                                                                                               >.      7ht Sctnltd Qatdtn fa* M i Blind, AtulU*/Jy plot, a *Ud a/uu
Youra alncaraly.                                                                                                       A HUltloAough ntmwual QaAdtn.......................................... o,t idtat
                                                                                                                       g u tndlkJtt.

                                                                                                                       I amhappy to           m aim on     any 4ittAing gtoup o* 4uppoAi in <ny may.
lira. H. a . Bovara. ». td.                                                                                                    11   ttAikkA u u l U i mo4t po*iliitt idt.a to *nuolut.                 a uhol*.
H«adt»uh»r                                                                                                             c o m m un ity /u a a lo n g t i M t ,

                                                                                                                            7ht. tmphU4i* on a U uytA from pAjt-tcAt.il to ptnncntAt ■■■“ do
                                                                                                                       moAt to pA.oU.cl tht aA±a including th*. houtL iLtilf. than anutfung
                                                                                                                       40 /at.                                                                             w      w
                                                                                                                               (jrood L u c k «

                                                                                                                                                               yOUAA iiiiC A A A jjf,




                                                                                                                                                                  ^UULUCm               f
                                                                                     S h m fim M
                                                                                 insulations
                                                                                 B   ra u p
                                                                             p it:




           io m m   ADSstts
Fy6m


           CLIVE B&TTS
To



           LHADKR'S OFFICE
At



                                                                    I230PM
Date ..................                  . Ti^e



Total Number vi’ Pages iinciting this page -




                                                                                              -s;^-



                               ffim -M ig h Wefts, $ ^ m kiS $ 2L W , Sngfafid
                              Tetiphtm 0742 8S28S2
                              fax CteujM 1 m &?& 34f602
      HILLSBOROUGH COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT TRUST
           Anfield House    1-13 Holme Lane   SHEFFIELD SB 4JP    Is!: (0742) 322474




                     FEES!      1KF0&MAT108


                 TUESDAY' 8-th OCTOBER 1991


  * Disaster Appeal Fmtd Award for Hillsborough Charity *


This afternoon in Hillsborough Park the trustees of the
Hillsborough Disaster Appeal Fund will present'a cheque tor
£10,000 to’ the Hillsborough Community Development -Trust. The
award is being made as a contribution to the cost ox; re-
creating, the Victorian, walled Garden in the Park which the
Trust is undertaking.    This cheque is the first instalment of a
larger sunt which is being given to ensure .the Gatdan* s long­
term well-being*

In making this award froiu the-Disaster Fund the trustees are
helping to create a garden which will provide -an opportunity to
a l l ’sectors of the coaauroity - ranging from the blind and
disabled      to those deeply influenced by the tragedy - the
families, the police and the people of -Hi-llsborough*

The Wailed Garden site, where work is now well underway by
volunteers, apprentices, trainees and Probation Service, wiii
include ornamental- gardens, nursery area and greenhouse, a
wild-life area and a memorial garden*.

Speaking, on behalf        of the trustees? ;Soraan    Adsetts OOK saia
’'the Walled Garden        in Hillsborough will be a living tribute to
the members  of .the       Hillsborough comuuni ty;,who provided so j a u c i i
help and support to         those who were affected by the tragedy'%

The cheque for £10.000 was presented to local'resident Denise
Hesp who    is Chair of the Wailed Garden Wocking Group by tSoraan
Adsetts,     Present at the presentation were. Councillors Clive
Betts and Peter Price, Trevor Hicks f c o m tha Hillsborough
Family Support Group,- Acting Chief Superintendent HcRobbie of
the Sout h 'Yorkshire'Police, Graham Makrell from Sheffield
Wednesday FC and Michael Reddington, Disaster Trust Fund
Manager *




       a   Registered Chanty No. 1003101         •Company No. 2808546
Notes to Editor


A photo~opportunity will b& available at 3,30 pm at the I h tiled
G a r d e n , a d j a c e n t , Hillsborough Library
                                Middlewood Road
                                Sii 11 sb o r on « h
                                SHEFFIELD ~
                                •35


 For further information ors the WaJLied G a r d e n Project and the
 Hillsborough Community Development Trust Contact4      ,
 Paul Wes t o n 5 Director     day 0742 322474
                           evening 0246 238994


 For -further information about the Disaster Appeal Fund
 contacts
 Michael R e d d i n g t o n , Trust Fund. Manager
                                              051 236 0044 or
                                       051   652   6 03 ; .
