        Sheffield Archives




Temporary Number: HRS’/I /i
                                                                           /V V A sJ

DRAFT REPORT                                                          /*   / ^   k     J

REPORT OF THE ACTING HEAD OF ADMINISTRATION AND LEGAL DEPARTMENT TO
THE POLICY COMMITTEE

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - OVERVIEW AND PROPOSALS FOR FUTURE


Purpose of Report

           The purpose of this report is to provide a summary of action taken

by the City Council since the Hillsborough disaster and also to address

the general recommendations of the Taylor Report regarding the issuing

of safety certificates by the City Council as the enforcing authority.

Copies of the following reports are attached

(a)       Report of the Director of Social Services to Family and Community

           Services Programme Committee on 10th May on the involvement of

           the staff of his Department and recommending the setting up of

           a task team.   The recommendations were approved.
          d
(b)       Report of the Director of Libraries and Information Services to

           this Committee on 23rd May.

(c)       Report of the Director of Health and Consumer Services to Health

          and Consumer Services Programme Committee on 20th June concerning

          the involvement of his Department's staff.

(d)       Report of the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department

          to General Purposes Panel on 17th August, 1989 advising members

          of interim action taken.

(e)       Report of the Acting Head of Administration and Legal Department

          to MEGS Programme Committee on 18th September together with supporting

      ^   documents which informed members of action a^I|eady taken and made

          a number of recommendations for future action.       The recommendations

          of the Committee will be reported verbally.

(e)       A copy of the Prohibition Notice served on Owlerton Sports Stadium.

(f)       Copies of letters from South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service,

          the Building Surveyor, Department of Land and Planning and the
                                                       tifa t
          Director of Health and Consumer Services oiTtlTta- review of the

          administration and inspection system.

Summary of Action Taken

The report to MEGS Programme Committee summarises the action which has

already been taken by the Council in its capacity as licensing authority

and no need is seen to repeat it here; however, members should be aware

that the General Purposes Panel, acting under delegated powers, considered

a report of the Advisory Group at its meeting on 15th September concerning

Owlerton Stadium and resolved to serve a Prohibition Notice with immediate

effect.

          Members should also be aware that the Advisory Group is at present

being chaired by one of the Department's Principal Solicitors as an interim

measure pending a decision by the Council on its future and to respond

to the views of the Taylor Report that the Group should be chaired by a

senior officer.

          Finally, the views of other interested bodies and Departments have

been requested on how the responsibilities of the Council should be carried

out in future; as already indicated, copies of these observations are

attached.

Matters for Consideration

A number of matters now require members' considerationj these include

(i)       The staffing requirements necessary for the effective and efficient

          running of the licensing service.

(ii)      The level of fees which should be charged for the issuing of

          certificates and the length of such certificates.

(iii)     The future administrat$W|ive arrangments required to operate the

          service.

This report addresses these three issues in turn.

(i }      Staffing

          It has to be said that the existing staffing arrangements in the
                                                -   3 -

        Licensing Section of my Department are totally incapable of handling

        the additional volume of work likely to arise from the implementation

        of the recommendations of the Taylor Report as well as the existing

        licensing obligations.          Members will see that the report to MEGS

        recognises this and proposes a new structure and additional staffing

        to handle the inceased workload.            It has to be said that the additional

        expenditure of £26,400 needed to implement this additional staffing

        requirement cannot be found from within the provisional cash limit
           ..   y f   j

  ^                       to the Department for 1990/91.   It may be possible to

        meet some limited expenditure in the remainder of the current financial

        year but not in a full year.

(ii)    Fees

        At the present time fees are not charged by the Council for the

        issuing or amendment of any safety certificate.           Regulation 14

        of the Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations 1976 enables a local

        authority to "determine the fees to be charged in respect of

        applications for the issue or amendment of safety certificates

        but such fees must not in a particular case exceed an amount commensurate

        with the work actually and reasonable done".

                The guidance quoted in the Taylor Report is that every safety

        certificate should be reviewed annually and renewed annually^

        therefore it can only be assumed that the expenditure will increase.

                Accordingly it is recommended that with immediate effect fees

        be charged to all applicants for safety certificates at whatever

        level is considered to be appropriate for the work done - clearly,

        fees may be different in different cases.           Any increased income

        would of course be used to offset the increased expenditure referred

        to above.

iiii)   Future Administrative Arrangements

        Paragraphs 16 and 17 of the interim recommendations of the Taylor

        Report state that a local authority should review its administrative
                        arrangements and set up aao. effective Advisory Group with a Chairman

                        from the local authority and an effective procedure which should

                        produce regular written reports for consideration by the local

                        authority.

                             The revised administrative structure that is summarised in

                        the report to MEGS Programme Committee would in my view provide

                        an administrative structure within my Department which would enable

                        the Council to deal adequately with the administration of the certificate,

                        but clearly the Council must consider whether its procedures would

                        need to be amended in the light of the recommendations.

                             So far as the Advisory Group recommendation is concerned,

                        such a Group already exists, although it does not have representatives

                        from the Clubs and Supporters' Club and is at present chaired by

                        one of my Principal Solicitors.    Members may wish to consider whether

                        these arrangements are considered satisfactory or whether it would

                        be appropriate for the local authority Chairman to be a member

                        rather than an officer.    In any event, members should consider

   kiA-    fun     \ whether it is desirable that an Advisory Group reporting directly
      TW? wctoI
      ,
) ' < ? afr        I to the Council     on matters related to safety of   the public should
'tk,. 7ne.e,(Xuf   I.     1 ^           ^
                   ' inc^u°e representatives of the Clubs and Supporters' Clubs or whether

                        an additional body including representatives of Clubs and Supporters'

                        Clubs should be created to advise the Advisory Group as and when

                        appropriate.

                            Finally, any consideration of the Council's procedures must

                        clearly include the formal decision-making process of the Council.

                     At present thepowers      and duties of the Council under the   Safety

                     of Sports Grounds      Act 1975 are delegated to the General Purposes

                     Panel of MEGS Programme Committee, with urgent matters delegated

                     further to m e .   Members need to consider whether this arrangement

                     is satisfactory, and if not, whether another Committee or Sub-
                                              -   5 -

            Committee of the Council should be responsible for such matters.
      \A       ^                                                    C i't
      X'.   Members need to be aware that Annual Council resolved           its meeting

            on 17th May that         the powers and duties exercised by MEGS

            Programme Committee in relation to licensing matters be referred

            to the Health and Consumer Services Programme Committee

                   It would seem to be consistent with that decision that the

            licensing functions of the Council should in due course be transferred

            to Health and Consumer Services Programme Committee, presumably

            at the same time as this Committee considers the date of transfer

            of the other licensing functions.     Such a decision should, however,

            take into account the need to consider what level the delegation

            to the Programme Committee and any Panels or offices would need

            to be established.

Recommendations

Members are asked to note this report and to

(i)         agree with the proposed new staffing structure and to indicate

            how this should be funded;

(ii)        agree with the basis of charging fees; and

(iii)       consider what Committee/Panel/Officer arrangements should       be brought

            into force to deal with the statutory responsibilities of       the Council

            under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.




MARK WEBSTER

Acting Head of Department
                       S H E F F I E L D    C I T Y   C O U N C I L




                            EMERGENCY SUB-COMMITTEE (POLICY)

              Meeting to be held on Tuesday, 21st March, 1989 at 9.00 a.m.
                                    in the Town Hall


                  PUBLIC INSPECTION OF DOCUMENTS AND ACCESS TO MEETING

     (a)     The documentation and items to be discussed in public at the meeting
             may, in the first instance, be inspected by contacting the Local
             Government Information Service, 67 Surrey Street, Sheffield 1.
             The Service is open between 11.30 a.m. - 1.00 p.m. and 2.00 p.m.
             - 4.00 p.m. - Monday to Friday.   For further details telephone
             734750.  Certain information may not be available for public
             inspection.

     (b)     For items (if any) marked * it is anticipated that the press and
             public may be excluded from the meeting.

     (°)     If indicated in the agenda, reports are either not available to
             the press and public or not available until the start of the meeting
             for the reasons shown.



                                       A G E N D A

    1.       EXCLUSION OF PRESS AND PUBLIC
              To identify items where resolutions may be moved to exclude the
             press and public.
                  _
*   2.       WORLD STUDENT'GAMES - PROVISION OF LEISURE AND RECREATIONAL
             FACILITIES - FINANCIAL AND ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE
             To consider, under the powers delegated to the Sub-Committee
             by the City Council on 4th January, 1989, a joint report
             of the City Treasurer and the Head of Administration
N            and Legal Department.              (Copy report herewith)

    (NOTE:   The report referred to in item 2 is not available to the public
             and press because it contains exempt information described in
             paragraphs 5, 7 and 9 of Schedule 12A to the Local Government Act
             1972, as amended by the LocaI_Goveriiment (Access to Information)
             Act 1985 relating respectively to (i) any particular applicant.for,
             or recipient or former recipient of, any financial assistance provided
             by the authority, (ii) the financial or business affairs of any
             particular person (other than the authority) and (iii) any terms
             proposed or to be proposed by or to the authority in the course
             of negotiations for a contract for the acquisition or disposal
             of property or the supply of goods or services.)
/Ooo
n z ° .
I H 0 0 ,

       c ,
           HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER APPEAL DRAFT MEMORANDUM

         ON SUPPORT TO ORGANISATIONS FROM CHARITABLE FUND



                      SHEFFIELD-BASED PROJECTS




             1)   Hospitals

                        Royal Hallamshire ) , f a*/-
                        Northern General I     /                       ’
                        ......
                        Keighley


            2)    Hillsborough Community*—    ffC'fAt/JT j t C i / R



                        St John's Ambulance

            4)    Churches — ell (JrCfir,.


            5)    Sheffield University/Polytechnic 1
                       Memorial Scholarships      j              @

            6)    Youth Training Projects




WNA/CMR/MLC/3.12.90
                  HOME OFFICE


                                                              ^   i/ Z
   THE HILLSBOROUGH
    STADIUM DISASTER K                                              v Jlr

                    15 APRIL 1989                             U


          INQUIRY BY
THE RT HON LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR ^A ^


              INTERIM REPORT

                        Presented to Parliament
           by the Secretary ofState for the Home Department
                      by Command o f Her Majesty
                              August 1989


          CONFIDENTIAL FINAL REVISE
          NOT FOR PUBLICATION, BROADCAST OR
          USE ON CLUB TAPES BEFORE
          11.00 am         FRIDAY 4 AUGUST
          This document is issued in advance
          on the strict understanding that
   ',»•   no approach is made to any
          organisation or person about its
          contents before the time of
          publication.
                                     CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION
PART I - WHAT HAPPENED AT HILLSBOROUGH?
CHAPTER 1 - THE G R O U N D AND PRE-MATCH
ARRANGEMENTS
       Fixing The Venue
       The G round
       The Turnstiles
       Travel to the G round
       Allocation o f Places and Tickets
       Access from Leppings Lane
       Inside the Leppings Lane Turnstiles
       Policing Arrangements
       Sheffield Wednesday’s Arrangements
        Police Communications
CHAPTER 2 - 1 5 APRIL: THE BUILD UP TO 2.30 pm
       Early Arrivals
       Public Houses
       The Gathering Crowd
CHAPTER 3 - TH E CRISIS AT THE TURNSTILES
       “ Open the Gates”
CHAPTER 4 - THE DISASTER
CHAPTER 5 - THE AFTERMATH
       Rescue Attempts
       First Aid
       In the Control Room
       No Information
       M isinformation
       Public Announcements
       Fire Brigade
       South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service (SYMAS)
       Gym nasium
       The D ead and the Injured
CHAPTER 6 - SPECIFIC INCIDENTS

 PART II - WHY DID IT HAPPEN?
 CHAPTER 7 - THE LAYOUT AT THE LEPPINGS LANE END
         The History
         The 1981 Semi-final
         Three Pens
         The 1985 Changes
         New Radial Fences
       ' Barriers
         The Turnstiles and Concourse
         Barrier 144
         Effects o f the Layout
                                                                          Paragraph       Page
CHAPTER 8 - LACK O F FIXED CAPACITIES FOR THE PENS                                         24
       Departures from the Green Guide                                         139
       S afety Certificate                                                     143
       Why was the Safety Certificate not Amended?                             147
       The City Council                                                        150
       Summary                                                                 159
CHAPTER 9 -L A C K O F EFFECTIVE M ONITORING O F TH E TERRACES                              28
       Who should M onitor the Terraces?                                       161
       The Interim Popplewell Report                                           163
       The Final Popplewell Report                                             164
       Arrangements at Hillsborough                                            166
       Case for the South Yorkshire Police                                     168
       Harris -v- Sheffield United Football Club Limited                       169
       Police Practice at the Leppings Lane End                                170
       “ Find Their Own Level”                                                 171
       When is an Area “ Full” ?                                               175
       Fear of Hooliganism                                                     182
       Summary                                                                 183
CHAPTER 10- T H E BUILD-UP AT THE TURNSTILES                                                33
       The Physical Layout                                                     186
       The N um ber o f Turnstiles                                             187
       The “ Late” Arrival o f Liverpool Fans                                  191
       Traffic Delays                                                          193
       Fine Weather and Drinking                                               194
       Was Drunkenness a M ajor Factor in the Crisis at the Turnstiles?        196
       Reduced Efficiency o f the Turnstiles                                   198
       Were Fans Without Tickets a Major Factor in the Build-Up?               200
       The “ Conspiracy” Theory                                                203
       Liverpool Supporters at Away Matches                                    205
       No Conspiracy                                                           208
       The Police Operation at Leppings Lane                                   209
       Previous Experience                                                     213    '
       Policing in 1988                                                        214
       Police Intelligence in Advance                                          216
       Police Intelligence on the Day                                          221
       M r Marshall and Mr Greenwood                                           222
       Control Lost       “                                                    223
       Postponement o f Kick-off                                               226
       Summary                                                                 228
CHAPTER 11 - THE BLUNDER ON OPENIN G T H E GATES                               -            40
CHAPTER 12 - THE BARRIERS IN PEN 3                                                          41
       Barrier 144                                                             233
       When did Barrier 124a Fail?                                             236
       D r Eastwood’s Testing o f the Barriers                                 237
       Corrosion                                                               240
       Causation                                                               243
CHAPTER 13- T H E CRUSHING NOT RECOGNISED                                                   43
       Observation from Control Room                                           244
       Officers on the Track                                                   245


                                                  iv
CHAPTER 14 - TH E RESPONSE O F THE POLICE
       The Officers in Com mand
       Police on the Pitch
       Fans on the Pitch
       False Reports
CHAPTER 15 - TH E PERIM ETER GATES WERE TOO SMALL

PART III - CONCLUSIONS
CHAPTER 16 - BRIEF SUMMARY O F CAUSES

CHAPTER 17 - TH E FA’S CHOICE OF G R O U N D

CHAPTER 18-P O L IC E
       Choice o f Ends by the Police
       Police Planning
       Policing on the Day
       The Police Case at the Inquiry
CHAPTER 19 - TH E CITY COUNCIL AND THE SAFETY CERTIFICATE
CHAPTER 20 - TH E CLUB AND DR EASTWOOD
CHAPTER 21 - FIRST AID AND EM ERGENCY SERVICES
       No Fault by the Emergency Services
CHAPTER 22 - COMMUNICATIONS
PART IV - INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS
CHAPTER 23 - IN TRO D U C TIO N
       Limited Objectives
       Perim eter Fences
       Reduced Numbers
       Safety Certificate
CHAPTER 24 - TH E RECOMMENDATIONS
       M axim um Capacities for Terraces
       Filling and M onitoring Terraces
       Fences and Gates
       Crush Barriers
       Safety Certificates
       Duties o f each Football Club
       Police Planning
       Communications
       Co-ordination o f Emergency Services
       First Aid, Medical Facilities and Ambulances
APPENDICES
1.   Plan o f Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, Hillsborough Ground
2.   Leppings Lane: the perim eter gates and turnstiles
3.   The west stand a n d terraces
4.   Arrangement o f barriers at west terrace
5.   The west terraces a t 2.59 pm
6.   Specific incidents
           M r Hicks’ Evidence
           The Goalkeeper and G ate 4 •
           Oxygen
           Calling the Fire Service
           M r Kenny Dalglish
7.   List o f parties and their representation
8.   List o f those giving oral evidence to the Inquiry in order o f appearance
The Rt Hon Douglas H urd CBE. MP
Secretary o f State for the Home Departm ent


                       THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER
                                   15 APRIL 1989

                                      INTERIM REPORT OF INQUIRY


                                               INTRODUCTION

   1. On 15 April 1989 a football match to decide a semi-final round o f the FA Cup com petition was to be
played between the Liverpool and Nottingham Forest Clubs. The neutral venue chosen was Hillsborough
Football Stadium, Sheffield Wednesday’s ground. Only six minutes into the game, play was stopped when it
was realised that spectators on the terraces behind the Liverpool goal had been severely crushed. In the result,
95 died and over 400 received hospital treatm ent.

   2. On 17 April 1989 I was appointed by you to carry out an Inquiry with the following terms o f reference:

      To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday football ground on 15 April 1989 and to make
      recommendations about the needs o f crowd control and safety at sports events.

   3    Two Assessors were appointed to assist me: Mr Brian Johnson QPM, Chief Constable o f Lancashire,
and Professor Leonard M aunder OBE. BSc, PhD, ScD, FEng, FI Mech E, Professor o f Mechanical
Engineering at the University o f Newcastle upon Tyne. Their help has been invaluable and I am very grateful
for their expert advice and wise counsels. While the sole responsibility for this report is mine. I am comforted
in the knowledge that both Assessors agree with it.

   4. Mr Robert Whalley was appointed Secretary to the Inquiry. He and his assistants have worked
 prodigiously and skilfully to give me all the advice and support I could have wished. I also wish to acknowledge
 the help I have received, as always, from my clerk, M r Ernest Pott.

    5. The policing arrangements for 15 April were in the hands of the South Yorkshire Constabulary. The
 efficacy o f those arrangements and their im plem entation was from an early stage called into question. It was
 therefore decided that the investigation o f the disaster and the gathering o f evidence for this Inquiry should be
 conducted by an independent police force. Mr Geoffrey Dear QPM, Chief Constable o f West Midlands
 Constabulary, undertook this task. He was made responsible directly to me; he appointed Assistant Chief
 Constable Mervyn Jones to take full-time charge o f the investigation. I am deeply indebted to both o f them.

   6. On 18 April I visited Hillsborough Stadium. I inspected the scene of the disaster on the terraces and all
 relevant parts o f the stadium and its approaches. My Assessors and I have made further visits during the
 Inquiry. I also visited Liverpool on 21 and 29 April.
     7. The Lord Mayor and the Sheffield City Council kindly offered to make the accom m odation and facilities
 o f Sheffield Town Hall available for the hearing o f oral evidence. This offer was gratefully accepted and I would
 like to record my thanks for those facilities and for the co-operation afforded to the Inquiry by the authorities
 in Sheffield.
    8. On 28 April 1989,1 held a preliminary hearing to announce the date when the oral evidence would begin,
 to give some directions as to the procedure I intended to follow and to hear applications from those wishing to
 be represented at the hearing. I accorded representation to the following:
       (i)  Those bereaved or injured as a result o f the disaster.
       (ii) The Football Supporters’ Association.
       (iii) The Football Association.
       (iv) Sheffield City Council.
       (v) Sheffield Wednesday Football Club together with the Football League, the Club’s casual staff and
             their insurers, the Sun Alliance.
       (vi) South Yorkshire Constabulary.
       (vii) South Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence Authority.
Subsequently, during the hearing, I further accorded representation to:
     (viii) Trent Regional Health Authority, for the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service
            (SYMAS).
and (ix) D r W Eastwood, consultant engineer to Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

  9. Since the circumstances of the disaster raised urgent questions o f safety, especially at football grounds,
you indicated at the outset that you would welcome any recommendations, even of an interim nature, which I
might be able to give in advance o f the new football season due to commence in mid-August 1989.1 therefore
announced at the preliminary hearing on 28 April that I would conduct an oral hearing with all possible
expedition as the first phase o f the Inquiry to discover the facts and causes of the disaster and enable me to
make any immediate interim recom m endations necessary in the short term.

   10. The West M idlands Police investigation began on 24 April. A “Freephone” num ber was advertised to
enable members o f the public, especially those who had attended the match, to offer their evidence to the
Inquiry. Initially this num ber was available for three days on 28 different lines. The response from the public
was such that the lines were continued for a further three days by the end o f which 2,666 calls had been
received. There were also many written offers of help. Some 440 West Midlands officers were deployed on the
Inquiry. To service this operation, special police offices were established in Birmingham, Liverpool and
Sheffield and com puter technology was used to the full. In all some 3776 statements were taken. There were
also some 1550 letters to Ministers, to the Inquiry and to me personally all of which I read. The police,
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and the BBC had video cameras filming at the ground on 15 April. In
aggregate, they recorded some 71 hours o f film covering the period before, during and after the disaster. Thus
the material gathered and potentially available for presentation at the oral hearing was enormous. From this
mass it was essential to select only sufficient good and reliable evidence necessary to establish the facts and
causes of the disaster.

   11. Where it seemed likely that any allegation or criticism might be made o f the conduct of any person or
party, the Treasury Solicitor, after consultation with Counsel for the Inquiry, wrote to the party concerned
setting out the likely grounds for complaint. This followed the practice established by the Royal Commission
on Tribunals of Inquiry (the Salmon Commission).

  12. The hearing began on 15 May. It continued, sitting long hours, for 31 days concluding on 29 June. In
that period, 174 witnesses gave oral evidence. Counsel’s submissions were delivered in writing on 7 July and
on 14 July I heard their brief oral submissions supplementing the written argument.

  13. Witnesses were not sworn. Since this is a departm ental inquiry, there was no power to adm inister the
oath but there was no instance o f any witness giving evidence which I considered might have been different
had he or she been sworn.

   14. The witnesses called were only a small fraction of those from whom statements were or could have been
taken. Nevertheless, I am satisfied that they were sufficient in num ber and reliability to enable me to reach the
necessary conclusions. To have called more would have prevented me from presenting an interim report in the
required time and would not have added significantly to the relevant evidence. I have, however, been able to
take into account many written statements in addition to oral testimony.,

   15. Apart from the evidence called by CounseLfor the Inquiry which was drawn from statements taken by
the West Midlands Police and others volunteered by individuals, each of the represented parties was given full
opportunity to put forward any witnesses they considered should be called. A final submission was made by
Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police that since the investigation by West Midlands Police is still continuing,
all the evidence has not been assembled and it would be unsafe for me to make findings o f fact. I should
therefore make clear that the investigation continues principally to furnish as much detail as possible to HM
Coroner for the City o f Sheffield as to the cause o f death, the precise position at death and the care and
movement of each of the 95 victims individually. 1 am assured by Chief Constable Dear and Assistant Chief
Constable Mervyn Jones that it is most unlikely any further evidence gathered will significantly alter or add to
the history of events which emerged at the hearing.

  16. 1 should like to thank all those who made it possible for the oral hearing to take place so soon after the
event and for evidence to be efficiently presented and tested so as to give a full and fair account o f what
happened in all its aspects without irrelevancy or duplication. 1 pay tribute particularly to the West Midlands
Police for their speed and dedication in gathering the evidence and to-all those responsible for processing it.
The most eloquent tribute to the fairness and thoroughness of the police investigation came from the Secretary
o f the Football Supporters’ Association. He said there had been initial anxiety in Liverpool as to whether that
investigation would be fair and objective. His Association therefore collected 200 witness statements
themselves. Having heard the opening statement by Counsel to the Inquiry based upon the evidence gathered
by the police, he found that it accorded entirely with his Association’s evidence and the initial anxiety was
wholly dispelled.

   17. Before and during the Inquiry I derived great assistance on a wide range of technical issues from the
Health and Safety Executive who providentially have a laboratory in Sheffield (the Research and Laboratory
Services Division) where tests were conducted and reports prepared swiftly and efficiently. This was done
in close consultation with Professor Maunder. I am most grateful to the Director, D r A Jones, and to the
Deputy Director, D r C E Nicholson, for their invaluable help.

  18. I wish to com m end Counsel to the inquiry, M r Andrew Collins QC, Mr Alan Goldsack and Mr
Bernard Phillips for their industry, care and fairness in selecting and presenting the necessary evidence; also,
Counsel for all those represented who tested that evidence fully but expeditiously. This Interim Report could
not possibly have been prepared in so short a time had I not had the whole-hearted co-operation o f all those
m entioned and many others.

   19. The second phase of the Inquiry will be directed to making final arid long term recom m endations about
crowd control and safety at sports grounds. I need to consider in depth information, opinions and arguments
from a wide range o f sources and contributors both here and abroad. It was clear from the outset that this
second phase could not be carried to completion before the next football season. However, at an early stage of
the oral hearing I invited evidence from all who wished to contribute to it and specifically from m any sporting,
local authority, emergency service and police bodies as well as technical consultants. I asked that submissions
should be in writing and should be m ade prom ptly so that the second phase o f the Inquiry could
follow immediately after the first. I shall now proceed to consider the large body of written evidence which has
been submitted. I shall want in some instances to have further oral evidence or discussion in conjunction with
my Assessors. We will also need to make a num ber o f visits and inspections.

  20. I now present my Interim Report and Recommendations. I shall prepare my Final Report and
 Recommendations as soon as reasonably possible.




 1 August 1989                                                                              PETER TAYLOR




                                                         3
                  PART I - WHAT HAPPENED AT HILLSBOROUGH?
                                                 CHAPTER1

                         T H E G ROUND AND PRE-M ATCH ARRANGEM ENTS

Fixing The Venue
  21. On 20 March 1989, the Football Association (the FA) requested that their Cup semi-final between
Liverpool and N ottingham Forest be held on 15 April at Hillsborough Football Stadium. The corresponding
semi-final between the same two teams had been held there in April 1988. The arrangements had been
successful in the view both o f the police and of the host club. Sheffield Wednesday (the Club) were therefore
willing to accom m odate the 1989 match. South Yorkshire Constabulary were prepared to police it but only if
the ticketing arrangements were the same as those for 1988. Otherwise, the FA would have to look elsewhere.
Those arrangements did not please Liverpool or its supporters either in 1988 or 1989. They thought the ticket
allocation was unfair for reasons to be explained later. Reluctantly, however, the police requirement was
accepted and the m atch was fixed for 15 April at Hillsborough.

The Ground.
  22. The Hillsborough Stadium is some 2'/: miles to the north-west of central Sheffield in the district of
Owlerton. The ground was opened in 1899 on what was then a greenfield site by the river Don. The pitch lies
roughly east to west. A plan of the ground and its im mediate environs is at Appendix 1.

  23. The west end, with which this Inquiry is principally concerned, is known as the Leppings Lane end. The
east end abuts on Penistone Road, the A 61. To the south is the river Don and to the north a residential street,
Vere Road, which runs between Leppings Lane and Penistone Road North.

   24. Alongside the river is a private roadway giving access to the south stand, to the Directors’ and players’
entrances, and to the adm inistrative block under the stand. The roadway gives both vehicular and pedestrian
access between Penistone Road and Leppings Lane, but there are gates which can shut it off at each end. There
is some car parking along this roadway principally for Directors, players and employees of the Club. The south
stand dates from 1914 and is the oldest at the ground. It is all seating with'places for 8.800. 5.500 of those are
roofed over and 3,300 are uncovered.

  25. The north stand is also all seating and accommodates about 9.700. Behind it is a gymnasium or sports
hall. There are also a first aid room and police room close by.

  26. The east end is all terracing and is known as the Spion Kop. It was enlarged and roofed over in 1986 and
now accommodates some 21,000 standing spectators. There are crush barriers in the Kop running parallel to
the goal line but no dividing fences to prevent free movement from side to side.

   27. At the west or Leppings Lane end o f the ground there is terracing close to the pitch. Behind it is the west
stand which provides covered seating and was built in 1965 for World Cup matches, some of which were held
at Hillsborough in 1966. The covered stand accommodates 4.456 seated spectators. The terracing in front of it
extends higher in the comers between the stands and its total capacity was stated to Be 10.100. At both the Kop
end and the west end access to the pitch is barred by perim eter fencing. The fencing is about eight feet high
m ounted upon the low wall at the foot of the terracing. At the top of the fencing the wire returns back at a sharp
angle for some 15 inches to make it difficult for anyone to climb over towards the pitch. There are gates at
intervals along the perim eter fencing to afford access between terrace and pitch. These gates are less than a
metre wide and were designed to be opened only from the pitch side for police purposes or in an emergency.
They are marked and num bered on the plan Appendix 1.

   28. Unlike the Kop end, the west terracing has not only crush barriers parallel with the goal line but radial
fences at right angles to it, dividing the area into pens. This division was begun after an FA Cup semi-final in
 1981 when crushing occurred due to overcrowding and gates had to be opened. It proceeded in stages, the final
arrangement being shown on the plan Appendix 1. The first section of the west terracing moving south to north
contains gates 1 and 2 and is known as pens 1 and 2 although in fact constituting only one pen. Next is pen 3
with one gate; next pen 4 with one gate; pen 5. which is extremely narrow, was intended as a sterile area to
divide pen 4 from pen 6. This was to isolate home and away fans on occasions when both might be
accommodated on the west terracing in separate pens. Finally there is pen 7 at the north-west corner. Pens 5,6
and 7 each have a perim eter gate. At the back of the pens, under the front o f the west stand, there is a gate in


                                                         4
each radial fence. When those gates are open, the back row of the terracing is intended to permit access from
pen to pen along the whole west side. In practice, when substantial numbers are present, those gateways are not
readily visible or accessible. The present layout o f the pens, fences, crush barriers and gates has resulted from a
series o f piecemeal changes. The nature and effect of those changes must be considered later.

The Turnstiles
  29. Because of the housing in Vere Road there is no access from the north side o f the ground. Along
Penistone Road North there are some 46 turnstiles which usually give access both to the Kop and to the east
end o f the north stand. They are marked 43 to 88 inclusive on the plan. The 12 numbered 77 to 88 are designed
to feed the north stand but were not used for that purpose on 15 April in order to segregate supporters o f the
two teams as appears later. Two o f them. 77 and 78. were however used for access to the Kop.

  30. At the south side of the ground there were 24 turnstiles (numbered 19 to 42 on the plan). Those
numbered 37 to 42 led to the Kop and the rest to the south stand.

  31. In summary, the south and east sides o f the ground accommodated some 29,800 whose access on the
day was through 60 turnstiles.

  32. The other two sides of the ground, north and west, with a capacity of 24,256 were fed solely from the
Leppings Lane entrance where there were only 23 turnstiles.

Travel to the Ground
  33. Most supporters were expected to come by road although rail transport was available. Nottingham
supporters travelling by train would arrive at the m ain line Sheffield Midland Station whence they would be
directed and escorted northwards by the police. They would arrive at the ground along Penistone Road.
Nottingham supporters travelling by coach, m ini-bus or car would approach Sheffield from the south mainly
on the M 1. Again their arrival at the ground would predominantly be via Penistone Road or Herries Road.

   34. Liverpool supporters travelling by normal rail service would arrive at Sheffield Midland Station just
like their Nottingham counterparts. The police aim ed to segregate the rival fans and put them into separate
coaches. Liverpool fans could alternatively travel by special train to Wadsley Bridge, a British Rail station
catering solely for football supporters and situated to the north of the ground. A police escort was available to
conduct them on foot to the Leppings Lane entrance. Those coming from Liverpool by road would approach
Sheffield either via the M62 and down the M 1 from the north or across the Pennines from the north west. All
such routes would bring them to the ground via one or other limb o f Leppings Lane as shown on Appendix 1.
Broadly, therefore, arrivals from Liverpool would be from the north and west; arrivals from Nottingham
would be from the south and east.

 Allocation of Places and Tickets
   35. Experience in recent years has produced a policy o f segregation to prevent trouble between supporters
 of rival teams. The need for this policy to be m aintained was endorsed and emphasised by the Popplewell
 Report following the Bradford City disaster in 1985. Accordingly, before the 1988 semi-final the police decided
 that sections of the Hillsborough Stadium should be allocated so as to achieve efficient segregation of
 Liverpool and Nottingham Forest fans. The section to be granted to each was determined by the direction
 whence each predominantly approached. Thus, Liverpool were allotted the north and west sides of the ground
 for which access was from Leppings Lane. Nottingham Forest were allotted the south and east sides with access
 from Penistone Road.

    36. The effect o f the decision was that for this all-ticket Cup Tie, Liverpool were allotted only 24,256 places
 as against 29,800 for Nottingham Forest. This, although average attendance of supporters at home matches
 was substantially higher at Liverpool than at Nottingham. Moreover, with standing tickets at £6 and seats at
 £12, Nottingham Forest had 21.000 standing places com pared with Liverpool’s 10.100. So. Liverpool’s
 allocation was more expensive as well as smaller. Understandably, Liverpool were aggrieved by the allocation
 of places and tickets. They sought with some support from the host club and the FA to have it changed in
 1988, but the police were adamant. To switch ends would, in their opinion, have involved rival supporters
 crossing each other’s paths when approaching the ground thereby frustrating attempts at segregation and
 creating a risk o f disorder. In 1989, when the same plan was proposed, Liverpool again challenged it. The
 police, however, maintained their view, adding that those who had attended in 1988 would be familiar with the
 arrangements and that any change would lead to confusion.
Access from Leppings Lane
   37. As the plan Appendix 1 shows, the approach to the west turnstiles is across a narrow neck or forecourt at
a bend in Leppings Lane where, coming from the north, it turns to the south-west and crosses a bridge over the
river Don. Parking areas for the Liverpool supporters had been arranged north and west o f the ground. They
were therefore expected to arrive on foot along both limbs o f Leppings Lane and would converge on the
forecourt at the bend. In an arc across that forecourt is a line o f railings with six sets o f double gates. Inside
those perim eter gates is the short approach to the turnstiles. As shown in the photographs Appendix 2. the
latter are in two sections divided by a fence. The northern section consists of turnstiles 1 to 16. Num bers 1 to
10 gave access to the north stand. Thus there were 10 turnstiles for the 9.700 with north stand seats. Their
tickets were marked “Entrance A” and were colour-coded brown. Turnstiles 1 to 10 correspondingly had the
letter A above them and brown boards on the wall.

   38. Turnstiles 11 to 16 were for those with seats in the west stand. Thus 4.456 were served by six turnstiles.
They were the next block to the right of those marked A. However, instead of these turnstiles and the west stand
tickets being marked B as might alphabetically have been expected, they were marked C. Their colour-code on
tickets and boards was red.

   39. On the other side of the dividing fence in the approach area, there were only seven turnstiles to serve
 10.100 with tickets for the west terracing. Those seven turnstiles were labelled A to G. This was because there
had originally been 18 turnstiles at Leppings Lane and the sequential numbering continued from 19 upwards
on the south side of the ground. When the num ber at Leppings Lane was brought up to 23 the present
arrangements o f 1 to 1-6, A to G and then 19 upwards was adopted to avoid re-numbering all round the ground.
However, above the lettering A to G was a large letter B. “Entrance B” also appeared on tickets for the west
terrace. Thus, the three blocks of turnstiles encountered by a ticket holder at the Leppings Lane end read from
left to right A, C, B. The colour-code for west terrace tickets and the boards beside turnstiles A to G was mauve.
To the right o f turnstile G is a tubular steel barrier to divide the queue for that turnstile from the roadway to the
south stand.

Inside the Leppings Lane Turnstiles
  40. Turnstiles 1 to 10 gave access to a passageway leading to the north stand. There is an exit gate (marked A
on Appendix 1) between turnstile 1 and the adjacent housing.

  41. Inside turnstiles 1 to 16 is a concourse leading to pens 6 and 7 and the steps to the west stand. There is a
wall dividing this area from that inside turnstiles A to G. It had been built to segregate hom e and away fans at a
time when the Club intended they should share the west terrace. That idea was not pursued but the wall
remained. There was, however, a gateway in the wall which did permit access between the two areas. An exit
gate (marked B on Appendix 1) was provided from the area inside turnstiles 11 to 16.

  42. Finally, anyone using turnstiles A to G entered a concourse bounded on the left by the wall just
m entioned and on the right by the wall of the private roadway coming from the south stand to Leppings Lane.
There was an exit gate in the latter wall (marked C on Appendix 1) just inside turnstile G.

  43. All three exit gates, A. B and C. were of concertina design. They could be opened only from the inside
and were not intended for entry o f spectators into the ground.

   44. Those entering through turnstiles A to G had three options once inside the ground. They could by
moving to the right go round the south end of the west stand and gain entry' into pens 1 and 2. They could go
through the gap in the dividing wall towards the concourse behind turnstiles 11 to 16 and then round the north
end o f the west stand into pens 6 or 7. However, there were no conspicuous signs inviting them to take either of
those courses. The obvious way in was straight ahead o f the turnstiles where a tunnel under the middle of the
west stand gave access to pens 3 and 4. Above its entrance in large letters was the word “Standing” and a large
letter “ B”. Thus B ticket holders were drawn towards the tunnel.

  45. The length o f the tunnel is some 23 metres. It rises slightly at first then levels off but finally descends
towards the terraces at a gradient o f 1 in 6. As it emerges onto the terrace, the way ahead is bisected by the radial
fence between pen 3 on the right and pen 4 on the left. A short spur o f brick wall projects forward from each side
of the tunnel at its mouth. Those emerging are thus guided straight forward rather than to either side. The
photograph at Appendix 3 shows the west stand and terraces.

  46. As with the layout on the terraces, the configuration o f the Leppings Lane turnstiles and the areas inside
them was effected by a series o f piecemeal changes. Again, it will be necessary to analyse their resultant effect.


                                                          6
Policing Arrangements
   47. At the 1988 semi-final, policing had been under the control o f Chief Superintendent Mole, then
C om m ander o f F Division within whose area Hillsborough lies. He was still in post on 20 March 1989 when
the FA broached the 1989 semi-final, but he was due to hand over command o f F Division on 27 March to
Superintendent Duckenfield on the latter s prom otion to C hief Superintendent. Both were present at an initial
meeting on 22 March, but on 27 March Mr Mole bowed out and M r Duckenfield took over. Under him were
Sector Commanders, all Superintendents with m uch experience o f policing football matches at Hillsborough
and elsewhere. In particular. Superintendent Marshall was in charge o f the area outside the Leppings Lane
entrance and the approaches to it. Superintendent Greenwood was in com m and inside the ground, but this
included the area between the turnstiles and the perim eter fence. They thereby swapped roles from the
previous year. Under Mr Duckenfield’s overall com m and were some 801 officers and men on duty at the
ground plus traffic officers and others from D Division to deal with the influx o f supporters into the city centre.
In all, therefore, some 1,122 police were deployed for this match amounting to about 3 8 per cent o f the total
South Yorkshire force. Included in the mounted section o f 34 were officers from Liverpool and Nottingham to
assist respectively in marshalling their home supporters. The total at the ground was divided into serials
consisting usually o f eight to ten Constables plus a Sergeant and an Inspector. The serials were posted to duties
at various stations in and around the ground in three phases: before, during and after the match. All o f this
was provided for in an Operational Order which followed closely the Order drawn up for the 1988 semi-final
and took into account the force’s “Standing Instructions for the Policing o f Football Grounds”. The Order
described the duties o f each serial at each phase. It was supplem ented by oral briefings before and on the day of
the match.

Sheffield Wednesday’s Arrangements
  48. The Club provided 376 stewards, gatemen and turnstile operators for duty on 15 April. The stewards
were briefed as to their duties on the morning o f the match by police Inspectors and were allocated round the
ground. They wore yellow tabards. The Club’s control room, situated below the south stand, could
cortimunicate by VHF radio with the stewards. Closed circuit television was installed by the Club with
screens in their control room showing all the turnstiles round the ground. A computerised counting system was
incorporated in the turnstiles. This flashed onto a screen in the Club control room the running total of
spectators passing through the turnstiles section by section. Thus, at the Leppings Lane end, there would be
separate running totals for turnstiles 1 to 10 (north stand), turnstiles 11 to 16 (west stand), and turnstiles A to G
(west terraces). When the total for any section was within 15 p ercent o f its permitted capacity a warning pulse
showed on the screen. For the west terracing that warning would occur when the numbers were within 15 per
cent o f the total terrace capacity o f 10.100. What the system could not do was m onitor the distribution o f fans
on the terracing, pen by pen. It could give no warning therefore if one pen was full beyond its safe capacity.

Police Communications
   49. The nerve centre for police control is the control room or box situated at the south-west com er o f the
ground between the south stand and pen 1 o f the west terracing. The box is elevated and reached by a number
o f steps. It has windows commanding views across the pitch and straight along the line o f the west perimeter
fence. The box is very small and has seats for only three officers. Superintendent Murray was in control o f it
and was advisor to M r Duckenfield as he had been to Mr Mole the year before. Next to him sat Sergeant
G oddard who operated the radios. The third seat was for Police Constable Ryan who operated the telephone
and public address systems. At the back o f the box stood Police Constable Bichard who was in control o f the
police closed circuit television system operated by a row o f consoles on a bench in front o f him and behind the
three seated officers.

   50. There were five television screens showing views o f five roving cameras fixed at high points on the
stands and directed both inside and outside the ground. There was also a master screen which flicked in
rotation from one camera view to another and which m ade a video recording. The cameras have a zoom
facility to close in on any point o f interest. Specifically, there were good camera views o f the west terracing, of
the Leppings Lane turnstiles and beyond them o f Leppings Lane itself.

  51. The Tannoy public address system was relayed through speakers fixed at vantage points inside the
ground and outside the turnstiles. It was used by a disc jockey, housed under the police control box, to relay
music before the match, but it could be overridden by the police. Messages could be relayed through all
speakers or if appropriate to one area onlv.
                                                              VT:




                                                         7
   53.   R adio contact at Hillsborough from control to serials operating both inside and outside the ground was
U H F on channel 25. There was a W1 FU. portable base station in the control box and if it failed there was a
stand-by station under the operator’s bench. Hand sets were issued to all ranks o f Sergeant and above.
C om m unity Constables on duty would already have their own. O ther Constables had no radio.
Com munication was on “talk through” i.e. any message from any source would be heard by everyone tuned in
and if more than one source spoke messages could become garbled. Ear pieces were issued to some officers in
an attem pt to overcome the loud crowd noise which made receipt o f signals very difficult. There were other
radio channels open to Sergeant Goddard: VHF to police Headquarters at Snig Hill, channel 35 to FI
Sub-divisional Headquarters at Hammerton Road and channel 19 used by CID. There was also a set tuned to
Sheffield Wednesday’s radio system between its control room and the stewards.
                                                  CHAPTER 2

                                   15th APRIL: THE BUILD-UP TO 2.30pm

Early Arrivals                                                ,
  54. 15 April 1989 was a warm sunny spring Saturday. The m atch was a sell-out, so 54,000 ticket holders
were expected. Others would come without tickets hoping to acquire them or even to gain access otherwise.
The following account concentrates, as did the evidence, bn the western approaches and the Liverpool
supporters since the disaster occurred at their end. They began to arrive in the Hillsborough area quite early in
small numbers. Some brought cans o f beer with them and were seen drinking as they walked: others took
advantage o f the weather and sat about on walls and open spaces. When the public houses opened, many
resorted there, drinking inside or spilling out into the sunshine. Leppings Lane and its environs comprise a
mixed shopping and residential area. Local residents saw groups o f Liverpool supporters keen to find a public
house or off-licence. Many were asking for tickets or “spares”. There were a few touts selling them at inflated
prices. From an early stage, some o f the fans were using private gardens and yards to urinate. As the morning
wore on. num bers increased. Requests for tickets and trespass to urinate also increased. Still the prevailing
mood was one of carnival, good hum our and expectation.

Public Houses
  55. There were some 74 shops with off-licences in and around Sheffield. In general, they opened at 8 am.
Liverpool supporters did visit them but the evidence did not suggest a great am ount of alcoholic drink was
bought there.

  56. Opening tim e at public houses was in general 11 am. Some remained closed all day. O f the others, some
72. mostly in the city, were frequented by local patrons only Some 23 public houses, however, served over a
hundred Liverpool supporters each. Another 51 served more than 20 each. Little trouble was reported, b u r
many supporters drank enough to affect their mood. At first excitement: later frustration.

The Gathering Crowd
   57. Towards the end o f the morning, fans gathered on and around the bridge near the Leppings Lane
entrance. They seemed reluctant to enter the ground early. All turnstiles were open at 12 noon and one or two
as early as 11.30 am. Some 53 police had been deployed to operate outside the turnstiles and in the Leppings
Lane area. They enquired at-random whether fans had tickets. Those who had hot were advised to go away;
nevertheless, many returned more than once. Those who had tickets were guided in the right direction. The
police tried to persuade them to enter the ground early. Officers, male and female, had been posted outside
each turnstile with the duty of searching entrants for weapons, drink or drugs. Once through the turnstile, an
entrant was liable to be searched again by one o f a serial,of officers positioned just inside.

   58. At about 12 noon Chief Inspector Creaser asked Superintendent Murray whether the pens on the west
terrace were to be filled one by one successively, but was told that they should all be available from the start and
the fans should find their own level.

  59. By 2 pm it was apparent to those inside the ground and those monitoring events in the police and Club
control room s that the num ber o f Nottingham fans in their places greatly outnum bered those from Liverpool.
The Kop and the south stand were filling up steadily, but the north and west stands were half empty. It was
noted about that tim e that the turnstile figures showed only 12.000 had entered as against 20,000 at the same
time the previous year. O n the west terraces, although pens 3 and 4 were filling, the wing pens 1,2,6 and 7 were
nearly empty. At 2.15 pm a Tannoy message asked fans in pens 3 and 4 to move forward and make room for
others.

  60. There had been three special trains from Liverpool in 1988. This time, there was only one. It arrived
early, just before 2 pm. at Wadsley Bridge station. The 350 passengers were met by both mounted and foot
police officers who escorted them in a crocodile down Leppings Lane. They were orderly and passed through
the turnstiles into the ground by about 2.20 pm without incident.

  61. By this time the police Traffic Division reported that the Liverpool routes were clear, so the majority of
Liverpool fans were in the Sheffield area. The numbers converging on the Leppings Lane entrance were
increasing rapidly. Between the perimeter gates and the turnstiles the crowd became congested. There was no
longer a separate queue at each turnstile but a single phalanx filling the whole approach area. The foot officers
outside the turnstiles were no longer able to search everyone and had difficulty in searching even selectively


                                                         9
M ounted officers in and outside the turnstile area were having difficulty manoeuvring in such a dense crowd.
The police were beset by fans bemused by the ticket and turnstile labelling asking for directions. Many had
been drinking but up to and just after 2.30 pm the m ood remained good.

  62.      Superintendent Marsball was on foot amongst the crowd. He became anxious about the numbers
coming down Leppings Lane and spilling out onto the roadway where buses and cars were moving. At 2.17
pm he radioed to control to have m otor traffic in Leppings Lane stopped. This was eventually done at about
2.30 pm . U p to this lime, despite the large mass outside the turnstiles and the numbers still approaching, there
was still no panic in the crowd; no perception of crisis by the police. In the control room M r Murray, who could
see Leppings Lane on the video, advised M r Duckenfield that they would get everyone in by 3 pm. Mr
Duckenfield reaffirmed to him the policy about a delayed kick-off. It would be ordered only if there was some
m ajor external factor such as fog on the Pennines o r delay on the motorway: not if spectators merely turned up
late even in large numbers.
                                                 CHAPTER 3

                                    THE CRISIS AT THE TURNSTILES

  63. In the 20 m inutes from 2.30 pm to 2.50 pm there were crucial developments both inside and outside
the ground. In pens 3 and 4 there was a steady increase in pressure as more fans came through the tunnel to the
favoured area behind the goal. By 2.50 pm these pens were already full to a degree which caused serious
discomfort to many well used to enduring pressure on terraces. The numbers at that tim e were clearly in excess
of the m axim um density stated by the Home Office Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (1986 Edn) (the Green
Guide) i.e. 54 persons per 10 square metres. (Although the Green Guide has no statutory or legal force, it is the
only official advice available about safety at sports grounds.) In the wing pens 1, 2. 6 and 7, there was still
ample room and bare patches o f concrete were visible.

  64. Meanwhile, the crowd grew at the Leppings Lane entrance. As more arrived at the back the crush at the
front grew worse, Entry to the turnstiles became more difficult. Their efficiency was im paired and their rate
reduced. Arrivals at trie back exceeded deliveries through the turnstiles, so the build-up increased. The foot
officers outside were unable to function and in danger themselves so they went through the turnstiles and out
again through gate C where they did what they could to relieve pressure by the tubular barrier. The mounted
officers were surrounded by the dense mass o f people and became ineffective. Superintendent Marshall was in
the m idst o f the turm oil. He extricated himself and stood on a parapet o f the bridge to get a clear view. A
drunken fan tried to push him off: a beer can was thrown at a m ounted officer. But these were isolated acts by
individuals; the menace camelfrom the massive numbers single-mindedly determ ined to be in for the kick-off
with tim e running out. At the back o f the crowd fans were frustrated by the lack o f progress as 3 o’clock
approached. Some, mostly young men who had been drinking, tried to push and force their way forward. At
the front, people were jam m ed together and against the turnstile walls. Some panicked as the pressure
intensified. Some youngsters and women were fainting and in distress. They were helped out through the
tubular barrier by turnstile G or were passed over the turnstiles elsewhere. Fans climbed up and over the
turnstile building or on to the dividing fence. This was to escape the crush rather than to gain free entry since
most o f them had tickets.

  65. At 2.44 pm M r Marshall radioed for reinforcements, for the Tannoy to request the crowd to stop
pushing and for a vehicle with loudspeaker equipment to come and request the same. Unhappily, at about 2.40
pm, radio com m unication on channel 25 became defective. For a period o f two or three minutes the control
room lost contact-. A com m unications officer came promptly and switched to thestandbv station. With the use
of a handset at control, contact was restored. Despite this hiatus, two o f Mr Marshall’s requests were received.
The Tannoy was used but with little effect. Reinforcements, including m ounted officers from Penistone Road,
were sent. The third request, for a Landrover, was received direct by its driver PC Buxton who arrived at 2.46
pm and urged the crowd by loudspeaker not to push. This was no more effective than the Tannoy. The
m ounted officers besieged near the turnstiles came outside the perimeter gates. An attem pt was m ade to shut
them against the crowd outside, to enable the throng inside to be dispersed or at least thinned through the
turnstiles. The pressure from without, however, opened the gates again. M ounted officers, now reinforced to
greater numbers, formed a cordon across the elbow o f Leppings Lane from the sweet shop to the bridge, again
with the object o f reducing pressure inside the gates. They were successful in this for some minutes despite
desperate individuals forcing their way under or between the horses. However, this exercise was overtaken by a
more dram atic relief o f the pressure.

“Open the Gates”
  66. Between 2.40 pm and 2.45 pm the crowd inside arid outside the turnstile approach had swelled to
over 5,000. At the head o f the phalanx conditions had become intolerable. Those who got through were short
of breath and sweating profusely. Many complained to police officers on the concourse inside the turnstiles
and asked them in forceful terms to do something. Exit gates A and B were being shaken. It was clear the crowd
could not pass through the turnstiles by 3 pm. Police Constable Buxton radioed from the Landrover to control
asking that kick-off be postponed. The suggestion was acknowledged but rejected.

   6    7. Superintendent Marshall realised the crowd had become unmanageable. Although loth to do so, since it
 was contrary to basic police strategy, he decided to request the exit gates be opened to relieve the pressure.
 Otherwise, he feared fatalities would occur. Other senior officers outside the ground agreed. At 2.47 pm he
 radioed control to perm it the gates to be opened. At 2.48 pm, whilst Mr Duckenfield was considering the
 request, gate C opened to eject a youth who had climbed in with no ticket. Immediately, fans outside took
 advantage and about 150 managed to get in before a mounted officer enabled the gate to be closed again. M r
 Marshall repeated his request. Still no response from control. He repeated it a third time, adding that if the


                                                        11
gates were not opened someone was going to be killed. In the control room, Mr Duckenfield had n o t made.a
decision. Mr Murray asked him “Are you going to open the gates?”. Mr Duckenfield gave the order and Sgt
Goddard radioed to M r Marshall “Open the gates”. N either the Club control room nor any police officers
inside the turnstiles were told o f this order before or after it was given or o f any action it would require.

  68. At 2.52 pm, gate C was opened wide. Fans behind turnstiles A to G and from the concourse beyond
came round to flow through it in large numbers.

   69. About two minutes later the pressure outside gate A led Sgt Higgins to radio, despite the gate man’s
objection, for it to be opened. If it was not, he said, “ It’ll go and someone will get killed”. Permission was given,
but this tim e reserve serials were alerted to m onitor the inrush towards the north stand. G ate B was also briefly
opened against the gateman’s wishes and about 200 o f those pressed at turnstiles A to G gained entry to their
left.

  70. The largest entry, however, was through gate C. In the five minutes it was open about 2,000 fans passed
through it steadily at a fast walk. Some may have had tickets for the stands. No doubt some had no tickets at all.
The majority had tickets for the terraces. O f these, some found their way either right to pens 1 and 2 or left
through the dividing wall to 6 and 7. But a large proportion headed straight for the tunnel in front o f them.
                                                 CHAPTER4

                                               THE DISASTER

   71. The initial influx through gate C. augm ented by entrants via the turnstiles, came through the tunnel
with great m omentum. Fans spoke o f being swept through, feet off the ground. The 1 in 6 gradient accelerated
their progress. Upon reaching the crowded pens, some wished to go back but weTe unable to do so. The new
arrivals found themselves pushed forward and the pressure became intense. At 2.54 pm , shortly after this
influx began, the teams came onto the pitch. As usual, this was greeted by a surge forward. Many were now
acutely uncomfortable and some were in distress. The mass seethed about but voluntary movement by any
individual was difficult: hands down could not be raised and some fans found it hard to breathe. Still the flow
continued through the tunnel causing further surges forward. There were shouts for help and for the gates to be
opened to the pitch. Police officers on the perim eter track did not immediately react. In the deafening noise
from chanting and shouting they did not at first recognise the problem. Realisation came at different moments
to different officers in different places.

   72. Gate 3 sprang open under the intense pressure from within. An officer quickly closed it. Shortly
afterwards, it sprang again: officers tried to shut it. Those seeking to escape were urged and pushed back. Gate
4 was opened by a policeman who noticed the crushing. People began to spill out through it and were directed
to the wing pens where there was still ample room. Meanwhile! gate 4 was closed again and then re-opened. At
gate 3. a Constable, now alive to the crisis, followed strictly his written orders and radioed for permission to
open that gate. Receiving no reply, he took it upon him self to open it.

  73. Just before 3 pm. the match kicked off. At the same time, gate C. which had been closed at 2.57 pm,
was reopened and a steady trickle continued to enter through the tunnel.

   74. To escape the crush, fans began climbing the radial fences out o f pens 3 and 4 into pens 2 and 5. Others
tried to get over the front perim eter fence but were at first turned back by police who feared a pitch invasion.
Near the front, fans, mostly youngsters, were weakened to the point o f collapse and in some instances death but
they were held upright by pressure all round. Further back, most were so preoccupied with the pain o f being
pressed against barriers and with breathing problems that they saw nothing o f the game. But at the rear there
were many who. although cramped, were watching the football unaware o f the distress at the front.

  75. At 3.04 pm, Beardsley for Liverpool struck the crossbar at the Kop end. There was a roar from the
Liverpool fans and at the same tim e a powerful surge forwards in pen 3. The several surges which occurred after
the influx from gate C carried the pressure down the pens towards the pitch. The force became such as to twist
and break two spans o f a crush barrier towards the front o f pen 3. The evidence does not establish with
certainty when this happened. Probably it was triggered by the surge at 3.04 pm. But I am sure it occurred after
the influx from gate C so greatly increased the pressure in the pen. When the barrier broke those whom it had
supported were projected towards the perim eter fence. Many fell and the involuntary rush o f those behind
pressed them down. The crushing force was transm itted and dispersed so that all along the front o f pen 3 fans
were pressed hard up against the low wall and the wire mesh o f the fence above it.

  76. In pen 4 no barrier broke. Nevertheless those at the front were crushed against wall and fence. Further
back, two barriers were bowed and some individuals succumbed to the pressure around them.

   77. Surges on terraces are common. Usually, they go forward, then recede. Here, with the weight of
numbers, there was no receding. The pressure stayed and for those crushed breathless by it, standing or prone,
life was ebbing away. If no relief came in four minutes there would be irreversible brain damage; if longer,
death.

  78. In the control room no-one noticed the overcrowding or anything amiss in pens 3 and 4 until the first
fans spilt out onto the perim eter track just before kick-off. Then, the officers in com m and assumed that there
was an attem pted pitch invasion. They called up reserve serials waiting in the gymnasium and all available
officers elsewhere to go to the pitch. A request was made to HQ for dog handlers.

   79. Superintendent Greenwood, the G round Commander, was by the players’ tunnel at the kick-off. He
noticed fans on the track and went to the west end behind the goal. As he approached, he did not think the pens
overcrowded until he was very close and saw those pressed against the fence. Even then, he thought the
situation "retrievable" if those higher up the pen relieved the pressure. He climbed on the wall below the fence
and signalled with both hands to those behind to move back. Other officers joined him. It was impossible.
Those fans who would have wished to comply were powerless to do so. Behind them, there were still many
unaware o f the crisis, watching the game. The football continued to joyous shouting and singing round the rest
o f the ground while those crushed and trapped slowly expired.

  80.    When Mr Greenwood’s signals to move back proved fruitless, he tried to radio for the m atch to be
stopped. At first, his message was not received by control, so he signalled with his arm s towards the control
box. M r Duckenfield sent Mr M urray down from the box to have the match stopped via the linesman, the
agreed emergency drill. Before he could do so, M r Greenwood ran over the pitch to the referee who stopped the
game. It was 5'h minutes past 3.




                                                       14
                                                   CHAPTERS

                                              THE AFTERMATH

Rescue Attempts
   81. From 3 o ’clock, gates 3 and 4 had been open and remained so. At first, fans had walked or staggered out
winded and faint. But the final surge at 3.04 pm, and the struggle to reach the open gates, caused a horrendous
blockage o f bodies. The dead, the dying and the desperate became interwoven in the sump at the front of the
pens, especially by the gates. Those with strength left clambered over others submerged in the hum an heap and
tried to climb out over the fence. They were now helped by police and other fans who hauled them up and over.
Numbers of fans were climbing over the radial fences into adjacent pens. At the back, many were hauled up
into the west stand to relieve the pressure.

   82. The steps from the sump at gateways 3 and 4 were so congested with bodies live and dead that each had
to be prised from the pile by the police. Initially, no officer took effective charge. A num ber o f individual
officers and fans worked frantically to free those trapped but the gateways were so narrow that only two or three
could get at the entwined bodies Willing hands got in one another’s way. More officers arrived from the
gymnasium and elsewhere in the ground. M any used their own initiative to help those laid out on the pitch, to
assist in getting others over the fencing and to comfort the distressed. But some stood in groups near the
perimeter fence not knowing what to do. They had been summoned in response to what was thought to be a
threat to public order. What they found was a horrific scene of carnage and some young officers were shocked
into impotence by what they saw.

  83. It was truly gruesome. The victims were blue, cyanotic, incontinent; their mouths open, vomiting; their
eyes staring. A pile o f dead bodies lay and grew outside gate 3. Extending further and further on to the pitch, the
injured were laid down and attem pts made to revive them. More and more walking survivors flooded out on to
the pitch as the players left. The scene was emotive and chaotic as well as gruesome. As the enormity o f the
disaster was realised, many o f the fans milling about were bitter and hostile to the police, blaming them for
what had happened. Officers were confronted, abused, spat upon and even assaulted. A small num ber of
hysterical fans had to be subdued.

  84. Adding to the chaos, a num ber o f press photographers dodged about among rescue workers apparently
avid to secure photographs at point blank range o f those dying through the wire mesh and those laid on the
pitch. Angry fans sought to assault them. Police had to intervene.

   85. At about 3.12 pm, Chief Superintendent Nesbit, Com m ander o f the Traffic Division, arrived on the
pitch. He took charge at gate 3 and organised a chain o f officers to simplify and expedite the extraction of
casualties from the pen. In the absence o f any mechanical means, police and fans together pulled and worked
at the wire mesh with their bare hands and their feet to breach the fencing. They succeeded in both pens,
enabling officers to get in and fans to be got out.

   86. By now, some officers o f their own initiative went round from the pitch to the tunnel where they met
other officers from the turnstiles and the west stand. Together, they tried to persuade fans at the rear o f the pens
to go back through the tunnel. Some complied, but many resisted, wishing to stand their ground. Casualties
were brought out through the tunnel, and as the pressure in the pens was relieved, officers were able to get
further in and bring out more casualties, dead and alive. They were laid on the ground in the concourse outside
the tunnel and attem pts were made to revive them.

First Aid
  87. The St John Ambulance Brigade had some 30 personnel posted round the ground for the match - 25
adults and 5 junio r cadets, They were quickly on the scene when the first casualties emerged and sought to
revive them. Their Divisional Superintendent, M r Wells, tried unsuccessfully to help those pressed against the
fencing by feeding oxygen to them through the mesh until they could be got out.

  88. D r Purcell, Sheffield Wednesday’s doctor, came from his seat in the south stand and attem pted
resuscitation. Assisted by a male nurse from the crowd, he moved from patient to patient doing what he could,
but in most cases it was too late.

  89. At 3.13 pm a St John’s am bulance came onto the pitch at the north-east com er and drove to the
perimeter fence close to gate 3. There was no call for doctors and nurses on the public address system until
nearly 3.30 pm. Nevertheless, as the minutes ticked past, some o f them came onto the pitch to help o f their


                                                         15
own accord when they saw' the casualties and the ambulance and realised the gravity o f the situation. Many
fans also worked prodigiously in attempts to revive the dead and the dying, in some cases their own relatives
and friends. Artificial respiration, mouth to mouth respiration and cardiac massage were applied by the skilled
and the unskilled but usually in vain. Those capable o f survival mostly came round o f their own accord. The
rest were mostly doom ed before they could be brought out and treated."

    90. There was an urgent need to get casualties off the pitch and to hospital. There were six stretchers in the
first aid room and three in the St John’s ambulance. They were quickly brought into use. Then the fans
improvised by tearing down the hoardings around the edge o f the pitch and against-the stands so that lengths o f
board could be used as stretchers. Improvising in this way, parties o f fans and police ran repeatedly the length
o f the pitch bearing casualties to the north-east corner. A num ber were dead on arrival there.

In the Control Room
  91. Mr Duckenfield stayed in the control room. Chief Inspector McRobbie was there in civilian clothes as
an observer. M r Duckenfield sent him down to the track to tell a policewoman at gate 1 to admit those
displaced from the centre pens. Mr Duckenfield did not realise there were injuries until he saw someone laid
on the pitch. Even then, he did not realise the nature o f the problem or its scale.

  92. Mr M urray returned from his attem pt to stop the match and Mr Duckenfield sent him down again to
clear the pitch and assess the situation. A message was broadcast requesting fans to clear the pitch. This was
because Mr Duckenfield could not from the control room see clearly what was happening for the milling and
increasing numbers.

   93. The Assistant Chief Constable (Operations). Mr Jackson, had attended the match in civilian clothes as
a guest of the Club. He came from his seat in the south stand to ask what had happened. Mr Duckenfield was
unable to say. he did not tell Mr Jackson that the exit gates had been opened on his authority. M r Jackson went
down to the pitch to discover the situation.

   94. At 3.06 pm M r Duckenfield. still primarily concerned about public order, caused a message to be sent
to Headquarters asking for Operation Support. That was a call for all available additional police resources to
come to the ground to strengthen the police presence.

   95. Mr Jackson was told by Mr Greenwood that there were casualties and returned immediatelv to control
to make sure emergency services were alerted. Meanwhile. Mr Murray had seen the plight o f those behind the
fence. He radioed to control that a fleet of ambulances w'as required. He also asked for a Tannov broadcast to
those in the pens to move back but there is no clear evidence that it was made.

  96. Only when M r Duckenfield received the request for a fleet of ambulances did he realise the nature and
gravity of the situation. Then, supported by Mr Jackson, he caused messages to be sent converting Operation
Support into calls for the M ajor Disaster Plan.

No Information
   97. Apart from the message to clear the pitch and the belated call for medical assistance about 3.30 pm, no
information or advice was broadcast on the public address system. Mr Duckenfield feared that the crowd
might turn hostile or might all attem pt to leave together thereby hampering the emergency services if they were
given information about what had happened. The result was that apart from those close enough at the west end
to see the terrible truth for themselves, the majority o f the crowd were left in ignorance. Many, especially
Nottingham supporters in the Kop, still thought there had been a pitch invasion or other misbehaviour by
Liverpool fans. They continued singing.and chanting incongruously. This infuriated some Liverpool fans who
were already distraught. A few began to run towards the Kop end. The police feared violence might result on
top o f the existing disaster. Accordingly, they deployed a large number of officers to form a line across the
width o f the pitch at the Kop end and advance up to the halfway line sweeping anv Liverpool fans back as they
moved. There the line stood as an insurance against disorder but doing nothing. Other officers were posted to
the perimeter track facing the north stand for the same purpose. To those distressed and distraught who
wanted urgent action, this large contingent o f passive officers was seen as an affront. Feelings against the police
intensified.

Misinformation
 98. At about 3.15 pm, Mr Graham Kelly, Chief Executive of the FA, Mr Kirton also o f the FA and Mr
Graham Mackretl. Secretary of Sheffield Wednesday, went to the control room for information. Mr
Duckenfield told them he thought there were fatalities arttfthe game was likely to be abandoned. He also said a
     - 3 -


     Ix      R e s e a r c h and D e v e l o p m e n t D e p a r t m e n t Programme
             Chief C o n sta b le's rep ort attached

             Review o f t h e F i n g e r p r i n t S e r v i c e
             D is t r ic t Auditor's report attached

             L i s t o f O utstanding Items and/or Requested Reports
             J o i n t r e p o r t o f t h e C l e r k and F i n a n c i a l O f f i c e r and C h i e f C o n s t a b l e
             attached

             H illsb o r o u g h Stadium D i s a s t e r - Implementation o f t h e Taylor                            Inquiry
             R ep o rt Recommendations
             Chief C o n sta b le's rep o rt attached

             To c o n s i d e r t h e e x c l u s i o n o f t h e p u b l i c a nd p r e s s f r o m t h e m e e t i n g
             b e f o r e d i s c u s s i o n t a k e s p l a c e on t h e f o l l o w i n g i t e m s o f b u s i n e s s , on
             t h e g r o u n d s t h a t i n v i e w o f t h e n a t u r e o f t h e b u s i n e s s t o be
             t r a n s a c t e d , i f t h e p u b l i c and p r e s s w e r e p r e s e n t t h e r e w o u l d b e a
             d i s c l o s u r e t o them o f exempt i n f o r m a t i o n w i t h i n t h e meaning o f t h e
             L o c a l G o v e r n m e n t A c t , 1 9 7 2 , a s amende d b y t h e L o c a l G o v e r n m e n t ( A c c e s
             to Information) Act, 1985.

             H illsb o r o u g h Stadium D i s a s t e r -            C o m p e n s a t i o n , C r i m i n a l and
             D isc ip lin a r y Aspects
             C l e r k j a n d F i n a n c i j l j l f f i c e r and C h i e f C o n s t a b l e t o r e p o r t

             A mb u l a n c e S e r v i c e D i s p u t e - R e q u e s t s f o r P o l i c e A s s i s t a n c e
             J o i - n t r e p o r t o f t h e C h i e f C o n s t a b l e and t h e C l e r k and F i n a n c i a l
             O fficer attached

     *21     A p p lication fo r Voluntary Early Retirement
/            J o i n t r e p o r t o f t h e C h i e f C o n s t a b l e a nd t h e C l e r k a nd F i n a n c i a l
             O fficer attached
      X
    .'*22    Invitation         and A c c e p t a n c e o f T e n d e r s

                     D o n c a s t e r D&SDHQ - R e p l a c e m e n t o f C e i l i n g s c o n t a i n i n g A s b e s t o s
                     J o i n t r e p o r t o f t h e C l e r k and F i n a n c i a l O f f i c e r and t h e C h i e f
                     Constable attached

                     Force Training School, E c c l e s f i e l d - A lt e r a t io n s to Casualty
                     E n q u i r y Bureau
                     J o i n t r e p o r t o f t h e C l e r k and F i n a n c i a l O f f i c e r and t h e C h i e f
                     Constable attached

                     P o l i c e H eadquarters, Snig H i l l , S h e f f i e l d - Proposed E xen tsion
                     t o t h e C o mp u t e r Room
                     J o i n t r e p o r t o f t h e C l e r k and F i n a n c i a l O f f i c e r and t h e C h i e f
                     Constable attached

                     P o l i c e H e a d q u a r t e r s , Snig H i l l , S h e f f i e l d - Upgrading o f T o i l e t
                     F acilities
                     J o i n t r e p o r t o f t h e C l e r k and F i n a n c i a l O f f i c e r and t h e C h i e f
                     Constable attached
- 4 -


                P o l i c e H e a d q u a r t e r s , S n i g H i l l , S h e f f i e l d - S h e f f i e l d H e a t and
                Power Lt d
                J o i n t r e p o r t o f t h e C l e r k and F i n a n c i a l O f f i c e r and t h e C h i e f
                Constable attached

                T h o r n e P o l i c e S t a t i o n - C o m m u n i c a t i o n s E q u i p m e n t Room
                Extension.
                J o i n t r e p o r t o f t h e C l e r k and F i n a n c i a l O f f i c e r and t h e C h i e f
                Constable attached.

* £ ^   T w a i n r e a l m Lt d - v - S o u t h Y o r k s h i r e P o l i c e A u t h o r i t y
^       C l e r k and F i n a n c i a l O f f i c e r ' s r e p o r t a t t a c h e d

*24     The P o l i c e ( D i s c i p l i n e ) ( S e n i o r O f f i c e r s )         ) P o lic e Authority
        R e g u l a t i o n s 1985                                                      ) Members o n l y
        C l e r k and F i n a n c i a l O f f i c e r ' s r e p o r t a t t a c h e d   )




NOTE:   In a c c o r d a n c e w i t h P o l i c e A u t h o r i t y M i n u t e 4 1 ( b ) o f 3 0 May 1 9 8 6 , t h e
        F o r c e C o m p l a i n t s Book w i l l b e a v a i l a b l e f o r i n s p e c t i o n by Members o f
        t h e A u t h o r i t y upon t h e c o n c l u s i o n o f t h e m e e t i n g .
gate had been forced and there had been an inrush o f Liverpool supporters. He pointed to o n e of the television
screens focussed on gate C by the Leppings Lane turnstiles and said “That’s the gate that’s been forced: there’s
been an inrush”. Inevitably Mr Kelly was interviewed a little later live on television. He spoke ofthe two stories
concerning the gate - the fans’ account that the police had opened it. the police assertion that the fans had
forced their way in.

  99. About 3.30 pm there was a further meeting in the Club’s boardroom. Mr Duckenfield went there and
met M r Kelly, the referee and representatives of the three clubs. ACC Jackson was also there. Mr
Duckenfield indicated the match was likely to be abandoned although no firm ruling was given. He added that
he did not want people to know it was to be abandoned lest the dispersing crowd ham per the emergency
operations.

Public Announcements
   100. Later the managers of the two teams were asked to go to the control room. They were invited there to
make a public announcem ent to calm the crowd. Mr Kenny Dalglish agreed to do so. He told the crowd that
there were problems and asked them to assist the police and those rendering first aid. He asked for calm and his
message was well received. It was then 3.56 pm. At 4.10 pm it was announced that the match was abandoned
for that day. Again that message was received calmly by the crowd most of whom behaved responsibly as they
dispersed..

Fire Brigade
   101. Meanwhile the emergency services had been in action. At about 3.10 pm a request came from the
perim eter fence to control for bolt croppers to cut the wire mesh. Sergeant Goddard contacted the police garage
close by without success. At 3.13 pm, PC Bichard requested Headquarters to call the fire service to bring
hydraulic cutting equipm ent to the Leppings Lane entrance.

   102. There was no arrangement for a fire officer to be present during the match. However, the Major
Disaster Plan required all emergency services to be alerted. After ’phone messages which must be described
later, fire appliances arrived at both Leppings Lane and Penistone Road at 3.22 pm. At both entrances their
arrival surprised police who were uninform ed as to why they had been called or where they should go.

    103. At Leppings Lane a police Inspector told Station Officer Swain “I don't really think we need you”.
' Another police officer then asked for more resuscitators as people were dying so Mr Swain radioed for ten fire
  appliances. Each carries oxygen and resuscitation equipment.

   104. At the Kop end, Leading Firem an Housley arrived with an emergency tender and Station Officer
Fletcher in another appliance, each with a crew. The emergency tender came along the roadway by the south
stand but owing to its height was unable to proceed further. It therefore backed out and went to the Leppings
Lane entrance losing some eight minutes. From there, M r Housley and his crew went onto the pitch with
resuscitation equipment. They rendered help there and later at the gymnasium. Mr Fletcher and his men ran
along behind, the south stand carrying cutting equipm ent and oxygen cylinders. When they arrived at the
fence, the cutting equipm ent was not required as by then the last of the dead and injured were being removed
from the pens. Mr Fletcher set up a casualty clearing area under the police box and firemen assisted in carrying
victims as well as rendering first aid on the pitch.

 South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service (SYMAS)
    105. Before 1986 there had been no SYMAS representative routinely present at Hillsborough matches. The
 Club was content, as indeed are many other clubs, to rely upon the St John’s Ambulance Brigade and a 999 call
 if necessary. From 1986 onwards, after representations, the Club provided two seats in the south stand for
 SYMAS staff at League matches. At one stage it was suggested they would be best placed in the north stand
 close to the gymnasium which had been designated as the casualty centre in the event o f a major incident. The
 south stand seats were allotted as they placed the SYMAS staff closer to the players’ tunnel should a player be
 injured. These seats were, however, not available at Cup semi-finals. SYMAS representatives nevertheless
 attended at the semi-finals by arrangement with the police in 1988 and again in 1989. The SYMAS officers
 stood on the ramp leading to the pitch at the north-east comer. They had one ambulance outside the ground
 and one on standby.

    106. On 15 April 1989, Officers Higgins and Eason were at the ground with an ambulance and crew. They
 noticed fans on the track and went to the Leppings Lane end whilst the game was still in progress. They began
 to attend to casualties. Meanwhile, at 2.59 pm, there had been a call from Police Constable Waugh at police
Headquarters to the Hillsborough police control asking if. ambulances were requ:ire<*-                 waueh
instruction of C hief Inspector Edmundson who had heard over the radio, as had Police Const                  g
himself, crowd noise and snatches of speech from Hillsborough suggesting distress and possible i n j u r y ! ne
reply from the control box was: no reports of injuries but keep standing by. At 3.07 pm after hearing
ground that there might be injuries, police Headquarters notified SYMAS that am bul ^ c e s m g    erequi
Then seconds later, M r M urray’s request for a fleet of ambulances was relayed to SYMAS. They reacted at
once:' Ambulances began to arrive at the Leppings Lane entrance at 3.13 pm and at the>Penutone Road
entrance at 3.17 pm. In all, some 42 ambulances attended, 31 of them from SYMAS and _1 from
neighbouring authorities. By 4.30 pm, they had conveyed some 172 casualties to the N orthern Genera
 Hospital and the Royal Hallamshire Hospital.

Gymnasium
   107 The gymnasium had been in use for serving meals to the police. When the M ajor Disaster Plan was
ordered it was cleared and divided into two. One end became a temporary mortuary: the other was used as a
casualty clearing area for the injured. As the stretchers, designed and improvised, brought in more and more
casualties, the scene was initially and inevitably chaotic and harrowing. There was intense distress amongst
the injured and bereaved; relatives were reluctant to be parted from the dead and sought to revive them. The
were people looking for missing friends and relations; there were recriminations, there were scuffles Some of
those involved were the worse for drink. Doctors and nurses had followed the casualties in from the pitch and
sought to attend the injured as best they could in the adverse circumstances. Those in most urgent need ot
hospital treatm ent were taken to ambulances as they arrived, triage being employed to determ ine priorities.
Doctors were requested by the police to examine each person thought to be deceased to confirm and certify
death. A police Constable was detailed to attend and guard each of the dead and a photograph o f each was
taken by a police photographer so that relatives coming to identify bodies could be spared the ordeal ot
 searching amongst all who had died.

 The Dead and the Injured
   108. O f the 95 who died, the evidence suggests that at least 16 and probably 21 came through gate C after it
 opened at 2.52 pm. That is established by the statements o f relatives and friends who came through with them
 but survived.
    109 Bv com m endable hard work, a team of pathologists headed by Professor Usher completed
 post-mortem exam inations on all the deceased within 48 hours. They found that 88 o f the victims were male
 and seven female. Thirty-eight were under 20 years o f age, 39 were between 20 and 29 years and only tnree were
 over 50. In virtually every case the cause o f death was crush asphyxia due to compression o f the chest wall
 against other bodies or fixed structures so as to prevent inhalation. In all but nine cases that was the sole cause.
 In one, pressure on the chest had been so great as to rupture the aorta; in six cases there were also injuries to t e
 head neck o r chest; in the remaining two cases, natural disease was a contributory factor. In 18 cases bones
 were fractured. Thirteen o f those were rib fractures. However, one was a fractured femur, one a fractured
 radius and the remaining three involved fractures o f bones or cartilages round the voice box. These injuries
 suggest the victim s may have been trodden while on the ground.

    110. Blood samples were taken from the dead. No alcohol was found in any o f the females. O f the males. 51
  had no more than 10 milligrams per cent in their blood which is negligible; 15 had over 80 milligrams per cent
  and six over 120 milligrams per cent.

    111. Although the great majority o f those who died were in pen 3, at least five were in pen 4. Most deaths
  occurred at the front o f the pens but there were a few fatalities further back.

    112. Iri all, sortie 730 people complained.of being.injured inside the ground and 36 outside it. O f the 730.
  about 30% are thought to have entered through gate C after 2.52 pm. The largest category o f injury was
  bruising, especially to the ribs and chest.




                                                           18
                                                 CHAPTER6

                                          SPECIFIC INCIDENTS
  113. I have given my findings as to the basic factual background and the main sequence o f events in
narrative form. There was very little conflict as to the principal events save as to some timings and numbers.
Indeed, the consistency o f the evidence has been a remarkable feature o f this Inquiry. The experiences ofm ost
witnesses were unforgettable and no doubt the early hearing helped to preserve accurate memory. Also, the
existence o f timed videos and photographs and o f logged and taped messages provided reliable checks by
which to prom pt and test witness recollection. Accordingly, I have not for the most part burdened the narrative
with citations from the evidence of individual witnesses.

   114. However, there were several instances o f detailed evidence and assertions being highlighted by the
media in dramatic and emotive terms during the hearing. Since some o f those much-publicised incidents gave
rise to unfair criticism, they ought to be the subject o f specific findings. I have therefore dealt with them
individually at Appendix 6.




                                                       19
                                  PART II - WHY D IB IT HAPPEN?


                      Events o f the magnitude o f Hillsborough don’t usually happen ju st for one
                 single reason, nor is it usually possible to pin the blam e on one single scapegoat. . .
                 . . . Disasters happen because a whole series o f mistakes, m isjudgm ents and
                 mischances happen to com e together in a deadly combination. ”
                                                                Dr John Habgood. Archbishop o f York, preaching at
                                                               the Hillsborough Memorial Service on 23 April 1989.

   115. This disaster was the wdrst in the history o f British football. It happened because pens 3 and 4 became
grossly overcrowded. They were uncomfortably overcrowded by 2.50 pm at least to a degree which required
that they should be closed to further arrivals. Even th e numbers coming through the turnstiles in the last 10
minutes would have increased the pressure beyond danger point and there would have been injuries if not
fatalities. As it was, the influx through gate C after 2.52 pm so increased the pressure in the two pens as to
cause fatal crushing.

  116. The overcrowding up to 2.52 pm was due to a num ber o f factors which can be considered broadlv
under three heads.
   (i) The layout at the Leppings Lane end.
  (ii) Lack o f fixed capacities for the pens.
 (iii) Lack o f effective monitoring o f the terraces.

  117. The crushing and fatalities after 2.52 pm must be considered under a num ber o f headings.
 (iv) The build-up at the turnstiles.
   (v)   The blunder on opening the gates.
  (vi)   The barriers in pen 3.
 (vii)   The crushing not recognised.
(viii)   The response o f the police.
 (ix) The perim eter gates were too small.
                                                  CHAPTER 7

                              THE LAYOUT AT THE LEPPINGS LANE END

  118. I have already observed that the layout o f the turnstile area, o f the terraces and o f the concourse
between them was the result of piecemeal changes. A brief history o f these changes is now necessary.


The History
   119. Before 1965, the Leppings Lane end consisted entirely o f terracing like the Kop. In that year, the west
stand was built and the terraces remaining in front of it were truncated to their present depth, front to back. As
to width, they consisted of a single standing area with no dividing fences. During the early 1970’s, hooliganism
and pitch invasions made it necessary to prevent access to the playing area and the perimeter fences were
therefore erected in 1977.

   120. Section 1 o f the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 empowered the Secretary of State to designate a
sports stadium having, in his opinion, accom m odation for more than 10,000 as a stadium requiring a
certificate from the local authority. Hillsborough was so designated with effect from 1 January 1979 by SI
1978/1091. In anticipation of that date, Sheffield Wednesday instructed Eastwood and Partners, a firm of
consulting engineers, to act on their behalf especially in their dealings with the local authority. Dr Eastwood,
the principal of the firm, is a highly experienced civil and structural engineer and has advised several major
football clubs. He recommended that a num ber o f additional crush barriers should be added since those
already in place were insufficient to comply with the Green Guide (1976 edition). That work was approved
and carried out during 1979.

  121. The relevant local authority at the tim e was the South Yorkshire County Council. It set up an Officer
Working Party consisting of representatives o f the police, the fire service, its own building surveyor’s division
and its own legal and administration department. The Working Party made inspections and consulted with the
Club and D r Eastwood. A Safety Certificate was issued on 21 December 1979 for an indefinite period. It has
remained in force ever since and has not been amended.

   122. Schedule 3 o f the certificate sets out the m axim um crowd capacity for various areas in the ground. The
figure for the west terrace is 7,200 and for the north-west terrace 2,900. These figures were intended to be in
accordance with the Green Guide (1976). Paragraph 15.4 provided for a maximum “packing density” of
between 54 and 27 persons per 10 square metres depending on the condition of the terrace. Dr Eastwood had
calculated 8,000 for the west terrace on the basis o f 54 per 10 square metres. He thought this a justified starting
figure in view o f his improved system of barriers. However, he reduced it to 7,200 because there were no
gangways on the terrace and he did not think it feasible to provide any. So, the total figure for the Leppings Lane
terraces was and is 10,100.

The 1981 Semi-Final
  123. As already mentioned, there was crushing at the Cup semi-final in 1981. The match was between
Tottenham Hotspur and Wolverhampton Wanderers. The police debriefing minutes after the incident
prophetically refer,

   “to the late arrival of a large number of spectators who were still waiting to enter the Leppings Lane
   enclosure when the match started. The flash point occurred when Tottenham scored” (at the Kop end) “after
   only three minutes. The spectators just entering pushed forward to see what was happening and caused a
   crush, which resulted in the injuries”.

   124. Those being crushed called for the perim eter gates to be opened onto the track. There was no
immediate reaction, according to Mr Vaux who was there, but fortunately a police Inspector gave instructions
and the gates were then opened. About 250 came out onto the track. There were broken arms, legs and ribs and
38 were treated either in hospital or by the St John Ambulance Brigade. It is clear from the documents (a) that
the turnstile readings showed the capacity figure of 10,100 had been exceeded by over 400 (b) that the police
shut off further access to the terraces because of crushing, and (c) the police view after the event was that the
capacity figure o f 10,100 in the Safety Certificate was too high. This latter view was communicated to the Club
by the Chief Superintendent then in command o f F Division but it was not pursued.


                                                         21
  Three Pens
     1 - 3 .-After this incident in April 1981-the police requested that the terrace should be divided into sections.
  The object was to improve crowd control by reducing sideways movement. Division would enable more even
  ^ stn b u U o n to be effected when there was a capacity crowd. It would also enable the west end to be used fo r
  both home and away supporters who could be segregated in separate pens, if necessary with an empty pen
  between them.

    126. This proposal was agreed by the Club and the Officer Working P artv an d was approved bv the local
 authority. Two radial fences were accordingly fitted in November 1981. They are the fence now separating pens
 2 and 3 and that now separating 5 and 6. The result was to divide the whole terrace into three pens. Access from
 the concourse to the middle pen was through the tunnel and to the wing pens round the sides o f the west stand.
 D r Eastwood suggested and illustrated an altered layout which would have'provided separate access through
          banks o f tum stiles to the north stand, to each end o f the west stand, and to each of the three pens.
 Whilst the main object o f this was segregation, such a layout would have enabled each o f those areas to be
 monitored numerically via the tum stiles so as to ensure its maximum capacity was not exceeded. The plan was
 not adopted. The maximum capacity for the new centre pen was calculated at 2.200, but no alteration was
 made to the Safety Certificate so to limit it nor was there any means mechanicallv o f counting the numbers
 going into that pen.

 The 1985 Changes
         tu         Sheffield Wednesday had been prom oted to the First Division and was drawing larger
 crowds. The improvement o f the Leppings Lane end was raised again by the Club and Dr Eastwood prepared a
 num ber of drawings. These illustrated various schemes for achieving segregation by providing more tumstiles
 in separate banks and divisions o f the concourse. The police wanted further divisions of the terrace itself,
 again to improve control and segregation. There was much discussion o f these schemes which included
 suggestions o f 29 and even 34 tum stiles in total. In the result, the following alterations were carried out in


 New Radial Fences
    128. On the terraces, two more radial fences were fitted. One divided the existing central pen into the
 present pens 3 and 4. Gates were fitted at the mouth of the tunnel to enable each o f those pens to be closed off
  Fhe second fence was placed in the new pen 4 so as to create the narrow pen 5 intended to be a sterile area Until
 those two fences were added there existed only perimeter gates 1 ,2 ,4 ,5 and 6. The creation o f pen 3 required a
 new gate 3 to be fitted which was done.                                                                   4

 Barriers

  *2?- The 1.1"®s o f the ne^ radi,al fences ran across existing crush barriers so that without modification those
barriers would have run through the fencing. The police considered the barriers would be used bv fans as
SM ns^o be Tmnv^H8 fPOmttS, t0 K°ale th e o e^ f! nCeS’ thereby defeating their obJect- They therefore wished
           n                  t bamerus- ]?ad their wlshes been         in full the result would have been an
unim peded run in pen 3 from the mouth of the tunnel down the south side o f the new fence to the perimeter D r
to sn T P°mnH8r 1S,   m             proposal which he nghtly regarded as dangerous. He did however agree
to some modification to the middle row o f barriers in the newly created pen 3 chieflv to facilitate access
Likewise the new pen 5. The 1985 modifications ,o the pens are shown on the pian AppendS 4
The Turnstiles and Concourse

w aldW idedfrnm a     r ™od5 1Cati° ? but no increase in num ber was made at the tumstiles. The bank 1 to 16
was divided from A to G by the metal fence now in place and that division, was projected across the concourse
w J t E d ! ? ” in         t      ° f a .bnck wall‘A Personnel gate was provided for access through that wall b u t '
  as enlarged to its present size at the request o f the police. Those alterations were made in the interests of
s X d S n o A rr          ra!f dlViS1° nS Whkh Dr Eastwood had suggested, giving separate access to each
Hi™ t     of the accommodation, were not pursued for financial reasons. In May 1985 the Bradford
undem keexn^'      “ “ ’S        a* Hl| lsborough had wooden decking and the Club realised it would have to
                                              ‘ The cantllever roof o f the same stand was also discovered *

      1‘ ln ffuCt'Ah°urtLy after the new dividing fence and wall had been built at the Leppings Lane entrance and
 ° f ° I| rse' the Club- by agreement with Chief Superintendent Mole, ceased to accommodate home supporters
rema1nedPPm8S                          was therefore no longer any need for segregation at that end. but the wall



                                                       11
   1'32. Also in 1985. electronic counting equipment was installed at all tumstiles. This conveyed the running
count for each bank o f tumstiles, for example A to G, to a television screen in the Club control room where the
figures were displayed. In 1986. an electronic eye was installed in each turnstile booth to catch and record
anyone who climbed over the turnstile.

Barrier 144
     133. In June 1986. the police requested that the crush barrier nearest to th e tunnel at the entrance to pens’3
and 4 should be removed to assist the flow o f fans into the pens. They found it caused obstruction because it
was in a good viewing position and spectators liked to stand against it in num bers thereby blocking access by
others further into the pens. The police also suggested it might ham per effective evacuation through the tunnel
especially in an emergency. Dr Eastwood considered the pros and cons of this proposal and accepted the police
view The Officer Working Party approved the proposal at a meeting on 7 August 1986 on site. Authority was
given then and there by M r Bownes on behalf of the Sheffield City Council which had taken over responsibility
f o r t h e S a f e t y Certificate from South Yorkshire County Council on 1 April 1986. Two spans of the barrier were


therefore removed, leaving only one span in pen 4 as shown on Appendix 4.

Effects of the Layout
   134. The result o f these changes was to divide the terrace into a num ber o f small areas without providing
any com puterised or mechanical means of limiting entry numerically into any one area if all areas were open
for choice. Before the fences and pens had divided the terrace, the overall figure o f 10.100 could be monitored
via the tum stiles and in theory the crowd could even itself out laterally. Even then, it was not possible strictly to
ensure compliance with Schedule 3 Part 1 o f the Safety Certificate which prescribed a maximum o f 2,900 for
the north-west terrace and 7,200 for the west terrace. Paragraph 3 o f Schedule 2 of the Safety Certificate
provides:

  “The num ber o f spectators adm itted to the Stadium and to the several areas o f spectator accommodation
  within the Stadium shall not exceed the figures specified in Part 1 o f Schedule 3”.

  The Club had to rely upon visual monitoring.

   135. The situation became worse however with the division o f the west terrace into pens. Not only were
there more and smaller.discrete areas but some were likely to attract more than their appropriate share of the
 10,100 total. It is well recognised that the area behind the goal is very popular. Moreover, the position of the
tunnel vis-a-vis the tum stiles A to G, its labelling and the absence o f signposts advertising the wing pens would
draw to it those with terrace tickets. It was therefore highly likely that pens 3 and 4 would fill to capacity and
indeed exceed it unless preventive steps were taken. Had D r Eastwood’s plan for separate turnstile access to
separate sections with separate toilet and refreshment facilities been implemented, total computerised control
could have been kept.




                                                           23
                                                    CHAPTERS

                              LACK OF FIXED CAPACITIES FOR THE PENS

  136. In 1981, when the terrace was divided into three areas. Dr Eastwood gave the Club the figure o f 2,200
capacity for the centre pen. He based this on the Green Guide, m aking such allowances as he thought right. No
doubt the numbers could have been counted in via the turnstiles if only that pen was in use or if such pens as
were in use were filled sequentially, but not otherwise.
   137. After the 1985 changes, D r Eastwood did not him self give any figures for the new pens 3 and 4.
Someone on his staff however split the figure 2,200 into 1,200 for pen 3 and 1.000 for pen 4. Those figures did
not even take account o f the fact that pen 5 had been carved out o f pen 4 which was bound to have a reducing
effect on capacity. Nevertheless,, the figures o f 1.200 and 1,000 were put on a drawing emanating from
Eastwood and Partners and the figures have been notionally regarded since as applicable by the Club and the
police. They are in fact too high.
  138. Dr Nicholson, at the Research and Laboratory Serv ices Division of the Health and Safety Executive,
has calculated that the figures for pens 3 and 4 respectively would be 1,015 and 1,036 if the strength and
spacing o f the crush barriers had complied with the Green Guide. But they did not.

Departures from the Green Guide
   139. In pen 3, four out o f five gaps in the lines o f crush barriers do not conform with paragraph 115 of the
Green Guide (1986). In pen 4, nine out o f ten do not conform. In particular, the spans taken out o f the barriers
in pen 3 in 1985 left gaps well in excess o f the m axim um o f 1.4 metres prescribed. One gap was 57% wider than
the Green Guide maximum. Moreover, that gap was in direct diagonal line from the m outh o f the tunnel to the
barrier which collapsed. D r Eastwood justified these larger gaps by the absence o f gangways. Fans had to be
able to get in and out and standard gaps tended to get blocked up. The effect o f his reasoning was that the
absence of gangways, recognised as having a safety function, led to the sacrifice o f a second safety feature,
namely gaps o f strictly limited width.
  140. Again, the removal of barrier 144 was bound, as D r Eastwood conceded, to affect capacity. In fact it
did more, as I shall indicate later:
   141. Capacity should also have taken account o f two further departures from the Green Guide. If. as was
the case, the perim eter gates were not regarded as exits, some 40% o f those in pens 3 and 4 were more than 12
metres from an exit (and there was no gangway) contrary to the aim o f paragraph 96. Four out o f five of the
crush barriers in pen 3 and six out of nine in pen 4 were below the height prescribed in paragraph 110. These
were.the old barriers which had been repaired and plated where their bases had corroded and fresh concrete
had been applied, raising the level o f the steps. The point is not academic since, in the event, many fans were
bent painfully over barriers under great pressure.
   142. Dr Nicholson calculated that when all relevant factors regarding the configuration and the Green
G uide are taken into account, the maximum capacity for pen 3 should have been 822 and for pen 4. 871.

Safety Certificate
   143. Whatever should have been the maxim um capacities for pens 3 and 4. the fact is that no figures at all in
respect o f them were put into tHe Safety Certificate. Despite all the changes in layout o f the fences and barriers,
the two figures, 2,900 for the north-west terrace and 7,200 for the west terrace, have remained as the only
m axim a with which the Club has to comply.
   144. Section 2(1) o f the Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975 provides, (so far as is relevant):

   “A Safety Certificate shall contain such terms and conditions as the local authority consider necessary or
   expedient to secure reasonable safety at the stadium when it is in u s e . . . ”

   Section 2(2) provided (so far as is relevant):
   “W ithout prejudice to sub-section ( I) above, a Safety Certificate-
   (a) shall specify the maximum num ber of spectators to be adm itted to the stadium:
   (b) may specify the maximum num ber to be adm itted to different p an s of it:
   (c) shall include terms and conditions-
   ... (iii) as to the number, strength and situation o f any crush barriers.”


                                                         24
Section 2(2) was repealed bv the Fire Safety and Safety o f Places of Sport Act 1987, section 19, which
eave power to the Secretary o f State to lay down, by order, terms and conditions. No order has yet been
made and guidance from the Home Office has recommended local authorities to approach their
function under section 2(1) in accordance with the criteria in the repealed section 2(2). (See Home
Office Circular 71/1987 dated 25 November 1987. Annex A. paragraph 6.)

  145. It is clear that when the certificate was first issued the South Yorkshire County Council went
further than simplv to fix the maximum numbers for the whole Stadium. They prescribed figures for
each part o f the ground not merely by the four points o f the compass but by specified sections.

  146. Section 8(1) o f the 1975 Act requires the holder of the certificate before carrying out any
Droposals to alter or extend the stadium or any o f its installations while a Safety Certificate is in
operation to give notice o f those proposals to the local authority. That obligation is specifically
repeated in Sheffield Wednesday’s certificate at Schedule 2 Paragraph 5(2). The Club complied with
the requirement. Having received notice o f the alterations to the pens and the barriers, the local
authority ought, in my view, to have amended the Safety Certificate accordingly. They did not do so.

Why was the Safety Certificate not Amended?
  147. Although D r Eastwood acknowledged that the various changes to the layout would have had
an effect on capacity, he did not take active steps to see that appropriate am endm ents were made. He •
says he m entioned from time to tim e that the alterations would have an effect on capacity and that he
did not realise the Safety Certificate was not regularly updated. However, I find two memoranda in
early 1987 highly significant. D r Eastwood’s assistant Mr Strange was concerned with queries from
the FA as to Hillsborough’s capacity for a semi-final, Mr Strange recorded these questions in a
memorandum:-

  “Has any account been taken for alterations done on Leppings Lane over the last few seasonsTIs the 10,200
  or so figure still correct? I said that in my opinion it needs to be adjusted, better do it now than later.”

   148. Mr Strange’s next memo (a few days later) records as follows:-

   “D r Eastwood says leave the capacity at Leppings Lane end as it is, providing police have gates under West
   stand open so that people can distribute throughout the terrace evenly.”

 Although he says the last nine words do not report him accurately, D r Eastwood accepts the rest o f that
 message.

    149. In my view the provisions as to Capacity in the Safety Certificate ought to have been reviewed and
 altered. The unhappy situation is that the police believed even the overall figure o f 10,100 to be too high as far
 back as 1981. That was reported to the Club but apparently not to D r Eastwood. Meanwhile, that global figure
 had been rendered academic by the sub-division o f the terrace which was not reflected in the Safety Certificate
 at all. If proper m axim um figures had been inserted in the certificate for each o f the pens, the Club and the
 police might well have been prom pted to find some means o f limiting the numbers entering those pens other
 than by visual monitoring. This could have been done by implementing one o f D r Eastwood’s plans for totally
 separate sections, turnstile to viewing area. It could have been done by insisting on sequential filling o f pens at
 all matches; alternatively, by counting fans into each viewing area.

 The City Council
    150. That the Safety Certificate was not am ended and individual capacities not reviewed cannot be laid
 solely at D r Eastwood’s door. He was, after all, consultant engineer to the Club and responsibility for the
 certificate was that o f the local authority. When the South Yorkshire County Council handed over to the
 Sheffield City Council, the latter delegated all its powers and duties under the 1975 Act to its General Purposes
 Panel. Apparently, therefore, the decision-making body on behalf o f the Council was that Panel, although two
 specific functions were delegated to the Head o f Administration and Legal Departm ent - the power to issue a
 prohibition under section 10 o f the 1975 Act and the power o f entry and search under section 11 o f the Act.

  151. In practice, M r Bownes. the Council's Chief Licensing Officer in the A dm inistration and Legal
 Department, bore the brunt of the Council’s duties under the Act.



                                                          25
            e   '£er or^m g Party was superseded by a Safety o f Sports Grounds Advisory Group,' but
  apart rom the change o f the name the system continued as before. Mr Bownes attended the inspections
  an meetings o t e Advisory Group together with the representatives of the police, the fire service, the
   epartm ent o ealth and consumer serv ices, and the building engineer’s division o f the Council. The
  a er was an engineer and ought therefore to have been alive to the same issues as D r Eastwood.

    153. The Advisory Group seems to have worked in a very informal manner. A short passage from Mr
  Bownes evidence gives the flavour o f it:-

       Q    W ho was taking the lead in the working party as you understood it?

       A    That is a good question, sir. Leads were coming from several different directions really.

       Q     Who chaired it, if anyone?

       A    Nobody as such, sir. It was an inspection rather than a meeting as I understand it.

       Q     Who decided what should be inspected?

       A    Effectively the group itself, sir. it seemed to me. There was also some input from the Club
             representative as to, if you like, an element o f direction as to what should be looked at.

       Q    A part from the inspections the working party met, presumably, or did they only meet on
             inspections?

       A    No, sir, I have referred to three previous meetings.

       Q    Who took the chair when it met?                    ,

      A     I suppose it could be said that I did. to some extent.

      ^     there?1Sn° P° m t in havinS inspections unless you form conclusions as a result o f that inspection, is

      A     T hat is correct.

      Q     There must presumably have been some meeting following the inspection at which you all sat down
            together and decided what, if anything, should be done.

      A     There was not, to my recollection, no.

      Q     How did you decide what should be done, if anything needed to be done?
      A
            There were discussions on the site, particularly in relation to barrier 144. which took place at the


      Q     Nothing more than that and no record anywhere o f any decisions that were made?
      A     No, sir.”

The decision to remove barrier 144 was assented to on behalf o f the Citv Council by Mr Bownes It was not
 eferred to the General Purposes Panel. W hether Mr Bownes strictlv had any power to assent to it is to sav the
least ver\ doubtful. But he him self adm its that he was ill-equipped to do so. He knew verv little about football
s t r ip s              , h e f iie p a s s e d o n f r o m s ° u , h   vorkshirecoumyc°“k“-sasSXutd'^i;
r          VaS recorded’ however, in a report which Mr Bownes drafted that “the conditions (in the Safetv
rpnoli ? t h 8r 6 sonf Dcause for concern as they appear to be inadequate or inappropriate in some areas” The
 eport to the General Purposes Panel suggested that new Safety Certificate conditions should be drafted.

  155. The task o f revising the Safety Certificate was begun in June 1986. In Julv 1987, a draft was sent to th:i
ire serv ice to which they replied in August. In September 1987. the Panel was informed that the redrafting was


                                                                        26
-progressing steadily” and should be subm itted to the Panel in October. The final draft was not circulated until
30 March 1989, 16 days before this disaster.

    156 Meanwhile, the Safety Certificate has remained unamended since 1979. The enlargement o f the Kop
,'n 1986 increased its capacity to 21,000. Although this was known and agreed by the C o u n c i l it had no t been
the subject of any change in the certificate which still showed the capacity o f the Kop as 16,850. Mr Mackrell,
Sheffield Wednesday’s Secretary, raised the question o f amendments to the Safety Certificate and in particular
with regard to the Kop in April 1987 with Eastwood and Partners but nothing resulted.

  157 S h e f f i e l d United Football Club was designated under the 1975 A cton 3 July 1984. A Safety Certificate
was about to be issued by South Yorkshire County Council at the time it handed over to the Sheffield City
Council on 1 April 1986. No certificate has yet been issued to Sheffield United.

   158. The explanation given for these delays was pressure of work. Mr Bowries as C hief Licensing Officer
was responsible for 32 other licensing systems when this one was added to his burden. He had a staff o f only
five. I fully accept that the addition o f further statutory responsibilities to the already heavy workload o f a locai
authority with curbs on its expenditure creates problems. But it is clear that the attention given to this
im portant licensing function was woefully inadequate.

Summary
   159. The Safety Certificate contained no m aximum figures for individual pens. There was therefore no
sanction or provision focussing attention as to the need to limit entry to the pens by numbers. The layout at
Leppings Lane as it evolved made electronic or mechanical control over numbers entering individual pens
impracticable if all pens were to be available. Given an im portant match and a capacity attendance, fans were
likely to crowd into popular sections like pens 3 and 4. Those pens were likely to become overfull well before
warning came from the turnstiles that numbers were approaching the terrace m aximum o f 10,100. Control
over numbers and the avoidance o f overcrowding therefore depended entirely on visual monitoring o f the
crowd.




                                                            27
                                                  CHAPTER 9

                       LACK OF EFFECTIVE MONITORING OF THE TERRACES

  160. "Monitoring the spectators on the terraces so as to avoid overcrowding involves observing the numbefs
and their distribution in each area, making decisions as to when an area is “full”, taking steps to close it off
and moving spectators from one area to another, if necessary. It is a function beset by three problems. 1) Who
should carry it out? 2) When is an area “full”? 3) Fear of hooliganism.

Who should Monitor the Terraces?
   161. Should it be the host club via its stewards? Should it be the police? Should it be both? O r should it be by
arrangement, depending upon the ground or section o f the ground in question?

   162. In principle, a football club which invites the public to a match on its premises for reward is
responsible for securing safety at that event. The Green Guide (1986) provides:

       “ 23. The safety o f the public inside the ground is the responsibility of those who stage the event and
             adm inister the ground in which it is held, ie the “management”. This responsibility applies in
             both normal and emergency situations...

         195. ...there are five basic duties which stewards are called upon to carry out. These are:

              (a)    controlling or directing members o f the public who are entering or leaving the ground, to
                     help achieve an even flow o f people to the viewing areas and safe dispersal o f spectators on
                     the terraces or viewing slopes;

               (b)   patrolling the ground to deal with any emergencies, eg raising alarms or extinguishing
                     fires;

               (c)   manning entrances, exits and other strategic points, especially exit doors and gates which
                     are continuously open whilst the ground is in use;

               (d)   assisting police as appropriate or as requested with crowd control: and

               (e)   undertaking specific duties in an emergency.”

The Interim Popplewell Report
   163. There was considerable controversy in the course of the public inquiry held by M r Justice Popplewell
in 1985 as to the responsibility o f the club and the police. In paragraph 3.6 o f his interim report, M r Justice
Popplewell quoted from a report produced for the M inister o f Housing and Local Governm ent in 1969 as
follows:-

   “The responsibility for controlling crowd behaviour is divided between the police and the club operating the
   ground. The broad line o f division being that police are responsible for movement o f spectators in public
   thoroughfares and from public thoroughfares into the ground, while the club is responsible for the control of
   spectators once they are on the club’s premises ..

 Mr Justice Popplewell said he did not quarrel with that view and went on to observe that in practice the police
 have to take charge and be responsible for controlling crowd behaviour. He then said (paragraph 3.8):

   “It follows, therefore, that as a m atter o f practice, while the physical safety o f the building and the
   maintenance-and good housekeeping o f the ground must always be the responsibility o f the club, the police
   have to take the de facto responsibility o f organising the crowd, with all that entails, during the game .. .”

 Mr Justice Popplewell went on to instance evacuation o f the ground as a procedure in which only the police
 could bear the responsibility o f supervising the organisation o f the crowd.

 The Final Popplewell Report
   164. He harked back to this subject in chapter 4 o f his Final Report. There, he came down more firmly in
 favour o f holding the club responsible for crowd safety. At paragraph 4.13 he said “Because, as a m atter of
nractice police officers have regularlv attended in large numbers at football grounds, it has somehow been
a « u m e d by the clubs that the responsibility for control o f what goes on inside the ground has passed from
them to the police. A police presence'is there to assist in the enforcement of law and order. Those responsible
for organising a private function, however, have the prim ary and continuing obligation an d responsibi 1 y o
ensure reasonable safety for those who are invited on to their premises.” M r Justice Popplewell ended tha
section as follows: “It cannot be too strongly emphasised that it is upon the club, or the occupier o f the ground
who is putting on the function, that the prim ary and continuing obligation rests.”

    165. There remains, however, the question whether there are some grounds o r parts o f grounds where the
club riiay need to rely upon the police (whom they pay to attend) to control filling o f pens and monitoring them
for overcrowding. In other words, whilst the duty in law to ensure safety rests upon the club, they may need,
and bv agreement be entitled, to employ the police to act as their agents in certain circumstances. This very
difficult and grey area as to club and police responsibility will need to be reviewed in greater depth at stage two
o f this Inquiry.

Arrangements at Hillsborough
  166. W hat is clear, however, is that de facto the police at Hillsborough had accepted responsibility for
control o f the pens at the Leppings Lane end. The evidence o f the senior officers who had been concerned with
policing at Hillsborough over the years was all one way on this point. Only M r Duckenfield, who had not
policed at Hillsborough for some 10 years prior to 15 April, took a different view.

    167. M r Lock is now security officer at Sheffield Wednesday and was formerly a police Superintendent at
 Hillsborough matches occupying Mr M urray’s role. He claimed there had been a formal although unwritten
 agreement between the Club and the police in about 1982, whereby the police agreed to steward the Leppings
 Lane end o f the ground. Such a formal agreement is denied by other senior officers and I do not accept that any
 formal agreement was reached. Nevertheless, a practice or arrangement did develop which was known and
 accepted by both Club and police. Its effect was that throughout the ground the stewards were responsible for
 m anning exits and entrances, for controlling entry into the stands, for assisting spectators to their seats in the
 stands and for helping to control the exits after the m atch. They were also responsible at the Kop end on the
 terraces for keeping gangways clear and helping to control the crowd which usually consisted o f home
 supporters. At the Leppings’Lane end, however, there were no gangways on the terraces and the crowd
 consisted usually (and always since 1987) o f away supporters. M r Mole and other senior officers accepted that
 it would have been unreal and unreasonable to expect stewards to go onto those Leppings Lane terraces. They
 would not have been effective there; moreover, they could well have been in some danger from hostile away
 supporters. The police accepted, therefore, that the proper filling o f the pens and monitoring them for
 overcrowding could and would not be carried out by stewards. Many stewards have tended to be either
  extremely young or somewhat elderly. They are paid only a modest sum (£9 at Hillsborough) and they are not
  suitable either by physique or by training to cope on a crowded terrace with no gangways.

 Case for the South Yorkshire Police
   168. Notwithstanding the overwhelming evidence from senior police as already m entioned and from the
 Club, Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police continued throughout the hearing to contend that the Club and
 not the police were responsible for filling and m onitoring the pens and that this was well known to both parties.
 He m aintained that the police were there essentially to secure and preserve law and order. Quite apart from the
 police evidence to the contrary at this Inquiry, the official stance o f the South Yorkshire Police has not always
 been to that effect

  Harris -v- Sheffield United Football Club Limited
     169. In March 1986, the South Yorkshire Police Authority obtained a judgement against Sheffield United
  Football Club for money due for police services provided at Sheffield United’s matches. The defence had been,
  inter alia, that the police were not providing “special police services”. They were doing no more than
  performing their norm al police duties of securing and preserving law and order amongst a crowd. The police
  argument was that they had additional duties. In his judgement, Boreham J summarised the instructions for
  policing as providing for:-

   “(a) the m aintenance o f enforcement o f law and order.

    (b) the enforcement of the Club’s ground regulations, many o f which are concerned with law and order;

    (c) the safetv and comfort o f the spectators, officials and players.”


                                                          29
He referred to the argument o f Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police as follows:-

  “Thirdly. here the police were not discharging their own duty to the public: they were in fact discharging the
  Club’s duties to the spectators whom the Club invited to the ground. The Club chose to invite large numbers
  to their private premises; it was the Club’s duty to provide for their safety, health and com fort They could
  have employed a security firm as banks and others have to do to protect their interests: they chose to request
  the police to perform those duties knowing that the police expected payment. Fourthly, the police within the
  ground provided services which it was not within the scope o f their public duty to perform. For instance,
  they assisted in crowd m anagem ent and in the enforcement o f such ground regulations as refused entry' to
  those who tried to enter without paying or prohibited spectators encroaching on parts o f the ground which
  their entry fee did not entitle them to enter. It may be, submits Mr Bentley, that the m aintenance o f law and
  order was the predom inant aim but there were other services performed.”

The learned Judge found:-

  “In addition to what may be called their law and order role the police were expected and did take part in
  crowd management, ensuring the safety o f spectators, the enforcement o f the Club’s regulations and to be on
  hand to assist in the event o f some emergencies such as fire or accidental injur,."

Police Practice at the Leppings Lane End
   170. At League matches at Hillsborough, the police practice was to decide in advance how m any and which
pens would be used. If a m odest crowd was anticipated only one or two pens might be needed. It was better to
confine the fans to limited spaces (a) to prevent them running about and (b) to reduce the num ber o f police
required. The practice was then to fill the pens one by one. This involved making a judgem ent as to when a pen
was full. There would then be a police decision to close that pen and fill another. It was regarded as impractical
and unsafe for police officers (just like stewards) to go onto the Leppings Lane terraces with away supporters.
This m eant that m onitoring the numbers in any pen had to be done from vantage points outside it. Here, the
police were much better placed than the stewards. There was a good view from the control box and the
television screens there. There were officers on the perim eter track. No stewards were placed there because
having both police and stewards interfered with the viewing. There were also police in the west stand who
could look down on the peris. Intelligence from all these sources could give the police a good appreciation o f
the state o f the terraces. When it was necessary to shut off access to the pens officers on the concourse could be
informed by radio and could take the necessary steps.

 “Find Their Own Level”
    171. At Cup semi-finals, a different approach was adopted. All the pens were opened from the start and the
 policy was “to let the fans find their own level”. This phrase was repeated again and again by police officers at
 the Inquiry. W hat it m eant was that no specific direction was given to fans entering through the tumstiles.
 They were free to go wherever they wished on the terraces. If they became uncomfortable or wished for any
 other reason to move their position, then theoretically they could move elsewhere. In this way it was hoped that
 the fans on the terraces would level themselves out and that distribution would be achieved without police
 intervention. On these occasions, the gates at the top o f the radial fences were locked in the open position. It
 was sought to argue, therefore, that there was freedom o f movement from one pen to another enabling fans to
 “find their level”.

    172. This argument was bad both in theory' and in practice. In theory, the whole object o f the radial fences
 had been to achieve even distribution by directing fans into desired positions. To say then that they could move
 freely from one pen to another would defeat,the object and enable fans to go from a less popular to a more
 popular area without inhibition. In practice this did not happen because the position and size o f the gates was
 such that once a substantial num ber o f spectators were in, the gates were unnoticeable and inaccessible
 especially, to those towards the front who might have most need of them.

   173. The same argument was deployed to suggest that individual maxim um capacities for individual pens
 need not be assessed since the presence o f the open radial gates still meant that the terrace was dne area. In
 practice this simply was not so. The photograph at Appendix 5 taken from the north stand at 2.59 pm shows
 very clearly the congestion in pens 3 and 4 contrasted with'the sparseness in pen 6. This gives the lie to the
 suggestion that the fans could, if uncomfortable, “find their own level”.

   174. The effect of this policy was that whereas at League matches the police had to make a positive decision
 when to close one pen and open another, at semi-finals, where overcrowding was much more likely, the police


                                                         30
left it to the fans themselves to "find their own level” . Effectively, they were left to monitor their own comfort
and safety so as toavoid overcrowding. The police would only intervene when there was some overt sign that an
area was “full”.

When is an Area “FulP?
   175.    Over the years, spectators on terraces have come to accept conditions which are often very
uncom fortable and not infrequentlv downright dangerous. They are subjected to buffeting and squeezing to
set in and out o f the terraces. They are packed tightly and exposed to surging and swaying during the match.
Thev put up with these conditions because they are devoted to the game and because there is little they can do
nhout them. They believe the discomfort will pass and nothing very untoward will happen. Usually that is the
rase and they are reassured by it. Most clubs have not. until very recently, consulted their supporters as to t eir
srievances or suggestions. The practice has been to pack them in on the assumption that if they are prepared to
out u d with it the conditions must be tolerable. Although crowd figures at football grounds have been reduced
in recent years, this has been due principally to the increased proportion o f seating as against standing
acco m m o d a tion . Terraces have still been packed.

   176 It is said that many fans enjoy these features o f terrace viewing. Clearly close proximity shared
discomfort weathering sways and surges together and chanting the same songs and slogans en masse do evoke
good hum our and have produced a spirit or cult of the terraces which many enjoy. Equally there are many who
simply endure these things for the football, for a cheap ticket or indeed for the chance o f getting in at all. And
before Hillsborough most fans on the terraces, even if they enjoy the hurly-burly, had not realised the narrow
margin o f safety between an uncomfortable crush and a fatal one.

     177. The Green Guide sought to improve safety and comfort by laying down criteria for maximum
 capacity ie defining what is “full". The standard set was 54 persons per 10 square metres in favourable
 conditions but fewer, down to 27, in less favourable conditions. The tendency may have been to aim off too
 little from the higher figure for shortcomings in the layout. Certainly the figures considered appropriate in
 pens 3 and 4 at Hillsborough were too high, as already indicated.

    178 Even taking the highest figure suggested in the Green Guide, the problem remained that those
 supposed to be monitoring pens visually had and have little idea o f what 54 persons per 10 square metres look
 like M r Duckenfield’s opinion was that when a pen was full to capacity, the spectators would be shoulder to
 shoulder and chest to back”. That view may derive from seeing the sort o f density crowds regularly endure
 without injury resulting. But it is much more dense than the Green Guide maximum.

     179. The South Yorkshire Fire Brigade provided the Inquiry with photographs o f people standing in an area
 o f 10 square metres at various densities o f packing. Together with my Assessors and others. I took part in a
 similar experiment at the Health and Safety Executive's Sheffield laboratory. We stood in a room o f measured
 area at densities o f 54, 80 and 100 per 10 square metres. It was clear from the photographs and from our
 experiment that the maximum density set out in the Green Guide left considerably more room than those
 monitoring the terraces would have left before declaring an area full .

    180. The tendency has been to allow the pens to fill until the fans complain or show signs o f discomfort. If
 the density at the front appeared less than at the back, the Tannoy would invite the fans to move forward to
 make room for more. The evidence before the Inquiry and many anecdotal letters I have received clearly show
 there have been frequent occasions when the packing on terraces, not only at Hillsborough, has caused
 discomfort and sometimes, for brief periods, fear. Usually the surge recedes, the sway returns, the pressure
 eases and the incident passes unrecorded.

    181. After the crushing at the 1981 semi-final, Hillsborough was not chosen again by the FA until 1987.
  There was evidence that the central pens were uncomfortably overcrowded on that occasion and again at the
  1988 Cup semi-final, although entry to the tunnel was blocked off by police shortly before kick-off in 1988
  because the pens were deemed to be “full” .

  Fear of Hooliganism
     182. Over the last few years, hooliganism at and associated with football matches has strongly influenced
  the strategy o f the police. In their plans and management they have concentrated on averting or containing
  threats to public order. This is understandable and indeed commendable. But it has led to an imbalance
  between the need to quell a minority of troublem akers and the need to secure the safety and comfort of the
  majority. In the police Operational Order, the emphasis was upon prevention o f disorder and in particular
  prevention o f access to the field of play. There was no express requirement that officers on the perim eter track


                                                           31
or in the west stand should keep watch for any possible overcrowding on the terraces. Indeed, the view was
expressed in evidence that packing fans close together on the terraces assisted in controlling the unruly since
the less room they had the less scope there was for misbehaviour.

Summary
   183. Although the police had accepted de facto responsibility for monitoring the pens, their policy on the
day was to leave fans to “find their own level” and to concentrate their own attention on possible disorder.
Whilst in theory the police would intervene if a pen became “full”, in practice they perm itted the test of
fullness to be what the fans would tolerate.

  184. By 2.52 pm when gate C was opened, pens 3 and 4 were over-full even by this test. Many were
uncomfortable. To allow any more into those pens was likely to cause'injuries; to allow in a large stream was
courting disaster.




                                                      32
                                                   CHAPTER 10

                                    THE BUILD-UP AT THE TURNSTILES

   185.    The decision to open gate C. and subsequently gates A and B too, was forced on to the police by the
crowd conditions which developed outside the tumstiles. The crush was so severe that injuries were being
suffered and deaths were feared unless the pressure could be swiftly relieved. Why the crowd pressure had built
to such intensity was one o f the principal issues during the hearing. The suggested causes m ust be considered in
turn.

 The Physical Layout
‘ 186. I have already described and illustrated the approach to the turnstiles (Appendices 1 and 2). At
 Penistone Road and at many other grounds, tum stiles are in a straight line, adequately spaced and with a
 sufficient waiting area for queues to form. Not so at Leppings Lane. The building line, the bridge over the Don
 and the bend in the road, left a wedge-shaped approach to perim eter gates set in an arc, and across a short
 forecourt, to tum stiles also set in an arc. The pairs o f tum stiles were close together and the forecourt, especially
 as divided by the metal fence, provided little space for a waiting crowd.

The Number of Tumstiles
   187. The decision to fill the whole o f the north stand from the Leppings Lane end required the 23 turnstiles
there to adm it 24.256 spectators. O f those, the seven tum stiles (A to G) serving the terraces had to admit
 10.100. ie an average o f just under 1.450 through each turnstile. At the Penistone Road end. 29,800 were
served by 60 tum stiles, or just under 500 per turnstile.

    188. The Green Guide recognises (paragraph 47) that the rate at which spectators can pass through
 tum stiles depends on a variety o f local circumstances but states “in general based on observation and
 experience, it is unlikely that the maximum notional rate per turnstile would exceed 750 per hour”. Since the
 semi-final was an all ticket match requiring no cash transactions, the Club considered that a higher rate of
 about 1,000 per hour per turnstile could be expected. Even at this higher rate, which assumes the tumstiles
 working at m axim um efficiency non-stop, it would have taken nearly 1Vihours to adm it all those with terrace
 tickets. At 750 per hour, it would have taken nearly two hours.

    189. The Green Guide provides (paragraph 44):-

   “Tumstiles should be o f such numbers as to adm it spectators at a rate whereby no unduly large crowds are
   kept waiting for admission . . . ” .

    190. The Officer Working Party had discussed in 1985 the need, and D r Eastwood’s various schemes, for
 improvement o f the turnstile arrangements. The mathematics are elementary. Both the police and the Club
 should have realised that the Leppings Lane tum stiles and the waiting area outside them would be under strain
 to adm it all the Liverpool supporters in time. Success depended o n ih e spectators arriving at a steady rate from
 an early hour and upon the maxim um turnstile rate being m aintained. In fact neither o f these requirements,
 which are inter-linked, was fulfilled. That they might not be so was in my view foreseeable.

 The “Late” arrival of Liverpool Fans
   191. Between 2.30 pm and 2.40 pm the crowd waiting for the tum stiles swelled to over 5,000 and became
 unmanageable. The case made for the police was that large numbers o f Liverpool supporters arrived late, a
 high proportion o f them were drunk and unco-operative; a high proportion had no tickets; all o f them were
 hell-bent on getting in on time. They say this was unforeseeable and explains why they lost control.

     192. W hether those who arrived between 2.30 pm and 2.40 pm were “late? was m uch debated. The ticket
  simply requested its holder “to take up [his] position 15 minutes before k ic k -o ff. That may have been
  intended to persuade those with stand tickets to take their seats, but it would not be unreasonable for a
  standing spectator to arrive at the tumstiles between 2.30 pm and 2.40 pm. W hether they were “late” or not,
  however, there was certainly a large concentration o f Liverpool fans arriving at about 2.30 pm and after.

  Traffic Delays
    193. It is unlikely that traffic conditions had any significant effect on this. True, there were delays on the
  Liverpool traffic routes. There were roadworks on the M62 which was the recommended route. At various
  points the carriageway was reduced from four lanes or three lanes to two, but no serious delays were reported.


                                                            33
On the M63 there were longer delays due to a contraflow and at its junction with the A560 there was heavy
congestion due to volume o f traffic. However, the Liverpool routes were clear by 2.20 pm and those witnesses
who complained o f delays en route had nevertheless managed to be in range o f the ground in ample time.

Fine Weather and Drinking
   194. The likeliest explanations for the sparse Liverpool attendance in the ground before 2.30 pm were four­
fold - the warm weather, drinking, disinclination to enter the ground early and prolong the standing, and a
tendency o f Liverpool supporters to cut it fine.

   195. The police emphasised that at the 1988 semi-final there was no comparable build-up o f “late” arrivals.
They claim, therefore, that they had no reason to foresee it in 1989. However, in 1988. although the weather
was fine, it was 11 °F cooler than in 1989. 15 April was the sort o f fine spring day which tem pted fans to sit or
stand about in the sun with a drink. If you had a ticket it would seem more pleasant and sensible to relax in that
way than to enter the ground early and stand on the terrace for an extra hour. Pre-match entertainm ent in the
ground had been advertised but did not take place. Even if it had, it may not have been an encouragement to
many fans to enter so early.

Was Drunkenness a M ajor Factor in the Crisis at the Turnstiles?
   196. O f those who arrived at 2.30 pm or after, very many had been drinking at public houses or had
brought drink from home or an off-licence. I am satisfied on the evidence, however, that the great majority
were not drunk nor even the worse for drink. The police witnesses varied on this. Some described a high
proportion as drunk, as “lager-louts” or even as “anim als”. Others described a generally normal crowd with an
unco-operative m inority who had drunk too much. In my view some officers, seeking to rationalise their loss
of control, overestimated the drunken element in the crowd. There certainly was such an element. There were
youngsters influenced by drink and bravado pushing im patiently at the rear o f the crowd thereby exacerbating
the crush. But the more convincing police witnesses, including especially Detective Superintendent McKay
and Chief Inspector Creaser as well as a num ber o f responsible civilian witnesses, were in my view right in
describing this element as a minority. Those witnesses attributed the crush to the sheer numbers o f fans all
anxious to gain entry. There was no criticism o f the crowd by any o f the witnesses in the period up to 2.30 pm
or even 2.35 pm. W hat happened then was not a sudden deterioration in the m ood or sobriety of'those
assembled there. No doubt those coming behind would have had more to drink and would have included the
unruly minority. But the crisis developed because this very large crowd became packed into a confined
turnstile area and its very density hampered its passage through the tumstiles.

   197. Superintendent Marshall and other officers criticised the crowd as unco-operative because police
exhortations to stop pushing and to ease back were not heeded. How could they be? In that crush most people
had no control over their movements at all. Two incidents involving police horses illustrate the point. One
horse was found afterwards to have cigarette bum s on its rump. Clearly that was the despicable work o f a
hooligan whether in drink or not. However, there were also eyewitness accounts o f a horse being physically
lifted off its feet by the crowd. That occurred, as the police accepted, without malice or intent but as an
involuntary consequence of crowd pressure which those by the horse’s flanks could not resist any more than the
horse itself.

Reduced Efficiency of the Turnstiles
   198. The labelling o f the tum stiles in the order A, C. B was confusing. A fan with a B ticket who went by
mistake to the wrong side o f the metal fence would have had the greatest difficulty in getting back and round to
the correct side. The colour coding was inefficient because the coloured wooden panels were affixed to the
turnstile walls so low that they were not easily visible through a crowd. The information on the ticket printed by
Sheffield Wednesday Football Club was misleading and its layout unhelpful, as Mr Mackrell frankly conceded.

   199. The result was that in: the early, stages, police officers were pestered.by fans for help as to where they
should go. Later, as the crowd became more dense, fans were presenting their tickets at the wrong tumstiles.
There were also Liverpool supporters who had acquired tickets for the Kop end but sought entry at Leppings
Lane. They caused delays in the turnstile operation when entry was refused and after a while the police
instructed the operators to let them through. There was further delay because the crush made it difficult for
fans to get into the turnstile entrances. Once there, the pressure from behind was such as, on occasions, to jam
them in the doorway or against the paddle o f the turnstile. Finally, there were fans without tickets who sought
to enter by offering payment, by seeking to go over or under the paddle or by sliding through with a ticket
holder. All o f these activities slowed down the turnstile rate which at the worst period was only about 600 per
hour per turnstile. The waiting crowd therefore expanded and as the minutes passed frustration grew. Visitors


                                                       34
who had paid for tickets and travelled from afar realised they were making little forward progress. Frustration
increased pressure and induced panic at the front. Determination to get into the match was intensified by
determ ination to get out o f the crush.

Were Fans Without Tickets a Major Factor in the Build-Up?
  200.     It has become a fact o f football life that fans do turn up at all-ticket matches without tickets. It is not
possible to give an accurate figure or even a reliable estimate of the num ber without tickets on 15 April. Police
estimates varied from about 200 to about 2,000. There were certainly frequent requests for tickets or “spares”
during the hours before the build-up. Many o f those warned off by the poli ce were seen to return to the area.
Some were hanging about on the bridge. Again, however, the police witnesses who most impressed me did not
consider the num ber o f ticketless fans to be inordinately large. This accords with two other sources of
evidence.

   '*01. First, there was a wide range o f witnesses who observed inside the ground that the Liverpool end y a s at
a late stage well below capacity save for pens 3 and 4. The north stand still had many em pty seats and the; wing
pens were sparse. The match "being a sell-out. there were clearly many ticket holders to come and they could
account for the large crowd still outside the turnstiles. Had the Liverpool accom m odation been full by 2.40
pm. one could have inferred that most or much o f the large crowd outside lacked tickets.

   202. Secondly, such figures as are available from the Club’s electronic monitoring system and from analyses
by the HSE suggest that no great num ber entered without tickets. They show that the num ber who passed
through turnstiles A to G plus those who entered through gate C roughly equalled the terrace capacity figure of
10.100 for which tickets had been sold. The Club’s record showed 7,038 passed through turnstiles A to G.
However, the counting mechanism on turnstile G was defective, so the HSE did a study using the video film
and projecting figures from the other turnstiles. This gave an assessment o f 7,494. with a maximum o f 7,644
passing through A to G. Again, using the video, the HSE assessed the num ber who entered the ground whilst
gate C was open at 2.240 with a m aximum o f 2,480. Accordingly, the HSE’s best estimate o f the total entering
through gate C and turnstiles A to G was 9.734 with a maximum o f 10,124.1 recognise that these can only be
rough checks because, for example, some with terrace tickets were allowed through turnstiles 1 to 16 and there
would be other sim ilar factors which have not formed part o f the assessment. Nevertheless, the figures do
 suggest that there was not a very significant body o f ticketless fans in the crowd which built up.

 The “Conspiracy” Theory
   203. On behalf o f South Yorkshire police, the theory was advanced that the “late” arrival o f so many
 Liverpool supporters was planned to buck the system. The suggestion was that fans without tickets conspired
 to arrive late and create such trouble as would force the police to adm it them to the match. The slender
 evidence upon which this theory rested came from two sources: overheard conversations in public houses and
 the antecedent history- o f Liverpool supporters at away matches.

   204. One witness said he heard three Liverpool supporters saying, in effect, that they would manage to get
 in without tickets by causing trouble so that police would open a gate, and that they had done this before.
 Another witness heard two o f a group of Liverpool supporters say they had no tickets, that they would go to the
 ground just before kick-off, that no-one would stop them getting in and that they had not been stopped yet.
 Statements were put in relating to two other small groups talking in similar terms.

 Liverpool Supporters at Away Matches
   205. The South Yorkshire police prepared a dossier o f reports on the behaviour o f Liverpool fans at away
 matches with the object o f showing a pattern o f troublesome behaviour by large numbers eitherw ithout tickets
 or with forged tickets. W ithout setting out the whole history, it can be summarised as follows.

   206. On three occasions Liverpool fans without tickets were allowed into all-ticket matches upon payment.
 (At Watford on 13 February 1988, 1,500 were admitted; at Southampton on 24 Septem ber 1988, 150 were
 admitted; at Southam pton again on 12 December 1988, 750 were admitted.) At Norwich on 1 April 1989,
 Liverpool supporters arrived without tickets but 1.272 tickets had been returned and fans from both Liverpool
 and Norwich were allowed to buy them for cash. A similar situation occurred at W imbledon on 13 May 1989.
 There were six other occasions from 1986 to date, including the Cup finals o f 1986 and 1989, when numbers of
 Liverpool supporters turned up without tickets or otherwise behaved badly.

   207. Four points must be noted, however. On none o f the occasions when ticketless fans were adm itted for
 payment was the m atch a sell-out. There was therefore room in the ground on each occasion. At a sell-out fans
might not expect to be allowed in. even for payment. Secondly, no trouble o f the kind alleged was encountered
at the 1988 semi-final when Liverpool visited Hillsborough. Thirdly. Liverpool visited Hillsborough again in
January 1989 without any trouble. Finally, no forged tickets were in use on 15 April apart from three crude
photocopies.

 No Conspiracy
   208. I have already found that there was not an abnormally large num ber o f fans without tickets on this
occasion. W ith one or two exceptions, the police witnesses themselves did not subscribe to the “conspiracy”
theory. I am satisfied that the large concentration at Leppings Lane from 2.30 pm to 2.50 pm did not arrive
as a result o f any concerted plan. There were. I accept, small groups without tickets who were willing to exploit
any adventitious chance o f getting into the ground. They, together with the minority who had drunk too much,
certainly aggravated the problem faced by the police. But that main problem was simply one o f large numbers
packed into the small area: outside the turnstiles.

The Police Operation at Leppings Lane
  209. The Operational O rder for 15 April followed closely that laid down for the 1988 semi-final. The
emphasis was on m aintaining law and order. Side roads were to be blocked off to prevent damage in residential
areas. Pairs o f officers were to patrol streets to prevent “clash o f rival supporters”. Officers were to watch public
houses, shops and supermarkets “where looting could take place”. Outside the turnstiles, officers were to ensure
supporters entering did not have banners, weapons, missiles or alcohol.

  210. Unfortunately, hooligan behaviour has m ade all these steps necessary. But the only written provision
aimed at effecting controlled entry to the turnstiles was one enjoining officers “to ensure orderly queues are
formed”. There was no provision for controlling the entry o f the crowd into the turnstile area.

   211. As long ago as 1924, the Departmental Com mittee on Crowds stated:-

   The control o f crowds should begin at a point some considerable distance from the entrance to the ground.
  The advantages o f an arrangement o f this kind a r e ... in preventing congestion at the entrances to grounds.”

This was particularly im portant at Leppings Lane where the turnstile area was so small and awkwardly laid
out. If a large crowd was permitted uncontrolled entry through the perimeter gates, the forming o f queues at the
turnstiles and control by officers, whether on foot or mounted, would become impracticable. Those waiting at
the turnstiles would become a single growing mass. Once that happened, it would be difficult to retrieve the
situation.

  212. W hether steps were taken and what steps to avoid this happening was left to oral briefing and ad hoc
instructions on the day.

Previous Experience
  213. The senior police officers said it had never happened before so there was no reason to foresee it. In-fact,
the only two previous occasions when the Leppings Lane terraces had been used to fill the whole o f the north
and west sides o f the ground were at the two semi-finals, in 1987and 1988. In 1987. the match was on a Sunday,
scheduled for 12 noon, and kick-off was postponed for a quarter o f an hour because o f late arrivals.

Policing in 1988
   214. As to 1.988, there was a very large and consistent body o f evidence that, on the day, the police in
Leppings Lane conducted an efficient filtering exercise designed to keep away those without tickets and
control the flow o f fans towards the ground. I do not believe that so many witnesses without either opportunity
or reason to put their heads together could be mistaken about what they experienced on that occasion. Yet. the
police m aintain that no filtering exercise other than on a random basis was conducted in 1988 and that their
policy and practice then were no different from those o f 1989.

  215. The answer to this conflict must, I think, be that whilst the policy may have been no different, in
practice the policing in 1988 was more efficient and was not put to the same test and strain as a year later. There
was not so large a swell in numbers approaching the ground from 2.30 pm to 2.50 pm as in 1989.
Nevertheless, there had been warning signs in 1988. Detective Superintendent McKay gave the following
evidence:                                                                               6



                                                         36
 “Q Were you aware o f a build-up o f numbers last year towards the latter stages at the turnstiles?

 A      Yes. . . There was a huge build-up around 10 minutes to 3 when many, many Liverpool supporters
        came at that tim e. They had been drinking, the ones that I saw and there was q uite a sizeable crush
        built-up - sizeable queue.

 Q      Queue or crush?
 A      Com pacted queue, built-up in the area by the turnstiles which I believe are marked A to G. That crowd
        reached back alm ost to the gates. It never got any bigger than that and the turnstiles operated relatively
        freely and they dealt with that crowd. Fans were still arriving at about 10 past 3 b u t by then t h e . . .

 Q      This crowd that you have described o f the late arrivals at about 10 to —was it an orderly crowd?

 A      Oh no. No. The orderly crowd had gone in. and when I say they were not an orderly crowd, obviously
        mixed amongst those people w ere. . .

 Q      O f course, but taking it generally?

 A      But by and large they had taken a lot o f drink on board and they were in such num bers that excluding
        them from the ground was completely out o f the question.

  Q     Were they standing in an orderly queue or was there some pushing and shoving?

  A     There was a lot o f pushing and shoving. There was an urgency to get into the ground.

  Q     But fortunately it does not appear to have been in nearly such numbers as this year.

  A      It wasn’t.”

Police Intelligence in Advance
  216. Apart from that experience in 1988, the tendency o f Liverpool supporters to arrive late was not
unknown. Witnesses said that they get through the turnstiles at their home ground, Anfield. quite quickly and
tend therefore not to arrive early. Indeed, a general recent tendency to postpone arrival was noted by the
Sheffield City Council Advisory Group, with police present, on 23 March 1988. The m inute reads:-

  “As far as the turnstile question was concerned, a pattern has developed o f people arriving some 15 minutes
  before the start o f the game hoping to gain admission. This trend may be due to the banning o f alcohol at
  sports grounds which could lead to people going elsewhere for refreshment prior to the football match. As
  the available turnstiles operated quite effectively for the majority o f the time, and that the late arrival
  problem could perhaps only be dealt with by education o f the spectators” (sic).

  217. In so far as Liverpool supporters’ behaviour at away matches may have been indicative o f what police
problems might arise on 15 April, most o f the facts should have been available at the planning stage. As in other
forces, South Yorkshire Police had a liaison officer whose job was to seek, receive and collate relevant
information as to the visiting supporters. The Association o f Chief Police Officers’ Guide to Policing Football
highlights the im portance of such liaison:-

  “It is im portant that the officer responsible for policing the match determines the pre-match planning in the
  light o f the intelligence at hand. Whilst that intelligence can be obtained from a variety o f sources, the prime
  source for football intelligence is the Police National Intelligence System which is based on the network of
  police liaison officers. Summaries completed by police officers o f the hom e club force are forwarded to the
  visiting club’s liaison officer making available intelligence about fans’ behaviour at both home and away
  fixtures. This inform ation will be collated and made available for future matches involving that club”.

  218. The FA had also laid down in a m em orandum issued in the 1985/6 season measures to be adopted by
the away club which included the following: -

  “ It is the responsibility o f the away club to advise the home club of the recent behaviour o f their supporters
  at away matches, irrespective o f whether the behaviour has resulted in disciplinary action by the Football
  Association or not” .

     219. It does not seem that information o f this kind was passed to the Sheffield Wednesday Club or played


                                                          37
any part in the South Yorkshire Police plans. Had the latter been informed o f the history contained in the
dossier and summarised above it may well have influenced police strategy in Leppings Lane.

  220. There is presently a proposal that a national computer-based police football intelligence system should
be set up to make the necessary information readily available.

Police Intelligence on the Day
  221. The unfilled space in the Liverpool areas inside the ground, the figures for entry available from the
Club’s com puter and observations on the video screen should have enabled those in the control room to
m onitor the numbers arriving and still to arrive at Leppings Lane. Radio contact with mobile (Tango) patrols
detailed to m onitor licensed premises in the district could have indicated the numbers still to come. But at 2-.30
pm when M r Murray told Mr Duckenfield they would “get them all in by 3 o’clock” he seems not to have
appreciated that in addition to those visible at the turnstiles there were many more still to come. Certainly, Mr
Marshall outside the turnstiles was not told and could not otherwise have known that there were still many
Liverpool ticket holders to arrive.

Mr Marshall and Mr Greenwood
  222. The division o f command between these two officers did not help. M r Marshall was in charge o f the
serials outside the perim eter gates in the Leppings Lane area and in the roads beyond. In practice he operated
inside and just outside the turnstile area. M r Greenwood’s area as G round Com mander extended from the
pitch to the perim eter gates. He in fact stationed him self near the players’ tunnel. He was wholly unaware o f the
growing problems at the turnstiles and was in no position to exercise control over his officers who were under
pressure there. No-one in the control room thought to tell him.

Control Lost
  223. In the result, the large concentration o f arrivals from 2.30 pm to 2.40 pm pressed unrestrained into
the turnstile area through the perimeter gates which were fully open. When that area was full, later arrivals
swelled the crowd out to the forecourt and even into the road. As already recounted, the foot officers at the
turnstiles became trapped and endangered and retired through the turnstiles. The m ounted officers could not
operate am idst such a dense crowd in a confined space. They came out o f the turnstile area. There were then
the belated attempts to close the perimeter gates and prevent more fans joining the mass until it had a chance to
diminish through the turnstiles; still later the attem pt to put a cordon o f horses across the entrance.

  224. Despite knowledge o f the difficult layout, the very large num ber o f fans to be got through so few
turnstiles and the tendency o f fans to arrive in the last half hour, no contingency plans were made to avoid a
crush such as occurred. Even on the day, the need to close Leppings Lane to traffic before 2.30 pm and the
other available intelligence already summarised, should have prom pted those in command to take precautions
against such a crush. If some o f the perimeter gates had been closed and cordons o f m ounted and foot officers
had been placed a little distance from those gates, the flow o f fans into the turnstile area could have been
controlled before that area became engulfed. It was the crush itself which produced the frustration and the
panic and brought out the worst in those who had drunk too much. Earlier control o f entry would have
prevented the crush and maintained the good mood which had prevailed until 2.30 pm.

  225. It should moreover have been obvious by 2.40 pm , if not earlier, that a large part o f the crowd could
not be adm itted until well after 3 pm. Had a decision to postpone kick-off been made and announced much of
the frustration and with it the impetus crushing the crowd would have been reduced. A combination of
controlled filtering and a postponed kick-off would probably have obviated the need to open the gates.

Postponement of Kick-off
   226. At various stages in his evidence, M r Duckenfield gave three accounts of why he thought it too late to
postpone kick-off. Once it was that one of the teams had already come onto the pitch. Then it was that a group
of photographers at the tunnel had wrongly led him to think that the teams were coming out. Finally, he did not
know why he thought the teams were coming out. They did not in fact come onto the pitch until 2.54 pm. two
minutes after gate C was opened. Police Constable Buxton had asked for a postponement o f kick-off before
gate C was opened. It should not, however, have needed a police Constable in the thick o f the crowd (and there
were others o f like mind) to think o f postponing the kick-off. The need should have been clear in the control
room.

  227. The truth was that M r Duckenfield applied inflexibly the policy he had discussed with Mr Murray.
Kick-off would not be postponed unless there were some m ajor cause for delayed arrivals eg a jam on the


                                                        38
, motorway or fog. I accept that the thinking behind this policy was not callous or punitive. If kick-off is
  postponed whenever a proportion o f fans choose to leave the public houses late, the practice may grow and
  kick-off times would become meaningless. But, a com m ander must deal with the problem o f the day. Faced
  with a situation which was becoming dangerous, crowd safety should have been his param ount consideration.
  Kick-off should have been delayed.

 Summary
    228.    The layout o f the turnstiles and the num ber they were required to serve left no margin o f safety against
 an uneven flow o f fens. Because police strategy in advance and on the day did not cater for it, the arrival o f a
 large num ber o f supporters between 2.30 pm and 2.40 pm created an unmanageable crush. The presence of
 a substantial m inority o f fans who had drunk too much aggravated that problem. Having lost control and
 rejected the option o f postponing kick-off, the police were faced with a serious danger o f deaths or injuries.
 They were left therefore with no alternative but to open the gates. Superintendent Marshall was right at that
 stage to ask for it and M r Duckenfield was right to agree. But the possible effects o f so dram atic a step required
 other action.




                                                          39
                                                CHAPTER 11

                              T H E BLUNDER O N O P E N IN G TH E GATES

   229. The decision to order the opening o f the gates was not accompanied or followed by any other order to
deal with the consequences. W hen gate C was opened, a steady stream o f about 2,000 fans poured through it
over some five minutes. Clearly they were going to go into the ground somewhere and unless they were diverted
their likeliest route was through the tunnel for reasons already given. No warning was issued from the control
room that the gate was to be opened. Serials on the concourse were not alerted. Neither the Club control room
nor the Chief Steward at the Leppings Lane end was warned. Not even Mr Greenwood* the Ground
Commander, was informed. From 2.47 pm when M r Marshall made his first request untiL2.52 pm when Mr
Duckenfield acceded to it, there were five m inutes in which orders could have been given as to how the influx
was to be absorbed. It was not done. In evidence, M r Duckenfield began by saying that no officer m ade any
wrong decision but he later conceded he had erred in this regard. He said he did not consider where the people
would go when the gate opened. Even after it opened, when he could see the influx on the television screen, no
order was given to steer the fans to the wing pens. M r Duckenfield said it did not cross his m ind to detail
officers on the concourse to shut off the tunnel. Those officers could not have known from their position how
full pens 3 and 4 were. That was a m atter for the control room to m onitor from its own observations and using
 intelligence from around the ground.

  230. Since pens 3 and 4 were full by 2.50 pm, the tunnel should have been closed o ff whether gate C was to
be opened or not. The exercise was a simple one and had been carried out in 1988. All that was necessary was
for a few officers to act as a cordon at the entrance to the tunnel and divert fans elsewhere. Unfortunately, the
1988 closure seems to have been unknown to the senior officers on duty at the time. It did not figure in the
debriefing notes. It therefore had no influence on the planning for 1989.

  231. Planning apart, however, it should have been clear in the control room where there was a view o f the
pens and o f the crowd at the turnstiles that the tunnel had to be closed. If orders had been given to that effect
when gate C was opened, the fans could have been directed to the empty areas o f the wings and this disaster
could still have been avoided. Failure to give that order was a blunder o f the first magnitude.

  232. Significantly, when permission was given to open gate A, M r Duckenfield did order serials to go to that
part o f the concourse to m onitor the influx towards the north stand. He did this because he feared that if fans
went to the north stand without tickets, they would not get seats and, there being no perim eter fences at the
north side, they might invade the pitch. This illustrates again the preoccupation with avoiding pitch invasion
as against safety and the risks o f overcrowding. Because those entering through gate C could not get onto the
pitch, it was not thought necessary to alert officers to m onitor them. The possibility o f overcrowding simply
was not considered.




                                                        40
                                                 CHAPTER 12

                                          THE BARRIERS IN PEN 3

Barrier144                         t
   233. The removal o f barrier 144 in 1986 should have reduced the notional capacity o f pen 3 as already
mentioned. But it did more. In the absence o f barrier 144, the influx o f fans after 2.52 pm met no retarding
structure as it came into pen 3. The pressure created was free to push fans straight down by the radial fence to
the lowest line o f barriers. The pressure diagonally from the tunnel mouth down to barrier num ber 124a which
collapsed was unbroken by any intervening barrier. 124a was also vulnerable to pressure straight down the pen
through the gap in the barrier above it created in 1985.

  234. Inspector Bullas. positioned in.the west stand, described what he saw looking down on the pens
around 3 pm.

  “... I saw from the direction o f the tunnel l kind o f movement down the terracing... the type o f thing that you
  see on the nature programmes, the molten lead flowing down the side o f the mountainside, the molten lava ...
  a “river o f people” ... going directly towards the pitch but there again spreading... out.”

   235. Dr Eastwood conceded in evidence that the removal of barrier 144 was likely to have contributed to
the collapse o f 124a. Later, he sought to resile from that answer, but I think his earlier admission was correct. It
was argued that if barrier 144 had remained, the influx from gate C would have built up further back and the
tragedy might have occurred in the tunnel or might have broken barrier 144 itself. This is speculative and I
think unlikely. W hat remained o f barrier 144 in pen 4 did not cause a build-up; nor did it collapse. But its
remaining in position may well have accounted for no barrier further down pen 4 collapsing and for the lesser
carnage in that pen.                                                                     ~

When did Barrier 124a Fail?
  236. Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police sought to argue that this barrier collapsed or may have
collapsed at about 2.47 pm. His purpose was to suggest that the opening of gate C was not causally linked with
the crushing and fatalities resulting from that collapse. I have already found that whilst the evidence does not
permit the tim e o f collapse to be fixed with certainty, it was after 2.52 pm. I now give my reasons:

  (a) I have several times watched the BBC video tape on which Counsel relied. I do not find the incident he
      identifies at 2.47 pm suggestive o f a collapse at that time;

   (b) the evidence o f fans who were near or at the barrier was overwhelmingly to the effect that the collapse
       occurred at or after 3 pm;

   (c) the biggest group o f witnesses was that which related the collapse to the surge following Beardsley’s
       “near-miss” at the Kop end at 3.04 pm:

   (d) the appearance on video and photographs o f fans in the area o f barrier 124a after the incident at 2.47 pm
       and before the final crush is not consistent with it having collapsed so early;

   (e) it is highly unlikely that if so catastrophic an event had occurred as early as 2.47 pm, the police on the
       track and elsewhere would have taken until nearly 3 o’clock to realise something was seriously wrong.
       Indeed, if Counsel for the South Yorkshire Police were correct in his timing o f the collapse, the failure of
       the police to respond for so long would expose them to even graver criticism than that made in this
       Report.

Dr Eastw ood’s Testing of the Barriers
  237. Two sections o f barrier 124a in pen 3 collapsed as a result o f the overcrowding. T hat collapse caused a
number of deaths. D r Eastwood and his staff had undertaken the periodical testing of crush barriers required
by the Green Guide and by the Safety Certificate. Barrier 124a had been tested in July 1988 and passed.

   238. The test had been carried out in accordance with D r Eastwood’s interpretation o f Annex C to the
 Green Guide. That requires an evenly distributed force o f 6.0kN/metre width to be applied for 3 five minute



                                                         41
periods, the interval between applications to be as short as possible. A record has to be kept o f the am ount of
deformation during each loading and o f the percentage o f recovery. If the-recovery is less than 50% after the
tirird application o f force, the barrier has failed the test. If recovery is between 50% and 75%, there must be a
re-test. The question is: 50% or 75% o f what? Is the recovery’ to be in relation to the position o f the barrier
before the first application o f force or before the third? If the former, a span o f 124a recorded 53% at the 1988
test and should have been re-tested. If the latter, it recorded 100% and passed. Unfortunately the Green Guide
is unclear as to the correct interpretation. D r Eastwood took the latter view and so passed the barrier. He
justified his interpretation in evidence. He said failure to recover to the original position could be due to a
“shake-down" effect related to some giving in the ashes under the concrete or to some other extraneous factor
rather than to any defect in the material of the barrier itself.

  239. I think, after consulting Professor Maunder, that safety ought to have dictated recovery should be by
reference to the position of the barrier before the first application of force. I accept, however, that the Green
Guide is ambiguous and D r Eastwood’s interpretation is tenable. It has some support from the British
Standards tests on steel structures. Clearly, however, for the future, the Green Guide should be clarified on this
point.

Corrosion
  240. Inspection of barrier 124a, and indeed other barriers at Hillsborough, by the HSE showed
considerable corrosion o f the metal at vulnerable points where water could accumulate. D r Eastwood agreed
that if a significant degree of corrosion was observed on visual inspection, a barrier should be condemned.

   241. The Green G uide does not specifically refer to corrosion. Paragraph 39 provides, inter alia:

   “Crush barriers and balustrades should be examined for deformation or any other overt signs o f weakness”.

Paragraph 6 o f Annex C provides:           ,

   “If during any test, even though the barrier ... satisfies the above loading requirements, doubt should arise
   for any reason (including such matters as cracking o f the terracing or distortion o f connections) as to the
   safety o f the b a rrie r... a detailed investigation should be carried out. Unless the results o f this investigation
   remove the doubt as to safety of the b a rrie r... (it) should be deemed to have failed the test”.

   242. Since corrosion is a likely cause o f deterioration, a revision of the Green Guide should make specific
 reference to it.

 Causation
   243. Tests done by the HSE suggest that although barrier 124a passed the loading test in 1988 and probably
 would have been able to sustain a force which did not exceed the test load, it was unable to resist the load
 imposed upon it by reason of the numbers in pen 3, the excessive gap in the barrier higher up the pen and the
 absence o f barrier 144. Corrosion probably played a part, but the effective cause o f the collapse was the
 excessive and unanticipated pressure to which the barrier was exposed.




                                                            42
                                                CHAPTER 13

                                  THE CRUSHING NOT RECOGNISED

Observation from Control Room
   244. As the stream from gate C flowed through the tunnel, the officers in the control room could be expected
to keep a close watch on pens 3 and 4. They had a direct view o f them from an elevated position through their
window. Although they had no field-glasses, there was the zoom facility on the TV camera. The radio was by
then working again and although reception was difficult due to crowd noise and possibly excessive air traffic
on channel 25. attempts could have been m ade to alert officers on the perimeter track to watch for
overcrowding and report their observations. In the event, pens 3 and 4 became more and more crowded, surges
took place, fans were showing and signalling distress. None of this was seen or recognised in the control room.

Officers on the Track
  245. The 20 officers detailed to the perim eter track were distributed round the pitch so that some five
officers were at the west end. Their written instructions made no reference to the avoidance or detection of
overcrowding. The same applied to the officers in the west stand. Mr Greenwood adm itted that his oral
briefings also contained no m ention of monitoring the pens for overcrowding.

   246. The Operational Order for 1988 had instructed officers to forbid anyone “access to the track from the
terraces without the consent of a senior officer (except to receive medical attention)”. At the end o f the 1988
semi-final, there was a m inor pitch invasion. Accordingly, that prohibition was emphasised in the 1989
Operational Order by being put into capital letters. The com bination of no instructions as to overcrowding and
a strong prohibition on opening the gates was likely to make police recognition o f crushing slow and their
response reluctant. Small wonder that the growing pressure and congestion between 2.50 pm and 2.59 pm
went unheeded or certainly unremedied. Even when officers recognised there was a problem, the rule required
consent o f a senior officer before a gate could be opened.

  247. “Senior officer” meant an officer of Inspector rank or higher. The Inspector in charge of the 20 officers
on the track was Mr Darling. He stationed him self by the players’ tunnel, the most central position for
supervising his men. In evidence he said:

   “I would only take action if I thought.crowding had got to such a stage that the fans were in danger. I’d then
   inform ground control and I would expect someone deployed to the back of the stand.”

  T hat underlines the inhibition against opening perim eter gates. So did the evidence of one Constable who
said it had been so drum m ed into officers not to open the gates that when he saw distress in pen 4, he “debated
with himself before opening the gate, thinking: “If I’m wrong, I’m going to get a right bollocking for this.”
Naturally, one would hope that common sense and hum anity would make some officers cut through the rules
and open a gate if fans were clearly in distress.

   248. This is what happened, but not until officers recognised the distress and even then not immediately.
 Hence, gates 3 and 4, having been opened, were shut again before they were finally opened and at first those
 seeking to climb out over the fence were pushed back. This reaction of the police did not go on for as long as
 some witnesses believed. They probably m isinterpreted the hand movements from Mr Greenwood and others
 aimed at persuading fans to move back and relieve the pressure as attempts to stop those climbing out at the
 front.

   249. Nevertheless, there was a period during which the failure to recognise the problem and the inhibition
 against tackling it caused vital tim e to be lost.




                                                        43
                                       THE RESPONSE OF THE POLICE

 . The Officers in Command                                                                            <
     250. Even when realisation o f the problem came to officers on the track, it was some minutes before it
   reached the control room. W hen spectators first appeared on the track, the im m ediate assum ption in the
' control room was that a pitch invasion was threatened. This was unlikely at the beginning o f a match. It
   became still less likely when those on the track made no move towards the pitch. M r Motson, the BBC
   commentator, recognised and said, well before the match was stopped, that the trouble seemed to be
   overcrowding and not misbehaviour. Still, the assumption to the contrary persisted in the control room. Until
   Mr Murray radioed for a fleet o f ambulances, about 3.06 pm, M r Duckenfield continued to treat the incident
   as a threat to the pitch and to public order. The message calling up all available officers m entioned a pitch
   invasion. Operation Support was initiated and dog handlers were requested.
    251. Until Chief Superintendent Nesbit arrived, there was no effective leadership either from control or on
 the pitch to harness and organise rescue efforts. No orders were given for officers to enter the tunnel and relieve
 pressure. Some officers did this on their own initiative. Apart from the Tannoy request to clear the pitch, no
 attempt was made to clear and m ark off a casualty area where first-aid could be given without hindrance by
 fans and photographers milling about between the bodies. There was no co-ordination o f the early provision of
 first-aid or o f stretcher parties or o f the rescue effort through gates 3 and 4. No request for help was broadcast to
 doctors and nurses in the crowd until about 3.29 pm when it was too late. Probably, there was little that could
 have been achieved in m ost cases however soon doctors had been summoned, but there were marginal cases
 where earlier attention might have made a difference.
   252. The plight o f those behind the fencing and the existence o f injuries were known to officers at the scene
 from 3 pm. But the M ajor Disaster Plan was not started until 3.06 pm at earliest when the am bulance service
 was called. No request for cutting gear or for the fire brigade was made until 3.13 p.m. Again, it is unlikely that
 these services could have saved lives if they had been called promptly, but it is possible.
 Police on the Pitch
    253. Despite the initial lack o f leadership, many officers did all they humanly could to rescue and revive the
 victims. M any supporters who gave evidence paid tribute to these efforts:- It is also fair to say that the number
 of officers who could at first be usefully involved at the two open gates was necessarily limited.
    254. Chief Superintendent Nesbit’s action in deploying a line o f officers across the m iddle of the pitch has
 already been m entioned. I can well understand the resentment it caused. However, the police assertion that a
 rush by some fans towards the Kop end raised fears of conflict are well borne out by the video tape. In my
 judgement, Chief Superintendent Nesbit was well justified in using some o f the .r.any officers called up
 pursuant to Operation Support to prevent possible violence. To have had open fighting in a ground where
 some 90 spectators already lay dead would have been an unthinkable and obscene development.
  Fans on the Pitch
     255. Many fans who escaped onto the pitch alive were in a state o f collapse or close to it. Most o f those who
  retained their strength strove magnificently to assist the victims. They helped pull them clear; they helped with
  first-aid; they helped carry the improvised stretchers.
    256. There were fans, however, who were distraught, angry, drunk, or all three. Their conduct in abusing,
  assaulting and spitting at the police was disgraceful, the more so since earlier police failures had little to do
  with those officers now doing their best for the injured. In addition, there were abuse and assaults on
  ambulance men and firemen in the course of their rescue work. This was probably because their similar
  uniforms caused them to be mistaken for police. However, although the abuse was widespread, the num ber of
  assaults and spittings was on the evidence comparatively small. In deploring them, one m ust recognise the
  uniquely horrifying experience which those responsible had just suffered and were still suffering.
  False Reports
     257. Before this Inquiry began, there were stories reported in the press, and said to have em anated from
  police officers present at the m atch, o f “mass drunkenness”. It was said that drunken fans urinated on the
  police while they were pulling the dead and injured out, that others had even urinated on the bodies o f the dead
  and stolen their belongings. N ot a single witness was called before the Inquiry to support any o f those
  allegations although every opportunity was afforded for any o f the represented parties to have any witness
  called whom they wished. As soon as the allegations I have mentioned were made in the press, Mr Peter
  Wright. Chief Constable o f South Yorkshire, made a dignified statement dissociating him self from such grave
  and emotive calumnies. Those who made them, and those who disseminated them, would have done better to
  hold their peace.
                                                   CHAPTER 15

                              THE PERIMETER GATES WERE TOO SMALL

  258. T he perimeter gates in the pens were not designed as exits. They were intended to afford access by the
police to cope with any local disorder or with an emergency. The kind o f emergency contemplated was not
massive crushing but, for example, the collapse or illness o f an individual. Emergency evacuation o f the pens
had been considered by the Officer Working Party. Although fire risk was minimal since the terraces, west
stand and tunnel were o f concrete construction, the fire brigade were the principal arbiters o f evacuation
procedure. They aimed to be able to empty the pens in six minutes. The plan was to evacuate spectators via the
tunnel. If for any reason that option became impracticable, eg due to a bomb threat, then the alternative route
would be along the back o f the terraces, through the gates in the radial fences and round the sides o f the west
stand. The fire brigade were satisfied .that each o f these routes would enable the pens to be evacuated in less
than six minutes, without relying on the gates to the pitch. Those gates would also be available, but their use
was excluded from the calculation o f evacuation time.

  259. The need to provide for speedy and large scale evacuation from the front o f the pens to the pitch was
not anticipated. The Green Guide (1986) provides as follows:

  “209. Access to the pitch must be made as difficult as possible in normal circumstances while at the same
  tim e ensuring that the police have effective access to the terraces for the purpose o f crowd control and
  enabling the pitch to be used (where appropriate) in the event o f serious emergency . . .

  214. . . . at some m ajor soccer stadia, where restriction on crowd movement forms a necessary part o f the
  safety measures, it may be necessary to have a fence which prevents access to the pitch in normal
  circumstances . . . but allows for access in emergency.

   215. For most major stadia, whether used for association football or other sports, the pitch perimeter fence
   will be required either to prevent access to the pitch as m entioned above, or at least to discourage attempts
   by spectators to enter the playing area. Gates or other access points (minim um width 1.1 metres) should
   nonetheless be provided for use in an emergency . . . Provision o f such gates or access points is particularly
   im portant to allow full access to the playing area (or track) where it is likely to be used as a place o f safety in
   an emergency.        Such gates or access points should be properly stewarded and                             clearly
   marked so that immediate access to the playing area or perim eter track can be ensured” .

   260. G ate 3 was .82 metres in width; gate 4 was .79 metres in width. There were therefore clear departures
 from the Green Guide standard.

   261. The Safety Certificate provided (by Schedule 2 Paragraph 24) as follows:

   The (club) shall arrange for the Stadium to be inspected by a suitably qualified Chartered Engineer . . . at
   least once each period of 12 m o n th s. . . and . . . shall as soon as possible after each inspection supply to
   the . . . Council a Certificate by the said Chartered Engineer as to the current compliance or non-compliance
   with . . . the appropriate provisions and recom m endations o f the (Green) Guide o f all structural parts o f the
   Stadium . . .

   262. It was argued that there was no breach o f the Safety Certificate since the Green Guide specifically
 provides for flexibility. However, in my view the Safety Certificate cannot and certainly should not be
 interpreted so liberally as in effect to leave such basic requirements as the size o f exit gates to the total
 discretion o f the club and its advisers. One o f the m atters for consideration at stage two o f this inquiry will be
 whether, and in what respects, the Green Guide needs to be clarified and toughened.

   263. D r Eastwood explained the small width o f the gates by reference to the dilemma facing the police. They
 wanted a gate sufficient for its intended purpose ie police access and small scale emergencies. On the other
 hand, thev did not want a flood gate o f such size as to endanger the prime principle o f preventing pitch
 invasions' In the light o f Hillsborough, this is perhaps the most poignant example o f the difficulty o f achieving
 a balance between stopping hooliganism and ensuring crowd safety.

   264. Even if the width o f gates 3 and 4 had complied with the present Green Guide standard, they would
 have been wholly inadequate to relieve pressure and release spectators swiftly on 15 April. Moreover, the
 Green Guide says nothing about the num ber o f gates required for a pen o f given size. Whilst the Club.


                                                            45
D r Eastwood, the Officer Working Party and the local authority can be criticised for failing strictly to conform
to the G uide, the real failure was common to all those who have been responsible for considering safety on the
terraces. T he anxiety to protect the sanctity o f the pitch has caused insufficient attention to be paid to the risk
o f a crush due to overcrowding. Certain it was. that once the crush occurred on 15 April gates 3 and 4 were
wholly inadequate for rescue purposes.
                                    PART III - CONCLUSIONS
                                                CHAPTER 16

                                      BR IE F SUMMARY OF CAUSES

  265. The immediate cause o f the gross overcrowding and hence the disaster was the failure, when gate C was
opened, to cut off access to the central pens which were already overfull.

  266. They were already overfull because no safe maxim um capacities had been laid down, no attem pt was
made to control entry to individual pens numerically and there was no effective visual monitoring o f crowd
density.

   267. When the influx from gate C entered pen 3. the layout o f the barriers there afforded less protection
than it should and a barrier collapsed. Again, the lack o f vigilant monitoring caused a sluggish reaction and
response when the crush occurred. The small size and num ber o f gates to the track retarded rescue efforts. So,
in the initial stages, did lack o f leadership.

  268. The need to open gate C was due to dangerous congestion at the turnstiles. T hat occurred because, as
both Club and police should have realised, the turnstile area could not easily cope with the large numbers
dem anded o f it unless they arrived steadily over a lengthy period. The Operational O rder and police tactics on
the day failed to provide for controlling a concentrated arrival o f large numbers should that occur in a short
period". That it might so occur was foreseeable and it did. The presence o f an unruly m inority who had drunk
too much aggravated the problem. So did the Club’s confused and inadequate signs and ticketing.
                                                 CHAPTER 17

                                      TH E FA’s CHOICE O F GROUND

   269. The FA were strongly criticised by the Football Supporters’ Association and others for having
imposed the Hillsborough venue on Liverpool for a second year running. The Liverpool supporters had to
travel much further to Sheffield than their Nottingham rivals. The police required that if the match was to be at
Hillsborough at all, Liverpool would have to have the west and north side accom m odation. The disadvantages
o f that and the disparate num bers o f home supporters o f the two clubs have already been set out. Liverpool had
had to knuckle under to the arrangement in 1988. They resented having it im posed in 1989. To hold the match
at Old Trafford would have been a perfectly good and acceptable alternative. Indeed, the FA nom inated Old
Trafford as the venue for the replay should there be a draw at Hillsborough.

   270. M r Kelly, the FA’s C hief Executive, sought to give reasons for preferring Hillsborough, but the only one
which seemed to have any validity was that the 1988 match had been considered a successfully managed event.
He adm itted that a telephone call from the Chief Executive o f the Liverpool Club protesting and putting
Liverpool’s case had not been m entioned to the FA committee which finally decided the venue. M r Kelly
frankly conceded that “there was an element o f unfairness” to Liverpool in choosing Hillsborough for a second
time. I think the decision was ill-considered. No doubt in future the FA will be more sensitive and responsive
to reasonable representations.

  271. However, it was not suggested that the choice o f venue was causative o f this disaster. The only basis on
which that could be said would be that, because o f its layout, the Leppings Lane end was incapable o f being
successfully policed for this semi-final. I do not believe that to be so.




                                                       48
                                                 CHAPTER 18

                                                    POLICE

Choice of Ends by the Police
   272. There was m uch bitterness amongst Liverpool supporters that they had to make do again for the
second year with the Leppings Lane end. But, cogent as their complaints were, they am ounted to reasons for
choosing a different ground altogether. Given Hillsborough as the venue, I think the police were right to
allocate the sections o f the ground as they did. The direction o f arrival and the need for segregation made it
sensible and to reverse the 1988 arrangements would have m ade for confusion. As with choice o f venue. I do
not consider choice o f ends was causative o f the disaster. H ad it been reversed, the disaster could well have
occurred in a similar m anner but to Nottingham supporters.

Police Planning
  273. The Operational Order for 1989 left much unsaid. Apart from the lack o f any provision for late or
congested arrivals, or any provision for the avoidance o f overcrowding on the terraces, there was a num ber o f
other omissions. For example, there was no specific deployment o f officers to man the perimeter gates. The
Order did not detail the duties o f the mounted officers deployed at the Leppings Lane entrance, who included
Liverpool officers to assist in marshalling their own fans. The duties o f Superintendents (especially Mr
Greenwood and M r Marshall) were not defined so as to achieve clarity and efficiency. By an oversight, the
provision requiring mobile (Tango) patrols to assist the emergency services was om itted from the text.

  274. The 1988 O rder was never substantially reviewed save to reduce the num ber o f officers deployed in
shopping areas and to emphasise in capital letters the embargo on fans having access to the pitch. Satisfaction
with the 1988 event led to complacency. T hat some thought the pens overfull in 1988 and that the tunnel was
closed off on that occasion did not figure in or influence the plan for 1989.

  275. M r Duckenfield was promoted and put in charge o f F Division only 21 days before this semi-final. The
pre-planning was already in progress under M r Mole who had been in com m and both in 1987 and in 1988. It
might have been wiser to have left M r Mole in charge o f this operation. On the other hand, it is quite
understandable that M r Duckenfield should have been expected to take com m and o f events in his Division
from the date o f his promotion. In view o f his lack o f experience at Hillsborough and o f a semi-final match,
however, it was im perative that he be fully briefed and th at he should also brief himself.

   276. He was not informed o f the crushing incident in 1981 nor did he make inquiries which would have
revealed it. He did not know the arrangement as between Club and police for monitoring the Leppings Lane
terraces. He did not visit and tour the ground before approving the Operational Order. Although he attended a
match on 2 April, there was only a small crowd present and he left control o f the game to the Superintendents.

Policing on the Day
  277. One of the regrettable features o f the football scene as it has developed is the enormous expenditure of
money, tim e and effort in employing large num bers o f police all over the country to guard against the sort of
disorder and m isbehaviour which have become endemic. Police management o f a game o f football has become
a military operation. The problems faced and the responses received m ust be disheartening and may have
tended to harden police attitudes to supporters in general.

  278. It is fair to state that over many years the South Yorkshire Police have given excellent service to the
public. They have handled crowd problems sensitively and successfully at a large num ber o f football games
including m ajor matches, during strikes in the coal industry and the steel industry’, and in other contexts.
Unfortunately, their policing on 15 April broke down in the ways already described and, although there were
other causes, the main reason for the disaster was the failure o f police control.

   279. In all some 65 police officers gave oral evidence at the Inquiry. Sadly I must report that for the most
part the quality o f their evidence was in inverse proportion to their rank. There were many young Constables
who as witnesses were alert, intelligent and open. On the day, they and many others strove heroically in ghastly
circumstances aggravated by hostility to rescue and succour victims. They inspired confidence and hope.

  280. By contrast, with some notablegxeepfions, the sem br officers in com m and were defensive and evasive
witnesses. Their feelings o f grie|>and sorrow were obvious and genuine. No doubt those feelings were
intensified by the knowledge thm such a disaster had occurred under their management. But, neither their
handling o f problems on the pay nor their account o f it in c i d e n c e showed the qualities o f leadership to be
expected o f their rank.     V
   281. M r Duckenfield leant heavily on Mr Murray’s experience. Between them they misjudged the build-up
at the turnstiles and did little about it until they received M r Marshall’s request to open the gate. They did not,
for example, check the turnstile figures available from Club control or check with Tango units as to the
numbers still to come. They did not alert Mr Greenwood to the situation at the fringe o f his area o f command.
They gave no instructions as to the management o f the crowd at Leppings Lane. Inflexibly they declined to
postpone kick-off.

  282. W hen M r M arshall’s request came,' Mr Duckenfield’s capacity to take decisions and give orders
seemed to collapse. Having sanctioned, at last, the opening of the gates, he failed to give necessary
consequential orders or to exert any control when the disaster occurred. He m isinterpreted the emergence o f
fans from pens 3 and 4. When he was unsure of the problem, he sent others down to “assess the situation"
rather than descend to see for himself. He gave no inform ation to the crowd.

  283. Most surprisingly, he gave M r Kelly and others to think that there had been an inrush due to Liverpool
fans forcing open a gate. This was not only untruthful. It set off a widely reported allegation against the
supporters which caused grave offence and distress. It revived against football fans, and especially those from
Liverpool, accusations o f hooliganism which caused reaction not only nationwide but from Europe too. I can
only assume that M r Duckenfield’s lack of candour on this occasion was out of character. He said his reason for
not telling the truth was that if the crowd became aware o f it there might be a very hostile reaction and this
might im pede rescue work. He did not wish to divulge what had happened until he had spoken to a senior
officer. However, reluctance to tell M r Kelly the truth did not require that he be told a falsehood. Moreover,
although Assistant C hief Constable Jackson was at hand, M r Duckenfield did not disclose the truth to him
until m uch later.

  284. The likeliest explanation o f M r Duckenfield’s conduct is that he simply could not face the enormity of
the decision to open the gates and all that flowed therefrom. T hat would explain what he said to M r Kelly, what
he did not say to M r J ackson, his aversion to addressing the crowd and his failure to take effective control of the
disaster situation. He froze.

The Police Case at the Inquiry
  285. It is a m atter o f regret that at the hearing, and in their submissions, the South Yorkshire Police were not
prepared to concede they were in any respect .at fault in what occurred. M r Duckenfield, under pressure of
cross-examination, apologised for blaming the Liverpool fans for causing the deaths. But, that apart, the police
case was to blame the fans for being late and drunk. andlaJjlame-theJClub for failing to m onitor the pens. It was
argued t h ^ th e ja ta l cn^sh„was-n«t caused by the influx through gate C but waTdrre-taJjarrier 124a being
defective. Such amnffeafistic approach gives cause for anxiety as to whether lessons havebeerD^arnt. It would
have been more seemly and encouraging tor the tuture it responsibifrtytradbeerrfacedT




                                                         50
                                                 CHAPTER 19

                        THE CITY COUNCIL AND THE SAFETY CERTIFICATE

   286. The performance by the City Council o f its duties in regard to the Safety Certificate was inefficient and
dilatory. The failure to revise or amend the certificate over the period of three years preceding this disaster,
despite im portant changes in the layout of the ground, was a serious breach o f duty. There were, as a resu t. no
fixed capacities for the pens. The certificate took no account o f the 1981 and 1985 alterations to the ground.

  287. A. num ber o f breaches o f Green Guide standards were perm itted and persisted eg the spacing o f the
crush barriers, the width of perimeter gates and the gradient in the tunnel (1 in 6 as against the Green Guide
m axim um o f 1 in 10).

  288. The Advisory Group lacked a proper structure; its procedure was casual and unbusinesslike. Its
accountability to the General Purposes Panel was ill-defined. Decisions were taken informally and too much
was left td M r Bownes. In particular, thedecisibn to remove barrier 144 was not referred tq-the Panel and ought
not to have been made.
                                                  CHAPTER 20

                                      THE CLUB AND DR EASTWOOD

  289. It should be recorded that in general the Club has over the years adopted a responsible and
conscientious approach to its responsibilities. It retained the services o f D r Eastwood as consultant engineer
and abided by his advice. For his part, D r Eastwood is skilled and experienced in this field, as already
indicated, an d he sought I have no doubt to act efficiently and professionally in his advice and practical work.
The Club also retained Mr Lock who had acquired great experience and knowledge o f Hillsborough during his
police service. A num ber of witnesses described Hillsborough as a very good ground, “one of the best in the
country”. The police agreed that relations between them and the Club were good. Over the last four years, the
Club had spent some £ 1'k million on ground improvements.

   290. Nevertheless, there are a number o f respects in which failure by the Club contributed to this disaster.
They were responsible as occupiers and invitors for the layout and structure o f the ground. The Leppings Lane
end was unsatisfactory and ill-suited to adm it the numbers invited, for reasons already spelt out. The Club was
aware o f these problems and discussed solving them in various ways between 1981 and 1986. In the result,
there rem ained the same num ber of turnstiles, and the same problems outside and inside them. The plan for
this semi-final, involving as it did the loss o f 12 turnstiles for the north stand and large numbers to be fed in
from Leppings Lane, was one agreed between the Club and the police. The Club knew best what rate of
admission the turnstiles could manage and ought to have alerted the police to the risks of the turnstiles being
swamped.

   291. The alterations inside the turnstiles and on the terraces clearly affected capacity, but no specific
allowance was m ade for them. In that respect, both D r Eastwood and the Club should have taken a more
positive approach. Either a scheme such as one o f those D r Eastwood put forward should have been adopted
giving m ore turnstiles and total separation o f areas or at the very least the capacity of the new pens and of the
terraces a s a whole should have been treated more cautiously. The police view in 1981 that 10,100 was too high
a figure was known to the Club (although D r Eastwood says not to him). Yet, despite that and the sub-division
into pens, the figure remained.

   292. Although the police had assumed responsibility for monitoring the pens, the Club had a duty to its
visitors and the Club’s officials ought to have alerted the police to the grossly uneven distribution o f fans on the
terraces. The Club operated and read the closed circuit television and the com puter totaliser. Liaison between
Club and police on the day failed to alert the latter to the num ber of Liverpool supporters still to come. The
onus here was on the Club as well as on the police.

 293. The removal o f barrier 144 was the responsibility o f the Club although it clearly acted on the advice of
Dr Eastwood and the Advisory Group which in this instance was misguided.

  294. Likewise, the breaches o f the Green G uide were m atters which the Club should have appreciated and
remedied.

   295. Lastly, as already indicated, the poor signposting on the concourse tended to produce under-filling of
the wing pens and over-filling of pens 3 and 4. Poor signposting outside the turnstiles and the unhelpful format
of the tickets also led to confusion aggravating the build-up in the turnstile area.
                                                 CHAPTER 21

                                FIRST AID AND EMERGENCY SERVICES

No Fault by the Emergency Services
   296. I say at the outset of this chapter that no valid criticism can be m ade o f the response by the St John
Ambulance Brigade, by SYMAS or by the fire brigade on 15 April. Indeed, no represented party ventured any
criticism o f them. The only attack on SYMAS came from two Liverpool doctors. One claimed that ambulances
did not arrive swiftly or with sufficient equipm ent and that there was a lack of triage. He was proved to be
wrong in all three respects. Unfortunately he had seen fit to go on television on 15 April when he said more
lives could have been saved if staff and equipment had arrived earlier. Apart from being proved wrong in fact
as to the times o f arrival of ambulances, he conceded in evidence that it was no t possible to say whether lives
could have been saved. His comments on television were irresponsible. The other doctor complained of the
absence o f defibrillators. I am satisfied bn overwhelming evidence that to attem pt to use a defibrillator on the
pitch with people milling about would have been highly dangerous owing to the risk of injury from the electric
charge.

  297. I find that all three of the emergency services nam ed above responded promptly when alerted, that
they brought appropriate equipment and that their personnel operated efficiently.

  298. It would be unreasonable to expect, at any sports stadium , medical facilities capable o f dealing with a
m ajor disaster such as occurred. To have in advance at the ground, oxygen, resuscitators, stretchers, other
equipm ent and medical staff sufficient to deal with over 100 casualties is not practicable.

  299. W hat is required is a basic level of provision for first aid, for professional medical attention and for
ambulance attendance, together with a system of co-ordination with the emergency services which will bring
them to the scene swiftly in whatever numbers are required. W hat will am ount to an appropriate basic
provision for the future eg the equipment in a first aid room, requires expert evaluation and advice.

   300. On the day, there was no clear understanding between the Club and D r Purcell as to his role. He
believed he was prim arily there to attend to the players. The Club regarded him also as the “physician available
to attend at the first aid room if required”, as laid down in the Safety Certificate.

  301. There was insufficiently close co-operation between the police and the emergency services. It is clear
that SYMAS and the fire brigade should have been called earlier than they were. However, in view of the nature
and extent o f the crushing, the time when police rescue began and the pathetically short period for which those
unable to breathe could survive, it is improbable that quicker recourse to the emergency services would have
saved m ore lives.

   302. Finally, there was evidence that an advertising board had to be knocked down at the north-east com er
o f the ground to allow an ambulance onto the pitch and that at the top of the ramp leading to the pitch the
access for ambulances was inadequate. There was also evidence that the pre-match arrangement for
ambulances to use the two gates from Penistone Road at the north-east end o f the ground as in and out routes
was frustrated by the presence of vehicles just inside the ground. In the event, none o f these matters affected
operations. The hoarding was quickly knocked down. The difficult access to the ramp was negotiated and
ambulances used one entrance satisfactorily by backing out when loaded.




                                                        53
                                              CHAPTER 22

                                         C O M M U N IC A TIO N S

   303.      One problem which impeded police control and the gathering o f intelligence was the interm ittent
failure o f communication by radio. There was the period o f two or three m inutes when the control room was
out of radio contact. Even when that was remedied, it was only by using a hand set in the control room. This
meant that control could not override any other messages. No effective radio communication seems to have
reached control from the perimeter track at the relevant time. M r Greenwood’s request for the match to be
stopped and various messages from Constables reporting the distress in the pens did not register. Likewise,
communication from Leppings Lane to control was unreliable. Undoubtedly these breakdowns m ade it more
difficult for those in com m and to make proper assessments and exercise effective command.




                                                  54
                        PART IV - INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS
                                     CHAPTER 23 - INTRODUCTION

Limited Objectives
  304. It is im portant to stress the limited objectives o f the interim recom m endations I can make in this
Report. My purpose is to propose instant measures capabie o f being implemented forthwith and where
possible before the commencement o f the 1989/1990 season. They are designed to prevent overcrowding and
crushing on terraces in the short term and to improve safety procedures. They do not and cannot meet all the
problems or address all the issues o f post-Hillsborough football. Wider issues such as membership schemes,
identity cards, all-seater stadia, super-stadia and long term recom m endations fall to be considered in my Final
Report. So do a num ber o f other specific matters such as a comprehensive review o f the Green Guide, the
problem o f excessive pre-match drinking, fans without tickets and ticket touts. I m ention these matters lest it
be thought I have decided no.recom m endations need be made concerning them. I have not. But before
deciding what if any recommendation's to make about these and other matters, more evidence and study is
required.              ,        .

  305. Accordingly, the main thrust o f these interim recommendations, as a holding exercise, is to reduce
numbers on the terraces, to increase vigilance and to achieve a proper balance in crowd control between
prevention o f disorder and m aintenance o f safety.


Perimeter Fences
  306. It would be impractical and unwise to recommend works o f construction or radical structural changes
now. before completing the extensive study and consultation which will form stage two o f this Inquiry. Hasty
interim recom m endations o f that kind might well prove to be ill-judged after further study and require to be
changed in a m atter o f months.

   307. In particular, I do not at this stage make any recom m endation as to removing perimeter fences or
replacing them with structures o f different design. Understandably, there was a wave o f popular feeling against
such fences in the im m ediate afterm ath o f Hillsborough. The horrifying spectacle o f people being crushed
ag'ainst the fencing focussed blame for the disaster on the fences themselves. There were pleas to dismantle
them and emotive references to the fans being treated like “ caged animals” . Some clubs removed their fencing
straightaway. It was therefore very tempting to consider at an early stage making a recommendation that the
fences should be removed. I confess to being so tempted.

  308. Regrettably, only a month after Hillsborough, there were incidents which showed that violence and
hooliganism are still liable to erupt at football grounds. On 13 May at Selhurst Park, Birmingham City
supporters invaded the pitch and fought with supporters o f the hom e club, Crystal Palace. Five police officers
and 16 supporters were injured and required treatm ent at a local hospital. On the same day at a match between
Bristol City and Sheffield United, spectators spilt onto the pitch and there was fighting on the terraces. At the
Cup Final between Liverpool and Everton on 20 May, there was a pitch invasion, albeit a comparatively
benign one.

  309. Even the Football Supporters’ Association (FSA) felt it necessary to say in their final submission,

       “ With some reservations, the FSA accept that perim eter fences are necessary for crowd control.”

   310. Bearing in m ind those matters, and the need to consider further expert evidence, I have decided that it
would be unwise and premature for me to make any recom m endations now either to remove or to preserve or
to alter the structure o f perimeter fences. I shall make recommendations about them in my Final Report.

   311. For the present, I would emphasise that, although the fencing prevented escape, the real cause o f the
Hillsborough disaster was overcrowding and it is against that danger that my interim recommendations are
primarily directed. Whilst declining to recommend the removal o f the fences, I do consider that the gates to the
pitch should be kept open whilst the terraces are occupied. This will have, I hope, three beneficial effects.
Obviously, an open gate is a more ready escape route than one which has to be locked. Secondly, the sight of
open gates will be reassuring to spectators on the terraces. Thirdly, the existence o f gaps in the fencing by
reason o f the open gates will concentrate the minds o f police officers or stewards on the track to the need for
careful monitoring o f those on the terraces.
  312. It will o f course be necessary to have a police presence sufficient to prevent pitch invasion for improper
reasons through the open gates. However, I am encouraged to think that this is not an insuperable problem by
the fact that, for example at Anfield, Liverpool’s ground, there were no gates in the perim eter fencing before it
was taken down. There were instead gaps or “ access points” as they are called in the Green Guide (paragraph
215). Their existence did not, so far as I am aware, prevent the authorities from m aintaining order. Also, the
gates were open throughout the replay o f this ill-fated semi-final at Old Trafford on 7 May 1989.


Reduced Numbers
   313. In the assessment of figures for capacity, the criteria in Chapter 16 o f the Green Guide were not at
Hillsborough, and may not elsewhere, have been applied with sufficient rigour. Therefore, in addition to
reminding and enjoining local authorities and clubs to make all necessary deductions when assessing the
figure for m axim um capacity in accordance with the Green Guide, I recommend reducing that figure by a
further 15% as an interim measure.


Safety Certificate
  314.     The Safety Certificate procedure should, if it is properly adm inistered and enforced, go far towards
achieving crowd safety. W hether it succeeds depends upon the vigilance and commitment o f the local
authority issuing the Certificate. I do not know whether the poor performance o f the local authority at
Hillsborough was typical. Arguments have been put to me suggesting the need for some national oversight or
inspection o f local authority certification procedures. This raises complex issues which I shall want to consider
further at stage two o f the Inquiry. For the present, I make recom m endations as to the content o f Safety
Certificates and arrangements for issuing, monitoring, enforcing, reviewing, amending and renewing them.




                                                        56
                                     CHAPTER 24 - THE RECOMMENDATIONS

    315. The recommendations which follow are the m inim um necessary to ensure that existing football
  grounds can for the present be safely used, based upon the evidence which I have heard a t Sheffield and other
  information I have1received. They complement the recommendations which M r Justice Popplewell set out
  after his inquiry at Bradford.

     316. Those which are asterisked should be carried out before the 1989/90 season starts. The rest should be
. started forthwith and completed as soon as possible.

  Maximum Capacities for Terraces
  ★         1. Where a viewing terrace is divided into pens or areas which are self-contained, the Safety Certificate
          should specify the maximum number of spectators to be admitted to each such pen or area.

          A pen or area is to be deemed “self-contained” notwithstanding that it has a gate or gates affording access to
          another pen or area and whether such gate or gates be open or shut.

  ★        2. Each figure for maximum capacity should be assessed in accordance with Chapter 16 of the Green
          Guide (“the Green Guide figure”) subject to the following qualificadons:-

          (a) in arriving at “the Green Guide figure”, proper and realistic allowance must be made for all factors
              which should reduce the permissible density in accordance with the range of maximum figures specified
              in paragraphs 221 and 222 of the Green Guide;

          (b) after assessing “the Green Guide figure”, a deduction of 15% should be made to improve the safety
              margin.

  ★        3. Arrangements should be made:-

          (a) to limit the number of spectators entering each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity
              figure assessed in accordance with Recommendation 2 above either electronically, mechanically, by a
              ticketing arrangement, by counting or otherwise, and

          (b) to close off further access to such pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.


  Filling and Monitoring Terraces
  ★         4. There should be a written agreement between the club and the police setting out their respective
          responsibilities for crowd safety and control and in particular for the filling of each self-contained pen or
          other terraced area and the monitoring of spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding. Any
          variation of the agreement in respect of an individual match should be agreed in writing in advance.

  ★        5. At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained pen or other terraced
          area, a steward (if the club is monitoring that area) or a police officer (if the police are monitoring it) whose
          sole duty is to check crowd conditions in that area for possible overcrowding or distress throughout the
          period the area is occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in addition to any other steward
          or police presence. He should have ready access to the police officer authorised under Recommendation 9
          below, and by radio to the control room.


      Fences and Gates
             6.   All police officers and stewards with duties in relation to the terraced areas and especially those with
          duties under Recommendation 5 above, should be fully briefed and trained with regard to the recognition of
          crowd densities, to the recognition of signs of distress and to crowd dynamics. Training should include
          demonstrations at the ground and photographs, designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise
          different crowd densities.

      ★    7. All gates in radial or perimeter fences of pens or other self-contained areas should be painted in a
          different colour from the rest of the fence and marked “Emergency Exit”.
★        8. Where there are perimeter fences, all gates to the pitch should be kept fully open during the period
        when spectators are on the tecrace.

★         9. There should be in respect of each gate in a perimeter fence (or group of gates if they are close together)
        a police officer authorised to decide whether or not to allow spectators through a gate to relieve overcrowding.
        The officer so authorised in respect of each gate should be identified for each match and known to be so by all
        stewards and police officers in that vicinity. He should be able to make radio contact with the control room
        either himself or via an officer close at hand.

★        10. Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be provided by the club at each ground where there
        are perimeter fences to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release numbers of spectators if
        necessary. Agreement should be reached as to whether the equipment should be used by police, the fire
        brigade or stewards. Whoever is to use it should be trained to do so. Whether to use it should be a decision of a
        nominated senior police officer at the ground.


Crush Barriers
★          11. All crush barriers should be visually inspected immediately for signs of corrosion. Any barrier found
        to be affected by a significant degree of corrosion should be repaired or replaced.

★         12. The layout of barriers in each pen or terraced area should be reviewed immediately to ensure that it
        complies with the criteria contained in Chapter 9 of the Green Guide. If it does not, the assessment of the
        maximum capacity figure for that pen or terraced area, in accordance with Recommendation 2 above, should
        reflect the fact.


    Safety Certificates         ,
          13. There should be an immediate review of each Safety Certificate by the responsible local authority,
        which should consult the club in respect of which the Certificate is issued, the police, the fire service, the
        ambulance service and the building authority. Such areviewshould include an inspection of the stadium. Its
        object should be to ensure that the operative conditions of the Certificate are complied with and to add or
        substitute any condition shown to be necessary as a matter of urgency following the findings and
        recommendations in this report.

          14. Any local authority within whose area there exists a sports stadium designated under the 1975 Act for
        which no Safety Certificate has yet been issued should proceed forthwith to remedy the situation.

          15. Every Safety Certificate should be reviewed by the local authority at least once annually and each
        Certificate should require to be renewed annually.


           16. Each local authority should review its arrangements for issuing, monitoring, enforcing, reviewing,
        amending and renewing Safety Certificates. Such review should require that there exists or is provided an
        accountable administrative structure whereby the functions of the local authority are regularly and
        effectively supervised by senior officers and elected members and decisions are properly taken in accordance
        with the local authority’s rules.

           17. To assist the local authority in exercising its functions, it should set up an Advisory Group consisting
        of appropriate members of its own stall, representatives, of the police^ of the fire and ambulance serrices, of
        the building authority, of the club and of a recognised supporters’ club. The Advisory Group's terms of
        reference should encompass all matters concerned with crowd safety and should require regular visits to the
        ground and attendance at matches. The Advisory Group should have a chairman from the local authority,
        and an effective procedure. Its resolutions should be recorded and it should be required to produce regular
        written reports for consideration by the local authority.


    Duties of each Football Club
    ★      18. Each turnstile should be inspected and its potential rate of flow measured. Thereafter, regular
         inspections should be made to ensure that each turnstile remains capable of admitting spectators at the rate
         anticipated.


                                                             58
★    .19. The correlation between each viewing area in the stadium and the turnstiles serving it should be such
    as to ensure that all the spectators intended to be admitted to that viewing area can pass through the
    turnstiles within one hour. If that cannot be done,- the capacity of that viewing area should be reduced
    accordingly.

★    20. Turnstiles should be closed when the permitted capacity of the area served by them is about to be
    reached and arrangements should, be made to ensure quick and effective communication with turnstile
    operators for this purpose.

      21.    Closed circuit television should be so installed as to enable crowd densities outside the ground, within
    concourse areas and in pens and other standing areas, to be monitored before and throughout a match.

★     22. All signposting for spectators both outside and inside the ground should be comprehensivelv
    reviewed. It should, in relation to the arrangements for each match, be unambiguous, eye-catching, simple
    and clear and should be designed to ensure the rapid movement of spectators to their appropriate viewing
    area.

★     23. Information on tickets should be unambiguous, simple and clear and should correlate absolutely with
    the information provided in respect of each match both outside and inside the ground. Retained ticket stubs
    should contain information necessary to guide spectators once inside the ground.

★    24. Information on tickets requesting spectators to be in position by a particular time should be reviewed
    by clubs in conjunction with the police to ensure that it corresponds with the planned arrangements for
    admitting spectators to the ground.

      25. Each club should consult with a recognised supporters’ club as to the provision of pre-match
    entertainment aimed at attracting spectators to the ground in good time.


Police Planning
★     26. The Chief Constable of each police force in whose area there is one designated stadium or more
    should nominate a chief officer to liaise with the management of each football club and local authority
    concerned in respect 4)f the safety and control of crowds.

★     27. The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium and the pre-match briefing of all
    officers on duty there should alert such officers to the importance of preventing any overcrowding and, if any
    is detected, of taking appropriate steps to remedy it.

★    28. The Operational Order for each match at a designated stadium should enable the police to cope with
    any foreseeable pattern in the arrival of spectators at a match and in their departure. It should provide for
    sufficient reserves to enable rapid deployment of officers to be made at any point inside or outside the ground.

★    29. The option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion of the officer in command at the ground.
    Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration in deciding whether to exercise it.

       30.    There should be available in the police control room the results of all closed circuit television
    monitoring outside and inside the ground and the record of any electronic or mechanical counting of numbers
    at turnstiles or of numbers admitted to any area of the ground. Officers in the control room should be skilled
    in the interpretation and use of these data.


Communications
      31.     There should be sufficient operators in the police control room to enable all radio transmissions to be
    received, evaluated and answered. The radio system should be such as to give operators in the control room
    priority over, and the capacity to override, others using the same channel. Additional channels should be
    used, where necessary, to prevent overcrowding of the airwaves. Consideration should be given to
    sound-proofing the control room against excessive crowd noise.




                                                        59
      32. To complement radio communications, there should be a completely separate system of land lines
    with telephone links between the control room and key points at the ground.

      33. Within the control room, there should be a public address system to communicate with individual
    areas outside and inside the ground, with groups of areas or with the wjhole ground. Important
    announcem ents should be preceded by a loud signal to catch the attention of the crowd despite a high level of
    noise in the ground. This arrangement should be prominently advertised on every programme sold for every
    match.
      34. Use should be made where possible of illuminated advertising boards to address the crowd.
    Consideration should also be given to the use by police officers of a simple code of hand signals to indicate to
    the control room the existence of certain emergencies or requirements.


Co-ordination of Emergency Services
★      35. The police, fire and ambulance services should maintain through senior nominated officers regular
    liaison concerning crowd safety at each stadium.

★     36. Before each match at a designated stadium, the police should ensure that the fire service and
    ambulance service are given full details about the event, including its venue, its timing, the number of
    spectators expected, their likely routes of entry and exit, and any anticipated or potential difficulties
    concerning the control or movement of the crowd. Such details should be readily available in the control
    rooms of each of the emergency services.

★     37. Contingency plans for the arrival at each designated stadium of emergency vehicles from all three
    services should be reviewed. They should include routes of access, rendezvous points, and accessibility
    within the ground itself.

★     38. Police officers posted at the entrances to the ground should be briefed as to the contingency plans for
    the arrival of emergency services and should be informed when such services are called as to where and why
    they are required.


First Aid, Medical Facilities and Ambulances
★      39. There should be at each stadium at each match at least one trained first aider per 1,000 spectators. The
    club should have the responsibility for securing such attendance.

      40. There should be at each stadium one or more first aid rooms. The number of such rooms and the
    equipment to be maintained-within them should be specified by the local authority after taking professional
    medical advice and should be made a requirement of any Safety Certificate.

★     41. The club should employ a medical practitioner to be present at each match and available to deal with
    any medical exigency at the ground. He should be trained and competent in advanced first aid. He should be
    present at the ground at least an hour before kick-off and should remain until half an hour after the end of the
    match. His whereabouts should be known to those in the police control room and he should be immediately
    contactable.

★     42. At least one fully equipped ambulance from the appropriate ambulance authority should be in
    attendance at all matches with an expected crowd of 5,000 or more.

      43. The number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches where larger crowds are expected should
    be specified by the local authority after consultation with the ambulance service and should be made a
    requirement of the Safety Certificate.




                                                         60
APPENDICES




    61
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A p p en d ix 1:

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    '     S'                                                 Hillsborough Ground.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                   \ \        ' >
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          'Vo''A

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    A


                                                                                                                                                                     Gymnasium


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 V                v\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            'v   \   v           VV7 '   \
   w                                                                                                                                                                                i      1       \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Lighting ^ \ \        \          \
                                                                                                                                                                        _                              Police                      Tower                     '
                                                                                                                  Lighting                                              First Aid                      Room
                                                                                                                  Tower                                                 Room
                                                            Sweet Shop
                                                                                                                                                              NORTH STAND

                     1                   \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CCTV
                     I    co             \
                 /       &
                                   Perimeter        ^Turnstiles
            '/       ^              Gates           a           I
             I
            / #  Q*'         r~\
                             / tK            \VJ L \ 9-16iky
                                                                              Porta                                                                                                                                                                                                    \   'v f e v
        '                /
                                                 T             -S
                                                                    Gate
                                                                      -e //C' ab in
                                                 Turnstiles \        b   r--/

                                                                                  \ -Access
                                                                                    Gate            Tunnel
                                                                                                                      !I4

                                                                ;Gate C

                                                                                                                       II3


                                                                                           c
                                                                                                                       II2                                                       Players
                                                                                                                                                                                 Tunnel
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    :
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    y\
                                                                                                   CCTV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Lighting
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Tower

                               \        \ \                 \ **•'•*                  \'       1
                                       \ V      \             \             " ''A                     Lighting^
                                                                                                                             \                            A                  A
                                                                                                                                 Police                  CCTV               CCTV
                                                                      \. i* . *     *\     jv^J       Tower                      Control
                                                                                                                                                                SOUTH STAND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                nn nn—
                                                                       N.                ’ ** / •                                  1   1-- 1                                                                    30-32    34-36
                                                                                                                                               -2 3 -2 8 -r                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Prnban
                                                                                                                                                                 !    ''Directors Entrance
                                                                                                                                                     Official                              Car ParK                                                                                                         \
                                                                                                                                                                     Lighting-
                                                                                                                                                                     Tower
SCALE
                                                        50 metres
                         JL        T                T
                                                        j
                                   100              150 feet
A p p e n d ix 2:

Leppings Lane: the perimeter gates and turnstiles.
A p p en d ix 3:   The west stand and terraces.
                                                                                                                                                                                       Appendix 4:




                              I WEST STAND




                                                                                     BARRIER     No.144                  ••
                                                                                           1 ■

                                                                                               »|
                                                                                                                                                                       \      \
                                                            BARRIER : No.124a




SOUTH STAND                                                                                                                                                                       NORTH STAND




          r~“ t Barriers... Pre 1979                          "| 9 8 1 -2 radial fences             • • • • 1985 - Removal of some   ■ ■ ■ ■ 1986 - R em oval of B a rrie r
                                                                                                                   posts and rails                  No. 144 and som e on
                 • 1979....Additional barriers ■ “ — 1985 -2 more radial fences                                                                     S W est Terrace



          Arrangement of Barriers at West Terrace
              P repared by The H ealth & Safety Executive
A p p en d ix 5:   The west terraces at 2.59 p.m.
                                                   APPENDIX 6

                                             SPECIFIC INCIDENTS

Mr Hicks’ Evidence
   1. Mr and Mrs Hicks’ two daughters died in the disaster. They had arrived early en famille but had tickets
for different sections. The two daughters had standing tickets; they went into pen 3. Mrs Hicks had a seat in the
north stand. Mr Hicks took up a standing position in pen 1just below and to the west o f the police box at about
2.15 pm From there, he had a view of the centre pens. He kept an eye on them as they filled up since he knew his
daughters to be there.

  2. His evidence was that by 2.50 pm he could see people were in distress. At about 2.55 pm he and others
called to a senior police officer at the tpp o f the steps to the control box to draw his attention to the crushing. Mr
Hicks was only about 10 feet from the officer. He described him as wearing a flat cap with gold or silver braid
and a light coloured anorak. Mr Hicks believed he was the officer who stopped the match. M r Greenwood, who
did stop the match, was certainly not wearing a light coloured anorak, as can clearly be seen on the video.

  3. Mr Hicks says that he and others shouted several times to this officer in attem pts to alert him to the
distress in the pens. There was no reaction although M r Hicks believes the officer must have been in earshot.

   4. That officer descended from the steps and two cameramen whom M r Hicks believed were from
television came and appeared to direct their cameras towards the pens. A nother senior officer appeared two
steps down from the platform. He was a stocky figure; he also wore a flat cap but with black braid. Mr Hicks
says that he and two or three others tried several times to capture this officer’s attention without success. Then
Mr Hicks says he shouted “For Christ’s sake! Can’t you see what’s going on? We can, and you have cameras”. The
officer is said to have replied dismissively “Shut your fucking prattle”.

  5. When the disaster occurred the two Hicks girls were crushed. Victoria was put in an ambulance and Mr
Hicks accom panied her to hospital where she was found to be dead. Sarah died at the ground.

  6. Mr Hicks was an impressive witness and, despite his grievous loss, remarkably stoical. He gave his
evidence clearly and without rancour. He was certainly mistaken about Mr Greenwood being one o f those on
the steps and it has not been possible to identify either officer from Mr Hicks’ descriptions. He may well also
have been imprecise as to timings. Nevertheless. I see no reason to doubt that what he described did occur in
relation to two officers. As Mr Hicks generously said himself, the dismissive abuse from the second officer
(although reprehensible) may have been due to his being preoccupied with trying to see what was happening at
pens 3 and 4 around kick-off time.

The Goalkeeper and Gate 4
  7. Mr Bambrock, a Liverpool supporter, said he went through the tunnel. He would have liked to have
turned back when he saw how crowded the pens were. He went with his father and 13 year old brother Stephen
towards the front o f pen 4. He saw the teams come onto the pitch. Conditions at the front were, he said, alright
until about 2 m inutes to 3. Then the pressure in the pen increased and he and his father became separated. His
feet came off the ground. He shouted to police officers through the fence to get them out and help them. The
police did not react. The Liverpool goalkeeper, Bruce Grobbelaar, spoke to a policeman on the track. The gate
was then opened by a blonde policewoman and about 25 to 30 people went through it. They included the
witness’s father and his brother Stephen who had a broken arm. A police Constable shut the gate. It was then
reopened by the same policewoman, the witness thought, and he got out.

  8. Mr Eccleston, a male nurse and an impressive witness, was sitting in the north stand. He noticed pens 3
and 4 were full and realised something was wrong when fans started coming over the perim eter fence b u t did
not invade the pitch. He said the Liverpool goalkeeper appeared to notice this too.

 9. Mr Grobbelaar was out of the country during the Inquiry and was therefore not called. However, he
made a statem ent which was put in as his evidence. In the course of it he said:-

   “ Kick-off happened and we got into our stride pretty quickly - we forced a com er pretty early on and the ball
   came down to my end - I rolled it out to the full back once and play went on until Peter Beardsley h it the
   crossbar of the Nottingham Forest goal from a com er and came back into play. I rem em ber just after that
   there were shouts and screams from the crowd just behind me, it was different; not the ordinary crowd noise
   and I turned around to look. What amazed me first was the concentration and squash o f fans in the centre


                                                           63
section, the end areas still had plenty o f space. It was only then I became conscious that the crowd was *
squashing forward and wasn’t able to go sideways and that’s when I noticed the fencing alongside them
holding them in, I saw fans being pulled up into the stand above the terraces. I saw fans climbing over into the
empty areas at the side and I saw fans climbing out over the front onto the pitch which was particularly
difficult because o f the spikes on the top o f the fencing but they were getting out.
   “Play was still going on and I was in a terrible position trying to concentrate on play and having my
attention taken by what was happening behind me. The ball came down to our end and Nottingham Forest
won a comer, it was taken and we cleared our box area and as play was going forward over the centre line I
heard a shout, ‘Bruce - please help’ - a desperate shout from a fan squashed up against the fencing to the
right of my goal as I looked at Leppings Lane terraces. H e screamed, ‘Please get the fucking gate open - Help,
help’. All the people who could speak were pleading for help. There were two policemen near the gate right
alongside the fan who had shouted to me and so I shouted to them, 'G et the gate open’. I was still trying to
concentrate on play and was still having my attention taken by what was happening behind me - there were
lots of fans on the pitch behind the goal area by them too. I called again to the policemen, ‘Open the fucking
gate’ and one just turned away from me and looked back at the crowd but the other went to the gate and
opened it and it was like taking the top off a shaken coke bottle - people were everywhere on the play area
around my goal. Play was still going on and it came down towards me again for the left hand comer. It was
a Nottingham Forest throw-in, away to my left, the ball was out of play and a fan came up to m e on the
 pitch and said, ‘Bruce, they’re killing us’. I said ‘W ho’s killing you?’, and he said ‘They’re crushing us-our
fans’. I said ‘Go and get some help’, and then a policeman came on and spoke to this fan. I don’t know
 who the fan was, and then he led him off. It was about this tim e I saw a policeman running onto the pitch
 from my right across my box and to the referee who blew up, recovered the ball and told all players to clear
 the pitch.”
   10. It is clear from the video that M r Grobbelaar’s recollection o f the sequence of events, even with regard
to the game, is inaccurate in a num ber o f respects. For example, the two Nottingham Forest com er kicks
occurred minutes before Beardsley struck the bar. Further, it seems highly probable from other evidence that
gates 3 and 4 were open continuously well before M r G robbelaar says the fan asked him to get the gate open. It
seems surprising too that with all the noise M r G robbelaar would hear the precise words o f an individual fan,
let alone respond twice to them, whilst the game was in progress.
  11. As to M r Bam brock’s account, the evidence o f PC Fiona Richardson was that she was the only
policewoman on the track in the early stages although others came from the seated area as the incident
developed. PC Richardson began at gate 1 and, although she did go and help people out through gate 3. she
did not go to gate 4, and did not open it twice or even once. The two officers who spoke o f opening gate 4 were
both male.
    12. I think M r Grobbelaar did become conscious o f distress in the crowd behind him and did speak to a
 police officer at some stage, probably earlier than he now thinks. Not to reach that broad conclusion would
 involve attributing his whole account to invention o r fantasy and I see no grounds for doing so. However, his
 detailed account was not tested in cross-examination and its inconsistencies and errors when com pared with
 other incontrovertible evidence would make it unsafe to derive more than the broad conclusion stated above.
 The incident shows how honest witnesses can becom e confused and their evidence flawed when recollecting
 events experienced under tension or emotion.
    13. As to the opening of gate 4 there was an apparent conflict of evidence. PC Illingworth said that about
 five minutes to 3 he opened it and guided fans emerging through it to gate 5, PC Hooson said that it w as he
 who opened gate 4 just before kick-off. I am satisfied from the evidence of a num ber o f fans that, like gate 3,
 gate 4 was opened more than once. The probability is, therefore, that whilst PC Illingworth was shepherding
 fans to gate 5, gate 4 had been closed again until it was re-opened by PC Hooson two or three minutes later.
 Oxygen
    14. It was alleged by a doctor that an oxygen cylinder provided to him on the pitch was empty. D r Phillips, a
 Liverpool supporter, had been in pen 3 with his brother and others. He came under pressure and clim bed into
 pen 2. When the disaster occurred and gate 2 was opened, he went through it, injuring his head as he did so. He
 came onto the pitch sometime after 3.10 pm and started resuscitation procedures. He was given an oxygen
 cylinder. He believes this was from St John Ambulance. It was, he thought, too early to be the fire service. The
 cylinder was switched on but D r Phillips says it gave no oxygen since it was empty. There was one oxygen
 cylinder on the St John’s ambulance which came to the scene. M r Wells, the Divisional Superintendent o f St
 John, took that cylinder onto the pitch. He said it was effective. In particular, he recalls going to a patient being
 treated by D r Phillips and says that oxygen was flowing into that patient. Moreover, M r Wells tested the
 cylinder afterwards and found it was still half full. It has a capacity that will last for 5 hours 40 m inutes on a
 high setting. -
   15. There was evidence from Assistant Chief Fire Officer Hornsby that a M axaman resuscitator had failed
to work properly..It was delivering an oxygen flow appropriate to a “child” setting rather than a full “ adult”
flow. On examination, it was found that a retaining nut in the control knob had worked loose, possibly due to
vibration in transit, and this had affected the flow o f oxygen. The device had last been tested on 10 April 1989.
  16. I accept the evidence of M r Wells that the St John Ambulance cylinder was charged with oxygen and
working properly. In my view, D r Phillips may have been mistaken as to the cylinder o f which he complains
being empty. He agreed he was under great pressure, in an awkward situation; his head was injured and he
became very angry at what he regarded then as wholly the fault of the police. He conceded that if the cylinder
was not empty there was a possible alternative - that the master tank top valve was shut. It seems unlikely that
he could have been referring to the fire service resuscitator as he was clear that the bottle he received was a
simple piece o f equipm ent not designed to breathe for the patient but merely to supply oxygen.
  17. I conclude that on a balance of probabilities the evidence does not justify a finding that an empty
cylinder was brought to the scene.
Calling the Fire Service
   18. PC Bichard’s call to police Headquarters at 3.13 pm for the fire service to bring hydraulic cutting
equipment to cut metal fences (see paragraph 101 supra) was heard by Chief Inspector Edmundson. H e went
into the adjacent operations room to give instructions for the message to be passed to the fire service. There, a
temporary control room assistant was already speaking to the fire service about a house fire. M r Edm undson
interrupted the call and asked the assistant to tell the fire service that cutting equipm ent was wanted at
Hillsborough. There followed a conversation between the assistant and Miss Davies at the fire service in the
following terms:-
   Police          Can we have cutting gear for Hillsborough, please - straight away?
   Fire Control    Just a minute. Right - what’s the address?
   Police          Cutting equipm ent for Hillsborough football ground - straight away.
   Fire Control    Hillsborough football ground?
   Police          Yes, Hillsborough football ground.
   Fire Control    W hat road is that on? Do you know?
  . Police         J h e r e has been a m ajor accident, all the ambulances are up there.
   Fire Control    W hat road is it on?
   Police          I have no idea; Hillsborough football ground.
   Fire Control    W hat road is it on? Do you know?
   Police          “Hillsborough football ground - what road is it on?” (this was said to someone in Police
                   Force Control) - “Penistone R oad” (to Fire Control).
   Fire Control    Penistone Road.
   Police          Penistone Road, OK.
   Fire Control    Penistone Road, just a m inute - what’s exactly involved?
   Police          It’s football, a big m atch, Liverpool v Notts Forest.
   Fire Control    Yes, but why do you want us; you said it was an RTA [Road Traffic Accident].

    Police         No, no, no; m ajor incident inside the ground.
    Fire Control   M ajor incident inside - do you know exactly what it is?
    Police         No, I don’t; they want all the cutting gear.
    Fire Control    For what - do you know?
    Police          Hang on a sec.
    At that point Chief Inspector Edm undson intervened and spoke for the police. The conversation
  concluded: -
    Police          (Male voice) - Hello!


                                                           65
  Fire Control   Hello! Now you wnt some cutting gear - what exactly is it for?

  Police         There has been a m ajor accident at Hillsborough football ground where the semi-final is;
                 the crowds have forced their way in, they have broken fences and gates down. I don’t know
                 exactly what it is but there are people trapped.

  Fire Control   Right! O K - leave it with us.

  That conversation took 1 m inute 13 seconds. It was published in a num ber o f newspapers with strong
critical comment mostly against the fire service. T he thrust of the criticism was that valuable tim e was wasted
by the fire service asking unnecessary questions as to where and why cutting equipm ent was required.

   19. There was a meeting of the emergency services in August 1988 to discuss procedure in the event o f a
major disaster at Sheffield Wednesday’s ground. It was pointed out and m inuted that “It was im perative that
the Police Control give the exact location o f any fire or incident and as m uch detail as possible. No senior fire
officer is on duty at the m a tc h .. . Fire service will attend via Penistone Road or Leppings Lane as directed by
the police.”

  20. The message from PC Bichard contained all the necessary inform ation - Leppings Lane end, hydraulic
cutting equipment, to cut metal fences. Regrettably, it was not passed on by Headquarters in those terms. Miss
Davies had rightly been trained to require a precise location and needed to know the problem which would face
the fire service so that the appropriate response could be made. In fact, there are several football grounds in the
Hillsborough district although clearly Sheffield Wednesday’s ground is the principal one. In the result,
although Chief Inspector Edm undson clarified, to an extent, the nature of the problem, the locus which
emerged in the course o f the conversation (Penistone Road) was not that contained in the original message
from ground control (ie “ Leppings Lane end.”) Whilst on the face o f the conversation the fire service may seem
to have been slow in the uptake or perhaps pedantic, in my view the police ought to have been m ore specific.
They had the necessary inform ation to be so.

  21. I am satisfied, however, that the delay o f 1 m inute 13 seconds over the call, and even the delay
occasioned by the cutting equipm ent going to Penistone Road rather than Leppings Lane, did not affect the
outcome. Even had those with cutting equipment gone directly after a briefer ’phone call they would not have
arrived at a stage early enough to make cutting the fencing a helpful exercise.

M r Kenny Dalglish
  22. When the Liverpool manager went to the control room and agreed to make the announcem ent
broadcast at 3.56 pm , he says in a statement that he could not get the Tannoy to work. Spectators could see
him trying to address them and indicated to him manually that nothing could be heard. An officer pressed
buttons on the m achine and M r Dalglish says he tried again with similar lack o f success. He was then taken
under the police box to the room used by the disc jockey to broadcast pre-match music. There, the m icrophone
worked and he broadcast his message.

   23. M r Dalglish was not called. There was no other evidence about this incident. I accept it occurred as he
described. Why the Tannoy could not at that tim e be successfully operated from the police box is, however,
strange and unexplained. Unlike the radio, it had operated satisfactorily from the police box at the critical
times save that its messages may not always have been heard above the prevailing noise. It had worked at about
3.30 pm when it called for medical staff. le a n see no grounds for criticising the police in regard to this incident
and certain it is that the brief delay in relaying Mr Dalglish’s message can have had no significant effect.




                                                         66
                                              APPENDIX 7

                          LIST OF PARTIES AND THEIR REPRESENTATION

1.   M r Andrew Collins QC, M r Alan Goldsack and M r Bernard Phillips o f Counsel, instructed by the
     Treasury Solicitor, appeared on behalf o f the Inquiry.

2.   M r Benet Hytner QC and M r Timothy King o f Counsel, instructed by the Hillsborough Steering
     Com mittee, appeared on behalf of the bereaved and injured.

3.   M r John Jacicson o f Counsel, instructed by Messrs Hill Dickinson, appeared on behalf o f the Football
     Supporters’ Association.

4.   M r John Dyson QC and Mr David Gibson-W att o f Counsel, instructed by Messrs Freshfields, appeared
     on behalf o f the Football Association.

5.   M r R ichard Maxwell QC and Mr Michael M urphy o f Counsel, instructed by Messrs Keeble Hawsons,
     appeared on behalf of Sheffield City Council.

6.   M r Edwin Glasgow QC and M r Stuart Catchpole o f Counsel, instructed by Messrs Davies Arnold Cooper,
     appeared on behalf o f Sheffield Wednesday Football Club.

7.   M r William Woodward QC and Mr Patrick Limb o f Counsel, instructed by Messrs H am m ond Suddards,
     appeared on behalf o f the South Yorkshire Police.

8.   M r Franz Muller QC and M r Andrew Robertson o f Counsel, instructed by Messrs Crutes, appeared on
     behalf o f the South Yorkshire Fire and Civil Defence Authority.

9.   M r Michel Kallipetis QC, instructed by Messrs D ibb Lupton Broomhead, appeared on behalf o f Trent
     Regional Health Authority.

10. M r Roger Toulson QC. instructed by Messrs Reynolds Porter Chamberlain, appeared on behalf o f D r W.
    Eastwood.




                                                      67
                                APPENDIX 8

LIST OF TH OSE GIVING ORAL EVIDENCE TO THE INQUIRY IN ORDER OF APPEARANCE

                            Stephen M artin FOSTER
                            Michael Joseph BRADLEY
                            Peter William JACKSON
                            Alison Jane BENNETT
                            Daniel Joseph HENNESSEY
                            Keith G O LD IN G
                            Ian John CLARKE
                            David PERRY
                        ,   David Anthony CRUICE
                            Patrick C U N NINGHAM
                            Keith LEONARD
                            Wayne David W INDEVER
                            Gary GAINS
                            Mark Ian HUGHES
                            David HU G H ES
                            Anthony BARNBROCK
                            David C U N NINGHAM
                            Peter DARCY
                            Ian Kenneth DEVINE
                            Peter Joseph GARRETT
                            David Peter LOWE
                            Geoffrey Nigel MOODY
                            Christopher MORAN
                            Roy PARRY
                            John Stewart PHIMESTER
                            David POSTLETHWAITE
                            Thomas Kenneth HILTON
                            Nicholas BELL
                            Stephen Mark WESTERGREEN
                            Trevor HICKS
                            Ian William BURKE
                            William Ham ilton COM ERFORD
                            Diane Susan CONNOLLY
                            Peter Jeffrey GARRETT
                            David HARTLEY
                            Thomas Bentley MATTHEWS
                            David Thom as JONES
                            Paul M cCa f f r e y
                            David Stephen M OORE
                            Maxwell ROSS
                            Anthony Christopher SMITH
                            Steven ALLEN
                            P. MAHER
                            Michael G errard HILL
                            Neil FITZM AURICE
                            Angela HOCKEN HULL
                            Lee Edward OXLEY
                            Constance SWEET
                            Janet Ann ELLIS
                             Frederick James ECCLESTON
                            Adam James PEMBERTON
                            John R andolph Tom BARTHOLOMEW
                            Judith WATSON
                             Duncan STURROCK
                             Susan DAWES
                            Albert LINDLEY
                             PC Ian BROWN
                               APPENDIX8

LIST OF THOSE GIVING ORAL EVIDENCE TO THE INQUIRY IN ORDER OF APPEARANCE

                          Chief Superintendent Brian Leonard MOLE
                          Chief Superintendent David Godfrey DUCKENFIELD
                          Assistant Chief Constable Walter JACKSON
                          Superintendent Roger MARSHALL
                          Superintendent Bernard Dean MURRAY
                          Superintendent Roger GREENW OOD
                          Bruce David GROBBELAAR*
                          Chief Superintendent John Arthur NESBIT
                          Superintendent John Harris BROUGHAM
                          Detective Superintendent Graham McKAY
                          Inspector Paul HAND-DAVIS
                        ' Chief Inspector Robert Wallace CREASER
                          Inspector Peter Colin DARLING
                          Inspector David BULLAS
                          Inspector G ordon SYKES
                          Inspector Robert PURDY
                          Inspector Stephen ELLIS
                          Inspector John Joseph BENNETT
                          Sergeant Stephen John PAYNE
                           PC G raham D U FFY
                           PC D. EVANS
                           PC Andrew BEST
                           PC Brian Robert HUCKSTEPP
                           PC Alistair John TAYLOR
                           Sergeant John MORGAN
                           WPC Alison TAGG
                           Sergeant Lionel PROCTOR
                           WPC Jane Borthwick BURNLEES
                           Sergeant Philip Sidney SMITH
                           PC Stephen Frank FRY
                           PC F. N. G R U N N ILL
                           WPC Elizabeth Jayne WILSON
                           Sergeant William Cameron CRAWFORD
                           PC Paul BRANSTON
                           WPC Jacqueline BURTON
                           Sergeant Robert BURNS
                           W PC Helen Kay PEARSON
                           PC Alexander AITKIN
                           Sergeant Paul BURM AN
                           PC Stephen Andrew SHEAR WOOD
                           Sergeant Edward H IG GINS
                           Sergeant Peter CHAPM AN
                           PC Peter Edward SMITH
                           PC G errard St Clare FINNEGAN
                           PC David Alfred ILLINGWORTH
                           WPC Fiona RICHARDSON
                           PC Jam es Oscar PACKER
                           PC Michael BUXTON
                           Detective Sergeant Paul MORTON
                           Detective Sergeant David G U TCH ER
                           PC Michael Vincent RYAN
                           Sergeant Michael GODDARD
                           Peter WELLS
                           PC Trevor BICHARD
 . ..                     John E dm undTO W LER
 K                        Frank GOD LEY
                            Philip M artin SAXTON


                                     69
  PC Harold GU EST
  Inspector Ian TU R N ER
  Chief Inspector McROBBIE
  PC Kenneth RO O K
  FC O P Susan Elizabeth DAVIES
  Station Officer J SWAIN
  Station Officer FLETCHER
  A.C.O. A. D. HORNSBY
  Leading Firem an HOUSLEY
  George LLOYD
  Raym ond John LLOYD
  Brian SAYLES
  Randolph SAYNOR
  Stephen Michael COPELAND
  Albert R H O D ES
  Steven Charles RHODES
  Wayne Austin HALL
  Allan John HASKINS
  Stuart Roland TH O R PE
  Kenneth CASTLEY
  John Philip CASTLEY
  Albert R onald MARSH
  Robert William COBB
  Brian R ID G E
  Richard William BEADSLEY
  Malcolm BAIN
  Stephen Craig CARDWELL
  Gary VAUX
  Alan Keith SEAMAN
  Frederick M ADDO X
  D r William PURCELL
  Station Officer Patrick H IG GINS
  Station Officer Paul Anthony James EASON
  Control Superintendent Raym ond CLARKE
  Deputy C hief M etropolitan Ambulance Officer Alan H O PK IN S
  Chief M etropolitan Ambulance Officer Albert PAGE
  Lawrence YOXALL
  David John WALKER
  Maurice KAY QC
  D r Andrew Jolyon BYRNE
  Graham KELLY
  D r John ASHTON
  D r Naderassen Carpoosamy CURPEN
  Kenneth EVANS
  Glen KIRTON
" D r Wilfred EASTWOOD
  D rG lyn PHILLIPS
  Ferenc MORATH
  Andrew SANDERSON
  PC Philip HOOSON
  PC G aryC A M M O CK
  David BOWNES
  Inspector Clive William CALVERT
  Graham H enry MACKRELL
  Inspector Steven Robert SEWELL
  Douglas John LOCK
  Garry TAYLOR
  David George Lawrence WATTS
  Superintendent Terence Willis STUART
  PC Brian WAUGH



              70
  In addition, statements of evidence from many others were admitted to the Inauirv             on .
received from M em bers of the House of Commons and three from Members of the*Hon* & r r ettf rscwere
1,470 letters from the general public were received. Organisations who have submitted e v id e n t w
               Inauirv will be specifically
Part Et of the Inquiry         snecifirailv listed
                                            listen in the
                                                      t+»» R n d Report.
                                                           Final                             nce addressed to

* Statement read to the Inquiry




                                                                71



                               P rim a l m the United K ingdom for H er M ajesty's Stationery Office
                                    D d 0503228 S/89 C50 O /N o. 8406270 (3840) 4450
