  "Ji L1U UU


         v.           C c ~ J s T   m   T   a



                            /l^v
                                                                   * 3^


NEWS RELEASE                                     5 0 Queen AnVie's Gate London SW1 H 9AT
                                                 (N ig hi hoe 071 2 7 3 4 5 9 5 )
                                                 Contact Number



  9 August 1991
                                                                      071 273 4610


                            R£D-CARp FQR FQQTBAIJ, HOOLIGANS



 f w t b S l l m a t i e T u r d e t 0® h^ " eS„ ° f    “p t o E100° »-d a ban from
 - i™ t h « »                                            ? r k" u c h c° r in t ° * ° rce
 game at Wembley                                       th   the   shoucnse Charity Shield


 would        provide1 t h e ^ T o u V t s ^ l t h ^ n “ ith      incrsaaes      in    Penalties,

                                                                          -    a s r s .ta„ 5
 He said:

 the\a-ee                      £o°iba11 » « *      *=° «ee hooliganism expelled from
 p l a v 9 tne.r
           t h e , . \ part
                       , a * t "T,®
                                m
                                    *   "e “ o f f e n c e s ar‘d tougher p e n a l t i e s
                                    freeing our national winter s^orf- T f                  k!
 u ^ a v o u r y mln o r i t y „ho have done s o much tQ damlge “i t T i m a ' e “ n

  From tomorrow, it will be a criminal offence to:

       throw any object onto the pitch or into any spectator area;

   '   run onfco the pitch without $ood reason;

   -   chant indecent or racialist slogans.

"Pines have been increased two and a half fold      from ftnn     *
maximum of £1000.   This    in          . ..      ' rom E40^ to a
k.„.   •_ .          , s 13 in addition to the powers which courf-<*
h    .    issue exclusion and restriction orders to footba11
nooiigana preventing them from attending matches.          t°°tba*l

thi ^                   u"acfeptable f°r people to throw missiles, run on
the pit^h         and   chant racial abuse at football matches      rf
                            tall P^ “      , should               ha-   given the court!
offences^"                        stringently with                those who commit such
        '   91 - 0 8 -0 8 18=12



    •
    t




'




        These new offences, contained in Sir John Wheeler's Private
        Member’s Bill -The Football Offences Act 1991, provide further
        valuable   measures   to control  hooliganism and curtail  the*
        unacceptable behaviour that can lead to disorder at football
        matches, said Mr Lloyd.

        ’’These measures taken                together provide yet a further range of
        powers to the courts.                  I look to the courts to make full use of
        the m e a s u r e s       QDen   to them.   This   in   turn w i l l   complement   the work
        of the police in their efforts to combat football hooliganism.

        "These new criminal offences are the latest in the stage of the
        Government's fight against the spectre of football hooliganism.
        Trouble makers should realise that courts now have further powers
        at their disposal."

        Prominent among counter measures against hooliganism is the work
        of the National Football Intelligence Unit (NFXU) which has pliyed
        a major role in dealing with this menace.

        Hooligans should realise that the NFIU, working with football
        liaison officers appointed for every league club, makes it very
        likely that their disgraceful behaviour will be observed and
        punished, said Mr Lloyd.

        Recent figures released by the Home Office show that arrests and
        ejections at football grounds are down.
        "Thp.RA         1 nf-c-flf                                                      niaf-.ier*,
        pursue its campaign to eradicate hooliganism at football matches;
        there is still a long way to go but the arrest figures show that
        real progress is being made,"

        The  courts   currently have powers    to impose Exclusion and
        Restriction Orders for football related    offences. These orders,
        which are complementary, are designed to prevent those subject to
        them   from  attending football matchesin England or Wales
        (exclusion orders) or outside England     and Wales (restriction
        orders).

        Courts may make exclusion orders where persons are convicted of a
        football related offence and where the court is satisfied that
        such an order would help prevent violence or disorder at football
        matches. The Order has the effect of excluding persons from all
        matches in England and Wales involving    a Football League team,
        European club competition matches and international matches.

        Courts may similarly make restriction orders which has the effect
        of requiring persons convicted of a football related offence to
        report to a police station at times that would prevent them from
        travelling to matches outside England and Wales.
NOTES FOR EDITORS

The Home Secretary announced on 12 November 1990 that legislation
would be introduced as soon as Parliamentary time permitted to
give statutory force to the recommendations by Lord Justice Taylor
in his final report on the Hillsborough Stadium disaster.

The  Football    (Offences) Act 1991 was a Private Members Bill
           hv Sir- .7ohn     #»t M P . tf received Roval Assent on 27
June 1991.   Its provisions come into force on 10 August 1991.

Measures taken to date in the fight against football hooliganism
include:

  -   alcohol controls   imposed by      the Sporting Events    (Control of
Alcohol etc) Act 1985;

     exclusion orders introduced by the Public Order Act 1986 to
keep troublemakers out of football grounds in England and Wales;

     restriction orders introduced by the Football Spectators Act
1989 to keep troublemakers away from matches abroad;

     the establishment of the National Football Intelligence Unit
to help target serious and persistent football hooligans;

     Football (Offences)    Act   1991    incorporating   the   three   new
criminal offences.

The Criminal Justice Act 1991, which received Royal Assent on 25
July 1991, increased the level 3 fine on the standard scale from
£400 to £1000.  This penalty may be accompanied by the imposition
of an exclusion order or a restriction order or both in the case
of football related offences.

The National Football Intelligence Unit collects and disseminates
information on serious football hooliganism.      They operate a
confidential HOTLINE for members of the public who wish to
volunteer information about football hooliganism to the police.
The HOTLINE telephone number is 071 273 5340.
