                                                      HOME OFFICE
                                               Queen Anne's Gate London SW1H 9AT

                                                    Switchboard: 01-273 3000



Our reference: F E P / 9 0   35/ 4 3 / 8 9            7 February 1990
Your reference:



    To:     The Chief Executive:
                     County Councils
                     Metropolitan District Councils
                     London Borough Councils
                     Common Council of the City of London




    Dear Sir/Madam
    HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR 11/1990
    FINAL REPORT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY
    Introduction
    The Final Report of the Inquiry set up by the Home Secretary
    following the disaster at the Hillsborough football ground was
    published on 29 January. A copy of the Report is attached.
    2.   The purpose of this circular is first, to apprise recipients
    of the Report's recommendations and the Government's response to
    them; and second to give guidance to local authorities with
    safety certification responsibilities on compliance with the
    recommendations.
    The Report
    3.   The Report contains 76 recommendations, 43 of which are
    repeated in substance (see also paragraph 6 below) from the
    Interim Report circulated with HOC 68/1989. Attached at Annex A
    is a copy of the Home Secretary's oral statement to the House
    of Commons on 29 January responding to the final Report.     At
    Annex B is a copy of the schedule referred to in the statement
    setting out the Government's initial response to the individual
    recommendations in the report.
    4.   Local authorities may wish to note, in particular, the
    response to recommendations 1-4 (all seated accommodation) and
    recommendation 6 (National Review Body). The intention is to
    bring into force the relevant sections of Part I of the Football
    Spectators Act 1989 in order to implement these recommendations
E.R.
   as regards football grounds as soon as practicable.          Safety
   certificates should not be amended for this purpose.
   Scope
   5.   Paragraphs 238-239 of the Report indicate that in directing
   the recommendations "essentially" to sports grounds designated
   under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 the flexibility of
   approach referred to in paragraph 5 of the Guide to Safety at
   Sports Grounds (the Green Guide) should apply. Paragraph 14 of
   the Report makes clear that its emphasis is on football, with its
   special problems such as overcrowding and misbehaviour, which
   are not experienced to the same extent elsewhere.      The Report
   states that "crowd problems are directly related to the nature
   of the event and the numbers attending it". It would therefore
   be consistent with the Report's findings for local authorities
   to take proper account of these factors when applying the
   recommendations to individual grounds:     for example a careful
   appraisal of the value of such matters as the installation of
   sophisticated communications systems and CCTV may be necessary
   where spectator attendances are numbered in hundreds rather than
   thousands and where the police presence at the ground is minimal.
   interim Report Recommendations Adjusted
   6.   The   attention  of   local   authorities   is  drawn   to
   recommendations 8, 11, 12(b), 19, 20, 31, 33, 58, 66 and 67 all
   of which were contained in the Interim Report but have been
   modified as follows:
           recommendation 8    revised maximum figure
           recommendation 11 - "agreement" between club and police is
                               replaced by "statement of intent"
           recommendation 12 - qualification introduced by 12(b)
           recommendation 19 - discretion as regards opening of pitch
                               perimeter gates
           recommendation 20 - mannincr bv colice or steward
        recommendation 31 — revised     composition of the Advisory
                            Group
        recommendation 33 - reference to 1975 Act provision
        recommendation 58 - hand-signals not recommended
        recommendation 66 - recommended threshold figure of 2000
        recommendation 67 - ambulance may be approved          by   the
                            ambulance authorities.
E.R.
   New Safety Recommendations
   7.   New recommendations are summarised below and              local
   authorities are urged to take the action indicated             where
   appropriate.
           Turnstiles (recommendation 10) - to note the revised
           maximum flow-rate to be used in place of the figure of
           750 quoted in the Green Guide which will be amended as
           soon as possible;
           Gangways (recommendation 13) - to include appropriate
           conditions in safety certificates;
           Perimeter Fences (recommendations 14, 15, 17) - to
           secure action by clubs to comply with these
           recommendations and to amend safety certificates, as
           necessary;
           Safety Certificates (recommendations 24, 25, 26) - t o
           consider   any   necessary   adjustment   to   safety
           certificates and note Home Office intention to
           implement recommendation 24;
           Duties of Clubs (recommendations 39, 40, 42, 43) - to
           consider appropriate amendment to safety certificates,
           as necessary;
           Police Planning (recommendations 47, 48, 50, 52, 53),
           Communications (55) and Co-ordination (61) - to note
           the recommendations and the Government's response;
           First Aid (recommendation 69) and Offences/Penalties
           (recommendations 70-73)   - to note Government's
           response;
           Green Guide (recommendations 74-76 and Appendix 3) -
           to note the Government response and to adopt the
           revised criteria/requirements which will be included
           in a revised guide as soon as possible.
   Resource Implications
   8.   Action to consider, revise and enforce the provisions of
   safety certificates in the light of the Report may have short
   term resource implications but is not expected to give rise to
   significant long-term resource implications above existing
   commitments.
   other
   9.    Copies of this circular, annexes and enclosures are sent
   to Fire and Civil Defence Authorities, Police Authorities,
   Regional Managers Health Authorities, Chief Officers of Police,
   Chief    Fire Officers   and Chief Ambulance Officers        for
   information. Copies have also been sent to all football league
   clubs and the representative organisations on the attached list.
E.R.
   10. Any enquiries about the contents of this circular should
   be addressed to Mr A Brown (01-273-2765).
                                         Yours faithfully




                                         P E BOLTON
                                         (Fire and Emergency
                                         Planning Department)


   Enc
                                                                                                                        0
INSTRUCTIONS TO REPROGRAPHIC & DISTRIBUTION BRANCH                                       ''       .             I                    HOEST85(L)

     ease arrange for the distribution of the attached material in accordance with the instructions shown below.

Signature                   u.                               Date 2 - / £ /     l»    Division        O '2-             File Ref„j

1.     Title of document and brief description of enclosure(s)                HoiMC     o F C ice
                       flr tA t.       ft£P c >R T     o ?    THE         ■H lu .jfie fte lJ A K      tfS Q & IA .'i
                                     fh\~<.xe«                                                WOC

2.     Date of distribution (as agreed in advance with R & D Branch)


3.     Number of Circular (if included in HO numbered series)


4.     Class of mail required (1st or 2nd Class)                           C^SS

5. DISTRIBUTION (paragraph 8 Annex to HON 276/1979 refers)                                                             Number of copies required

                                                                                                                       Circular/
Galley Ref.                      Title of Galley                                                                       document      Enclosure(s)

                                 M -e /K o p z .k + c w i    C sM ^iuS S         7 C a»*JtL\ C a~~cjl±                       b
                   \    *        ()eh*                            Cewwfc-V» 3                                               3^
            1 *+ K j \ r -                &U        G n v v i^                                                                8
       ^ 7             \)C   n                                    sK-1"ct"                                                  3 b
                                                                                                                            33
        L-Ab           \X            L Ot-' d o w      feov        U
       Cobi 1                                                                                                               43
       C o * J 3 v*                                                                                                         4 -4
     C fo                    / ----C U—..
                                      a*4                                                                                    5b
                                          .—3"w e O-'Hvu^v
                                                    VV     s
     L h       l             ^ Fvvfi- (V vj Cwv£                                                                              7
                                     Oo»v~t**0V\                    ^         KLo                                                \
  ^M                                           Iis+s
    T)4............. 4 5
                                     X



                                                                              L




---
                                                                                                                             *12.
                                 o




                                 Fwe>              CAvJft J                                                                  ^ 2.
        •                        Q^fai/vS                                                                                     35
                                                                                                                         zi-q-
                                                                       Number of copies (total)                         2 $ -3
Further instructions/Supplementary lis t: continue if necessary overleaf/attached

NOTES                   This form MUST be accompanied by the appropriate Reprographic Order Form (HO Est 85 (J) or 85 (K))
                        Full names and addresses should be used on any Supplementary list; please avoid abbreviations
                        The issue of a Circular MUST have the approval of the appropriate Head of Division —paragraph 9/
                        Annex HON 276/1979 refers
                        The use of 1st Class Mail should be restricted to cases of exceptional urgency and should be authorised by a
                        senior officer.

For R & D Branch use

To:                                                                 Division
The above mentioned dOcument/Circular/enclosures have been despatched in accordance with your instructions. Spare copies
are attached.

Signature                                                          Date
                                             I                                                                                  ANNEX A
                               Hillshonmgh    J
                                             ladiAi Disaster   29 JA N U A R Y 1990           Hillsbtirtmgli Stadium Disaster           20

        Hillsborough Stac^um Disaster (Taylor                                        Jt
                                                                              Lord Justice  Taylor does not spare those who run the
                                                                           industry, 1He says, indeed, that the provision they make for
                                         Report)                                 custo
                                                                           their customers  is often not merely basic but squalid: and
                                                                                squal: conditions can have an impact on safety and
                                                                           that squalid
     .32 pm
                                                                           that, in hhis view, they also lead to lower standards o f
        Mr. Speaker: Statement. Mr. Secretary W addington.                 behaviour.
                                                                               Lord Justice Taylor says that the Football Association
                                                                           and Football League have not seen it as any part o f their
                                                                           duty to offer guidance to clubs on safety matters, and he
                                                                           questions whether the directors o f many clubs are
                                                                           genuinely interested in the welfare o f their supporters or
                                                                           their good behaviour. Players, too, are criticised, with
                                                                           Lord Justice Taylor pointing out that incitement from the
                                                                           pitch or bad behaviour by players, which is not confined to
                                                                           soccer, has a major influence o n the crowd.
                                                                              I acknow ledge that som e clubs have made an effort to
                                                                           im prove standards, but Lord Justice Taylor's clear
                                                                           conclusion was that the majority had not and that the
                                                                           game has a future only if the directors and the players can
                                                                           change their priorities and give a leadership which is
                                                                           plainly lacking at present.
                                                                              He agrees with the Governm ent that there must be a
                                                                           m ove towards all-seater stadia and points out that section
                                                                           11 o f the F ootball Spectators Act 1989 specifically
                                                                           provides the machinery for that. The change will improve
                                                                           safety and behaviour, and we intend to bring it about.
                                                                              Lord Justice Taylor m akes clear that the bulk o f the
                                                                           finances for ground im provem ents will have to be raised by
                                                                           the clubs themselves. He says there are w ays o f raising the
                                                                           m oney if the club s’ m anagem ent is enterprising and
                                                                           resourceful, and he points to the opportunities presented
                                                                           by sponsorship. H e also p oints to the revenue that flow's to
                                                                           the football authorities from television rights and says that
                                                                           the football authorities should ensure that this valuable
                                                                           source o f revenue is directed towards im proving stadia. He
                                                                          canvasses the possibility o f a levy o n transfer fees which he
                                                                          says have reached a level which many regard as grotesque.
                                                                              There is a w hole series o f detailed recom m endations set
                                                                          out in chapters 3. 4 and 5 o n matters relating to spectator
                                                                          safety such as gates and gangways. Indeed, o f the 76
                                                                          recom m endations, 43 in substance appear in the interim
                                                                           report. The G overn m ent accept these proposals, som e o f
                                                                          which can be im plem ented im mediately: som e will need
                                                                          further w ork. For convenience. I have placed in the V ote
                                                                          Office a schedule setting o u t the G ove rn m en t’s response to
                                                                          each.
                                                                              Hon. M em bers will recall that section 13 o f the
                                                                          F oo tb all Spectators Act provides for the F ootball
                                                                          Licensing A uthority to supervise the safety responsibilities
                                                                          o f local authorities in respect o f designated football
                                                                          grounds. We intend to im plem ent that provision. Lord
                                                                          Justice T aylor w elcom es the establishm ent o f the F ootball
    M r. Waddington:                                                      Licensing A uthority but w ould like us to go further and
    I am m o st grateful to Lord Justice T aylor for the                  extend its remit to cover other than football grounds. This
report, which sets out clearly w hy we have had so m any                  w ould require prim ary legislation, and we will have to
major tragedies at football grounds o ver the years and w hy              consider whether it is justified.
w e have had disorder and h ooliganism .                                      Part III o f the report contain s a number o f proposals
    A s the H o u se familiarises itself w ith the report, it will        relating     to   crow d   control     and    hooliganism .     It
becom e clear that it is addressed as m uch to the football               a ckn ow ledges the crucial role o f the police in crow d
industry as it is to the G o v e rn m en t. Lord Justice T aylor          control. Lord Justice T aylor rightly reminds us that,
explains h ow , in his interim report, he concentrated on                 w ith out the work o f the police, m any sporting events
overcrow ding because that w a s the cause o f the                        w ould be ch aotic and could not be permitted to take place.
H illsborough disaster, but now he goes on to talk o f a                  Som ething like 5,000 police officers are engaged on
gam e, the im age o f which has been m uch tarnished, and o f             football duties each Saturday during the season, largely at
a blight over the gam e due to old grounds, p oor facilities,             the expense o f the taxpayer and the ratepayer. H e pays
hooligan ism , excessive drinking and p o o r leadership.                 tribute to them for their service, and I w ant to add m y

   :il C U 7 2 . | J o b l-l
21                    Hillsborough Stadiihn Disaster    29 J A N U A R Y 1990          Hillsborough Stadium Disaster


thanks to the police for the way that they carry out the              better atmosphere by im proving the now often squalid
difficult, thankless and often unthanked tasks that are               conditions to which they subject their supporters— squalid
thrust upon them.                                                     conditions that can encourage squalid behaviour.
    The report recognises the advances made in the last                   T hose clubs that have not faced up to their
couple o f years in the effectiveness o f the policing o f            responsibility now have a final opportunity to do so; and
football, particularly inside grounds, and to the major               if thev d o not now act, the public will not forgive them.
impact o f closed circuit television on the hooligan
problem. It also m entions other measures taken by the
Governm ent, such as the restriction on the sale o f alcohol
and the power given to the courts to m ake orders
excluding convicted h ooligan s from grounds.
    Lord Justice Taylor also recognises the great potential
value o f the police national football intelligence unit in
dealing with football-related crime and with hooligans
travelling to matches abroad.
    A s I have said. Lord Justice Taylor takes the view that
better facilities and better treatment o f fans will bring
better behaviour. B eyond that, the report recom m ends the
creation o f three new specific offences to apply at
designated sports grounds— throw ing a missile; chanting
obscene or racialist abuse; and going on to the pitch
w ithout reasonable excuse. It also asks for consideration
to be given to extend in g the courts’ powers to im pose
attendance centre orders and for the use o f electronic
tagging in the case o f offenders' convicted o f football-
related offences. T he specific new offences suggested seem,
to so m e extent, to duplicate offences which are already
available in the Public Order A ct 1986, but I shall look
carefully and quickly at all these suggestions.
    I now com e to the p rop osed football mem bership
scheme. Lord Justice T aylor exam ined the invitation to
tender for a schem e which w as issued by the consultants
em p loy ed by the footb all authorities. H e cam e to the
con clusion that he c ou ld not support a schem e o f that kind
because he cou ld not believe that the tech n ology w ould
w ork well en ough to a v oid the danger o f congestion and
disorder. H e was also con cerned a b o u t the call on police
resources. Instead, he p rop oses the measures to which I
have referred.
    In the light o f this advice, the G o v ern m en t have decided
not to proceed with the establishm ent o f a football
m em bership authority, but part I o f the A ct will remain on
the statute b ook. W ork will con tinu e to see h o w the
sh ortcom ings identified by Lord Justice T aylor could be
overcom e in case w e have to return to the matter again,
should the problem o f h oo lig an ism not be defeated by the
alternative strategy p rop osed in the report.
    Let no on e im agine that this m eans that there will be
any let-up in the fight against h ooligan ism . T h o se w ho,
unlike the G o vern m en t, have for so long shrugged off their
responsibilities will n ow have to face up to them.
    T he G ov e rn m en t intend to proceed as quickly as
possible to the estab lish m ent o f a footb all licensing
authority and, subject to co n su ltation , section 11 o f the
F o o tb all Spectators A c t will be used to direct the F ootball
Licensing A uth ority to require all-sea ter stadium s— with
standing being reduced by stages and entirely elim inated in
first and second division groun ds by A u gu st 1994 and in all
F o o tb a ll League grou n d s by 1999.
    T he necessary steps will be taken to ensure im proved
arrangem ents for crow d co n trol and better training for
p olice and stewards. T here will be urgent consideration o f
the case for new offences and for new pow ers to deal with
those excluded from g ro u n d s by the courts. T h e clubs will
be com p elled to get rid o f the terraces. But Lord Justice
T aylor indicates h o w m u ch m ore they can d o to create a

     : i C 0 7 2 Z J o b p.3
                                                          ANNEX B




INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM INQUIRY

Initial response by the Government to the recommendations in the
final report of Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry into the
Hillsborough stadium diaster.

In his statement on 29 January, the Home Secretary indicated that
he would place in the Library a schedule setting out the
Government’s initial response to the recommendations of Lord
Justice Taylor’s final report. The schedule is annexed.




29 January 1990
Initial response by the Government to recommendations contained
in the Taylor report.


ALL SEATED ACCOMMODATION (Recommendation 1-4)

1.   General recommendation in respect of all sports grounds
     designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.

2.   To apply to all UEFA "high risk" matches from Autumn 1993.

3.   To apply by 20% stages between now and Autumn 1994 to
          Football league, Divisions 1 and 2
          Scottish football league, Premier Division
          National stadia.

4.   To apply by 10% stages between now and Autumn 1999 to all
     other matches played at designated grounds.

The Government accepts this recommendation in principle and
expects to apply it in the case of UEFA high risk matches, the
4 Divisions of the football league, and the national stadia as
recommended.

The application of the recommendation to Scotland and to other
sports cannot be achieved under the Football Spectators Act 1989
but the Government will in any case wish to discuss it with the
sporting authorities concerned. Designated sports grounds under
the 1975 Act include cricket, rugby union and rugby league
grounds which are not all enclosed grounds and which it may not
be practicable to deal with in this way.


advisory   DESIGN COUNCIL (Recommendation 5)

The Government supports Lord Justice Taylor’s recommendation
that the football league and Football Association should
establish an Advisory Design Council on stadium design.



NATIONAL INSPECTORATE AND REVIEW BODY (Recommendation 6)

     (a)   The Football Licensing Authority should be created to
           review the discharge of functions by local authorities.

     (b)   The powers of the Authority should be extended to other
           sports and other sports venues.

The Government supports the recommendation that safety
certification of designated grounds should be centrally reviewed
and proposes to bring into force relevant provisions of Part I
of the Football Spectators Act to create and empower the Football
Licensing Authority to carry out these responsibilities in
England and Wales in relation to grounds used by football league
clubs and the international football grounds. Consideration will
be given to introduction of legislation extending the role of the
new authority to Scotland and in relation to other sports grounds
and sporting venues after consultation with the representative
sporting organisations, the local authority associations and
other interested bodies.    Consideration will also be given to
extending the Authority’s responsibilities in the meantime on a
voluntary basis.
MAXIMUM CAPACITIES FOR TERRACES (Recommendations 7-10)

7.    Safety certificates to specify maximum number of spectators
      in pens or areas (interim recommendation 1).

8.    Calculations of crowd density:      revised figures    (interim
      recommendation 2, revised).

9.    Arrangements to prevent   further   access   to pens   (interim
      recommendation 3).

10.   Turnstile flow rates.

The Government supports these recommendations. Local authorities
with responsibilities under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
(the 1975 Act) have already been urged to review and amend safety
certificates to reflect reductions in terrace capacities
recommended in the Interim Report.      The adjusted figures in
recommendations 8 and 10 will be drawn to local authorities’
attention. The next edition of the ’Green Guide' will reflect
the new figures.
FILLING AND MONITORING OF TERRACES (Recommendations 11-12)

11.   Statements of intent (interim recommendation 4, revised.

12.   Stewarding or policing of pens (interim recommendation 5).

The Government have already urged police and clubs to enter into
non-contractual statements of intent with the aim of ensuring
that no doubt exists as to the respective responsibilities of
each; and to provide monitoring of terraces accordingly.       The
relaxation in recommendation 12 (b) will be drawn to the attention
of local authorities and clubs.
GANGWAYS (Recommendation 13)

Local authorities will be urged to include in safety certificates
terms and conditions to give effect to this recommendation.
FENCES AND GATES (Recommendations 14-21)

14.   Removal of spikes.

15.   Reduction in height.

16.   Training of stewards (interim recommendation 6).
17.   Emergency gates in perimeter fences.
18.   Marking of emergency gates (interim recommendation 7).
19.   Gates normally to be kept open during matches            (interim
      recommendation 8, revised).
20.   Manning    of    emergency      gates      (replaces     interim
      recommendation 9).
21.   cutting equipment (interim recommendation 10).
The Government supports the recommendations on perimeter fencing.
Local authorities will be urged to amend safety certificates to
include requirements so as to implement recommendations 14, 15,
17 and to note recommendation 19 which varies interim
recommendation 8. The revised recommendations on closure and
manning of gates in perimeter fences at football grounds will be
drawn to the attention of local authorities, clubs and police.
CRUSH BARRIERS (Recommendations 22, 23)
22.   Inspection (interim recommendation 11).
23.   Review of layout (interim recommendation 12).
These are repeated from the Interim Report.        They have already
been commended to local authorities.
SAFETY CERTIFICATES (Recommendations 24-31)
24.   Mandatory conditions in safety certificates.
25.   Variation from terms of safety certificates.
26.   Terms of safety certificates.
27.   Review of safety certificates (interim recommendation 13).
28.Issue of certificates     to    grounds    without   them   (interim
recommendation 14).
29.   Annual   review of    certificates;  annual         renewal   of
      certificates (interim recommendation 15).
30.   Review of arrangements for issuing certificates (interim
      recommendation 16).
31.   Local authority advisory groups (interim recommendation 17,
      revised).
The Government agrees with the aims of these recommendations.
An order under S.15A of the 1975 Act will be made to implement
recommendation 24. Consideration will also be given to including
within the scope of such an Order provisions which will require
terms and conditions addressing other aspects of safety to be
included in safety certificates.
Local authorities will be urged to ensure the terms/conditions
in safety certificates are clear and unequivocal: they will be
reminded of the need to have an effective review system, the
desirability of a properly constituted team approach to
certification and the desirability of consulting club and
supporters association representatives.
Annual review of safety certificates already exists in effect
because annual inspections of designated grounds in connection
with safety certificates is already required by law.       The
Government will consider whether any change in the law should
be made to make annual renewal of certificates compulsory.
DUTIES OF FOOTBALL CLUBS (Recommendations 32-43)
32.   Measurement of turnstile flow (interim recommendation 18).
33.   Correlation of turnstile      flow   and   capacity   (interim
      recommendation 19).
34.   Closure of turnstiles (interim recommendation 20).
35.   Closed circuit   television   (interim     recommendation   21,
      extended).
36.   Signposting (interim recommendation 22, extended).
37.   Information on tickets (interim recommendation 23).
38.   Co-ordination with the police (interim recommendation 24).
39.   Computer records of ticket sales.
40.   Restriction of all ticket matches to capacity attendances.
41.   Pre match entertainment (interim recommendation 25).
42. Recruitment of stewards.
43. Police control rooms.
These recommendations are aimed primarily at football clubs and
are supported by the Government.       Where appropriate, local
authorities will be asked to amend safety certificates to enforce
these recommendations.
POLICE PLANNING (Recommendations 44-53)

44.   Nomination of a Chief      Officer   for    liaison   (interim
      recommendation 26).
45. Pre match briefing (interim recommendation 27).
46. Operational orders (interim recommendation 28).
47.   Police action on ticketless fans.
48.   Review of arrest procedures.
49.   Postponement of kick-offs (interim recommendation 29).
50.   Early kick-offs and Sunday fixtures.
51.   Control room facilities.
52.   Training of senior officers.
53.   Charges for police services.
These recommendations, some of which are repeated from the
Interim Report are directed primarily to Chief Police Officers
and police authorities. The Government supports the proposal for
senior officer training and the objective to             improve
effectiveness of policing at football matches. The Government
agrees that the cost of policing inside grounds should be met in
full by clubs and will consider providing guidance to police
authorities after consultation with relevant representative
associations, to ensure consistency of practice.
COMMUNICATIONS (Recommendations 54-58)
54.   Radio communications (interim recommendation 31, amended).
55.   Provision of a command channel.
56.   Land lines (interim recommendation 32).
57.   Public address (interim recommendation 33).
58.   Illuminated advertising (interim recommendation 34: advice
      on hand signals withdrawn).
These are largely repeated from the Interim Report which the
Government has already urged clubs, local authorities and police
to implement. Chief Officers will also be encouraged to use an
additional, discrete channel of communications for police match
commanders.
CO-ORDINATION OF EMERGENCY SERVICES (Recommendations 59-63)
59.   Co-ordination (interim recommendation 35).
60.   Pre match briefing (interim recommendation 36).
61.   Communication with emergency services.
62.   Arrival of emergency vehicles (interim recommendation 37).
63.   Briefing of police officers (interim recommendation 38).
These recommendations are intended to ensure full co-ordination
and co-operation of the emergency services and are substantially
those covered in the Interim Report which the Government has
already endorsed. The Government will urge all those concerned
to comply with the further recommendation devised to ensure
immediate summons of emergency services.
FIRST AID, MEDICAL FACILITIES AMD AMBULANCES
(Recommendations   64-69)
64.   First aiders (interim recommendation 39).
65.   First aid rooms (interim recommendation 40).
66.   Medical practitioners (interim recommendation 41, revised).
67.   Ambulances (interim recommendation 42, revised).
68.   Ambulances, larger matches (interim recommendation 43).
69.   Major incident vehicles.
The Government will draw attention to variations from the
relevant Interim Report recommendations and will discuss the
provision of major incident vehicles with the authorities
concerned.
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES (Recommendations 70-73)
70.   Selling tickets.
71.   other specific offences.
72.   Attendance centres.
73.   Electronic tagging.
The Government will look carefully and quickly at all these
suggestions.
GREEN GUIDE (Recommendations 74-76)
74.   Revision of the Green Guide.
75.   crush barrier tests.
76.   Inspections for corrosion.
The Government accepts these recommendations and will act on them
with urgency.
E.R.



       Association of County Councils
       Association of Metropolitan Authorities
       London Boroughs Association
       Association of London Authorities
       Association of District Councils
       Welsh Counties Association
       Association of Chief Police Officers
       Clerks to Police Authorities
       Regional Managers, Health Authorities
       Chief and Assistant Chief Fire Officers' Association
       National Association of Fire Officers
       Fire Brigades Union
       Police Federation
       Police Superintendents' Association
       Association of Chief Ambulance Officers
       Football Association
       Football Association of Wales
       Football League
       Football Trust
       Football Grounds Improvement Trust
       Rugby Football Union
       Welsh Rugby Football Union
       Rugby Football League
       Speedway Control Board
       Cricket Council
       Jockey Club
       National Greyhound Racing Club
E.R.


       Lawn Tennis Association
       All England Tennis and Croquet Club
       Royal and Ancient Golf Club
       RAC Motor Sports Association
       British Board of Amateur Athletics
       Hockey Association
       British Show Jumping Association
       National Federation of Football Supporters Clubs
       Football Supporters Association
       St Johns Ambulance
       Sports Councils for England and Wales
       Central Council for Physical Recreation
