Essex                                       FEP/91 35/48/37
SS1 2
                                            21 August 1991
Dear Mr

Thank you for your letter of 26 July to the Prime Minister which
has been transferred to this Department in view of our
responsibilities for safety at sports grounds.

Lord Justice Taylor recognised, in his Final Report on the
Hillsborough Stadium disaster, that there is no single solution
to achieve crowd safety and cure all the problems of crowd
control.   However, he was satisfied that seating does more to
achieve these objectives than any other single measure. This is
a view with which the Government is in agreement and which is
consistent with the policies of both FIFA and UEFA. In addition,
by reducing the Pools Betting levy, the Government are making
available £100 million to the Football Trust over a five year
period to assist football clubs in carrying out these ground
improvements.

You also express your concern that if football grounds were to
provide   seated accomodation only      the  resulting   capacity
reductions would be such that at many grounds there would be
insufficient seats available for those wishing to watch certain
matches. However, Lord Justice Taylor pointed out in his Final
Report that of all the teams in Divisions 1 and 2 of the Football
League in the 1988/1989 season only at Liverpool did the average
attendance exceed the projected all seated capacity for the
ground. Indeed at 21 of these 44 clubs the projected all seated
capacity was not exceeded at all throughout the season.
Consequently the problem of over demand for tickets may not be
as serious as you envisage.

In answer to your worries over the cost of admission to football
grounds Lord Justice Taylor commented, in his Final Report, that
clubs may well wish to charge more for seats than for standing
but that it should be possible to plan a price structure which
suits the cheapest seats to the pockets of those presently paying
to stand.    It is not for the Home Office to comment on the
individual pricing policies adopted by individual clubs.

                                             Yours sincerely


                                              Steve Bilbe
                                              (Fire and Emergency
                                             Planning Department)
            DEPARTMENT        Of   E WV I R G N ME N T     AND
            DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORT
            Room    BG31 Readers S e c t i o n
            Romney House 4 3 Marsham Street London SW1P 3py


                           Direct line 01212
                           Switchboard 01-212 3434
                                       GTN 212

 j)er
  <fc m   o f t v    jL Scvser                   W
  VoAfT * D                                      Our reference


JW                                               Date r r * f /


           1 JBB '3 IS m « T "9AUGI991


The attached correspondence appears to raise matters
for which your Department may be responsible.                     It
is transferred accordingly; the writer W h a s                    not
been informed of its disposal.
 SSI 2

 26 July 1991

 J Major Esq
 Prime Minister
 10 Downing Street
 London
 SW1                           8 AUG 199!

Dear Mr Major
                               D.O.E
I feel forced, to write to you with regard to the Taylor Report on football
in this country, as the full implications do not yet seem to have been
appreciated by the public. How that the report is in the process of being
implemented, it is becoming- obvious that the ordinary "man in the street"
is being forced away from being able to watch his Saturday football.

I have been an Arsenal supporter for over 40 years and am horrified at the
manner in which my club are selling Bonds at £1100/£1500 each to give
supporters the right to purchase a season ticket to sit in future on the
present North Bank. Clearly this is way beyond the pockets of the present
supporter and will probably result in the North Bank becoming a       large
Executive Box with the present "hard core" support eliminated from the
ground.

Ay main complaint is that it is totally unnecessary as the Highbury ground
has never experienced trouble despite regular gates over the years of more
than 50,000 and no pitch barriers ever being required. The layout at
Highbury is such that entry to the standing areas at each end is from the
sides and not the rear as was the case at Hillsborough.

Are you aware of the animosity of the average supporter towards        beingforced
to sit and, more to the point, are you aware of the fact that ground
capacities will in future be totally inadequate for their needs?

In view of all of this I would be grateful if you could amend the Taylor
Report so that it only relates to the grounds and parts of grounds where it
is relevant, and to extend the deadline for implementation.

As you can see I am rather desperate at the prospect of being locked out of
my favourite club's ground, and I am writing to you as, for the first time to
my knowledge, we have a Prime Minister with an interest and a knowledge of
football.


                                                        Gontd
I am enclosing a letter I sent to Arsenal over two months ago, and to
which I have had no reply, setting out my argument in more detail. I
shall be grateful if you will give this matter your attention, as it seems
the average supporter is to be eliminated from football grounds without
any chance of protest. Football will in future no longer be the "working
man's" game it has always been, but will cater only for the wealthier
members of society.

I have always voted Conservative and feel horrified that I could be
deprived of my football in future by actions taken by my own party, and
shall be grateful for any assistance you can provide.

Yours s/npprpl v___




Enc
Essex
SS12

17 May 1991

D Dein Esq
Vice-Chairman
Arsenal Football Club PLC
Arsenal Stadium
Avenell Hoad
Highbury
LONDON
N5 1BU

Dear Sir

I feel that I must write in protest at your decision to Issue Arsenal Bonds
and, more importantly, to make Highbury an all-seater stadium* and the mannOr
in which this is being done*

I have stood on the North Bank since 1949 and have never felt the need to
become a season ticket holder, but do not feel that this makes me any less of
a supporter* I started going with my father, and my own son now goes to the
games, also standing on the North Bank. Your proposals would, of oourse,
stop fathers taking their sons in future and you are, therefore, eliminating
the next generation of supporters. I have over the years formed many
friendships and stand with the same dozen or so supporters at each home game,
some of whom have been going sinoe before the war*

Your proposals to seat everyone at the North end of the ground against the
wishes of everyone to whoa I have spoken would obviously sever these relation­
ships* None of the supporters I know oan afford £1,100 and I suspeot this
will apply to nearly all of your loyal support at that end of the ground. If,
therefore, Bonds are purchased they will be by other wealthier supporters from
elsewhere in the stadium or, worse still, by Corporations indent on enter­
taining their clients as is the case with the Exeautive boxes* This will, of
course, eliminate your main vocal support and, almost certainly, virtually
all of your away following. If in future the team hits bad times with their
results and slips down the league, you will find that your hard-core support
will be the very support you have eliminated.

I have written the above in the belief that onoe we are unable to use the
North end of the ground we will be unable to obtain entry anywhere else with
the capacity coming down from over 50,000 - which it was until recently - to
an anticipated 37,000. The reduotion to 44,000 at present appears to be an
exoessive reaction due to Hillsborough, a stadium whose problems were unrelated
to Highbury where supporters come in at eaoh end and not at the rear as was




                                                               Contd
the problem at Hillsborough] Furthermore Highbury han never been a ground
with problems and, as you know, we have never even needed barriers around the
pitoh and should not be penalised in this way.

As ha3 been stated many times in your programme letters» the Taylor report was
a recommendation not a ruling and I feel that you are over-reacting aa it is
quite obvious that if Arsenal - the country’s wealthiest club - cannot afford to
implement the report, then no other club will be able to act on the report.
Therefore, when the deadline is reached in 1993 virtually no clubs will have
acted except yourselves and you will have alienated your supporters for nothing*
I think you should also bear in mind that we now have a Prime Minister
sympathetic to football,

I think you will realise from this letter how desperate 1 am to be allowed to
continue to watch my team in the future and in ease, as 1 expect, my plea is
ignored and you go ahead with your plans, Iam enclosing a separate letter to
your Box Office for four of us to be plaoed on your waiting list for seats
together anywhere in the stadium, except for the top priced seats* Please
arrange for the enclosed letter to be handed to the appropriate offioe*

I thank you for your indulgence if you have read a3 far as this, but would ask
you once again to rethink your plans*

Yours faithfully




Ena
