PRIME MINISTER


                              HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY         *


          I have now discussed the interim report of Lord Justice Taylor with
colleagues most closely involved.


2.        The report has to be presented to Parliament and I propose that it
should be laid at 11.00 a.m. on Friday.      At that time Lord Justice Taylor
proposes to hold a press conference.   The press will have embargoed copies at
9.00 a.m.     My response will be by way of a statement issued from the Home
Office immediately following that press conference.    Neither the Minister of
Sport nor I see advantage in holding a press conference ourselves.


3.        We agreed at my meeting that    in this statement I should welcome
unreservedly the broad thrust of the report;     announce that circulars were
being issued by the Home Office and Scottish Office with strong encouragement
for all concerned to get on with implementing relevant advice;     and indicate
that a more considered response, including possible subordinate legislation,
would follow consultation required by law.     A copy of my proposed statement
(which covers a copy of the circular) is attached.


4.        Criticism is directed at Sheffield City Council for shortcomings in
their enforcement of the Safety at Sports Grounds Act 1975.    In the short term
this is dealt with by the interim recommendations.      In the slightly longer
term the powers we have proposed in the Football Spectators Bill will permit
the licensing authority to supervise the way in which local authorities carry
out these responsibilities.    Taylor specifically indicates that he will deal
in his final report with the need for som§ national oversight or inspection
of local authority certification procedures.   Some criticism is also directed
at Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, including its technical adviser, for
inadequate arrangements for crowd safety and control.     In my view these are
inextricably linked with the shortcomings of the licensing authority.


5.        But the most severe criticism is directed at the South Yorkshire
Police;     Taylor concludes that the main reason for the disaster was the
failure   of police control.     The   actions    of   individual   senior   officers,
especially Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, are criticised;            reference is
made to poor operational orders, lack of leadership, and evidence of senior
officers given to the Inquiry is described as defensive and evasive.          It would
be for the Chief Constable, and perhaps the Director of Public Prosecutions
and the Police Complaints Authority,      to act on the conduct of individual
officers.


6.        We are arranging for the bodies criticised, namely the South Yorkshire
Police, the Sheffield City Council and the Club to receive confidential copies
of extracts of the report relating to them tomorrow afternoon.          I will report
to you again about the police aspect before the report is published.


7.        I am sending copies of this minute to colleagues on H Committee, the
Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State, Department of the Environment, and Sir
Robin Butler.




                                                  u
                                                 ^2. August 1989
                                CONFIDENTIAL



                            HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY

                   DRAFT STATEMENT BY THE HOME SECRETARY




        Commenting today on the publication of Lord Justice Taylor’s report,
the Home Secretary, the Rt Hon Douglas Hurd, CBE., M P ., said:

        "I am grateful to Lord Justice Taylor and his team for
        completing the first part of his inquiry in time to produce
        an interim report before the start of the football season.

        It is an excellent report which pulls no punches about the
        causes of the disaster.

        The Government welcomes the broad thruct of the report and its
        n.ippr.Bfa-               t-ho recommendations. They include
        a number of matters which should be dealt with without delay
        pending the longer-term findings of the inquiry which will be
        published in the final report.

        A Home Office circular* is to be sent out immediately to
        local authorities, the police, football clubs and others
        concerned with the organisation of football matches, urging
        them to take action on the report's recommendations so as to
        put as many of them into effect as possible before the
        beginning of the season.   Similar steps are being taken by
        the Secretary of State for Scotland.

        I am satisfied that the interim report has not identified any
        major shortcomings in the law on safety in sports grounds,
        though clearly the Government will look at the Safety of
        Sports Grounds Act and the Home Office and Scottish Office
        guide to safety at sports grounds (The Green Guide) in the
        light of the inquiry.

        Most of the problems which contributed to the disaster at
        Hillsborough had been recognised in the past.     The report
        reveals serious shortcomings in applying those lessons on the
        part of the police, of the club and of the local authority
        responsible for the safety certificate.




                   * A copy of this circular is attached

                                     1.
The report reveals clearly that there are major deficiencies
in the layout and organisation of the Hillsborough ground
which should have been recognised and corrected.



The South Yorkshire Police


It will be for the Chief Constable in the first instance to
consider the conduct of individual officers and the South
Yorkshire police collectively in the light of the inquiry and
the investigation carried out by the West Midlands police.
I shall look to the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
initially for a report on the action he proposes to take.

Supervision of Safety Certificates


Powers recently proposed by the Government in the Football
Spectators Bill will permit the setting up of a new authority
with powers to supervise the way in which local authorities
carry out their responsibilities for the safety of sports
grounds if in due course this is considered necessary in the
light of Lord Justice Taylor's final report.


The tragedy would not have occurred if lessons learnt in the
past had been properly applied. It is for everyone concerned
to ensure they are applied in the future."
                                  DRAFT CIRCULAR




           The Chief Executive
           County Councils
           Metropolitan District Councils
           London Borough Councils
           Common Council of the City of London
           Fire and Civil Defence Authorities

2          Chief Officers of Police

3.         Chief Fire Officers

4.         Chief Ambulance Officers




Dear Sir


                             HO Circular        /1989
                   INTERIM REPORT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY


Introduction


         The Interim Report of the Inquiry set up by the Home Secretary into
the tragic events at Hillsborough football ground Sheffield on 15 April has
now been published.     A copy of the Report is attached.      Further copies are
available from HMSO bookshops.


2.      The purpose of this circular is to inform recipients of the contents
of the Report and to urge them to take required action without delay in order
to implement, as necessary, the Inquiry's recommendations to improve safety
arrangements at sports grounds.


Government Response


3.      The Home Secretary has welcomed the«tiE sai=±hseet of the -Interim1Report
and Fmppnrtn-frhn pginciplou u£ UlC'
                                   ,T5(lJ0miUtjndalluxtfa- which he believes should
be dealt with without delay pending the longer term findings of the Inquiry
which will be published in its Final Report.
Scope of the Recommendations


4.      Although the scope of recommendations is wide they are aimed primarily
at football league grounds and the international stadiums used for soccer and
rugby where there are liable to be large, densely packed crowds on terraces.
Recipients should nonetheless consider their application to other designated
sports grounds and sports grounds at which large crowds are in attendance.


5.      The   43   recommendations   are   in paragraph   316.   They   are    in   two
categories:   the 28 asterisked are those requiring implementation before the
start of the new football season or immediately thereafter;        the remaining 15
are those which, although requiring immediate action are likely to take longer
to put into effect.    The Home Secretary nevertheless urges recipients to take
urgent action on both categories so as to put into effect as many of the
recommendations as possible before the Start of the season.


The Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds


6.      It is anticipated that the Guide will be amended to reflect the
Inquiry's findings in due course after consultation with appropriate bodies.
Any changes will take account of the Final Report's recommendations.          If there
is any doubt as to the nature of crush barrier testing described in Annex C
of the Guide advice can be obtained from the Home Office 01-217 5352.


The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975


        Consideration is also being given to any necessary enforcement of the
Report's recommendations by means of a Statutory Instrument under Section 15A
of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975           (the 1975 Act) requiring safety
certificates to include mandatory terms and conditions.            Consultation as
required under section 18 of the 1975 Act will first be carried out before any
such Order is made.
                                               >



Football Clubs


8.      A copy Of this circular together with the Report has been sent to all
92 football league clubs arid the international stadiums in the expectation
that they will co-operate fully.     Should co-operation not be forthcoming local
authorities are reminded of their powers under section 10 of the 1975 Act for
use if there is judged to be a serious risk to spectators in any part of the
grounds.
                                          3.


Resource Implications


9.      While it is acknowledged that local authorities will need to examine
current priorities in order to act on the Inquiry’s recommendations, it is not
envisaged that there should be significant long-term resource implications for
them.   The cost of any additional policing and/or provision of ambulance
services at football grounds is expected to be met by the clubs or ground
operators themselves.


Other


10.     Any   enquiries   about    this   circular   except   barrier   testing   (see
paragraph 6 above) should be addressed to Mr A Brown (01-217 2765).


11.     Copies also go to those bodies on the attached list.




                                           Yours faithfully




                                              A H TURNEY
                                  Fire and Emergency Planning Department
