                                        FROM: C J ROCHE
                                              APS/MR ATKINS
                                        DATE: 29 August 1991

                                        cc   Mr Baden

MR ELLINGFORD

TICKET TOUTING


The Minister has seen your submission of 23 August and is content
for officials to write to the Football League as drafted.




                                       \




                                   V/vo^o




                                                               i
Arthur Sandford
Chief Executive                                               August 1991
The Football League Limited
City House
Maid Marian Way
Nottingham
NG1 5BH




At the meeting with the Minister on 19 June to discuss the Premier
League you also raised the questions of the latest position on the
proposed    ticket     touting   offence   for    football    and   the    renewal   of
exemption orders for the sale of alcohol at football grounds. We have
since taken both of these matters up with the Home Office.


On ticket touting it was not possible to include such an offence in
Sir John Wheeler's Private Members Bill because the House authorities
ruled that this was not permissible given the scope of that Bill. It
has also been decided not to introduce a Criminal Law Bill in the next
session of Parliament.        However the Government         remains      committed to
introducing legislation as soon as Parliamentary time permits this to
be done.


Regarding    exemption    orders   for   alcohol    sales    the Home Office have
recognised the       force of our representations about the inconvenience
caused to clubs by having to go back to the magistrates courts every
five months    to    seek renewal   of these orders.         I understand that in
practice    renewals    are   granted    fairly    readily   by   the   courts   which
suggests that there might not be too strong a case against extending
the period to twelve months. However legislation to amend section 4(1)
of the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol Etc) Act would be necessary
to effect such a change and, as with ticket touting, we run up against
the problem of a suitable legislative vehicle and the availability of
Parliamentary time.



                                                                                      1
In these circumstances I can only point out that it is always open of
course to the Football   League to try to identify an MP or MPs who
would be willing to introduce Private Members Bills on these issues.




J VAUGHAN
