x •                                                M/PSO/25747/90
2.    PS/Mr Moynihan


TIDY BRITAIN GROUP PROJECT AT FOOTBALL LEAGUE GROUNDS


1.   The Tidy Britain Group (TBG) are a charity funded by the
Department to carry out litter abatement activities. One of their
projects has been investigating litter at 8 Football League
grounds. This project should have ended in June 1990 but TBG wish
to extend it. The clubs have not given a great deal of support
to the project nor has the private sector provided the level of
sponsorship TBG are usually expected to attract for their
projects. TBG have now written to the Minister asking for his
support in obtaining more financial support from the League and
FA for this project.

2. They wish to extend the project in the light of comments made
in Lord Justice Taylor's report about the problems of litter at
football grounds and since Part IV of the Environmental
Protection Bill which provides local authorities with the power
to designate private land as litter control areas. It has not
been decided whether this will include football grounds. Contrary
to what the TBG say if it does however, it is unlikely to be an
absolute requirement that    the land should be clear of litter
within three hours, only that it should          be achieved if
practicable.

3.   The Secretary of the Football League has replied to TBG's
letter of 6 June by saying that, although disappointed at some
aspects of the work done by TBG, he will raise the issue with the
President of the Football League on his return from the World Cup
Finals (letter at Flag A). The League apparently has made clear
in the past that it does not have funds for this sort of
project.I understand that pressure of World Cup work has
prevented the FA from replying so far.

4. The TBG have done some Very good work in other areas where
their results have been very     useful to local authorities in
developing anti-litter programmes. It is not the first time
however that TBG have gone ahead with an activity without the
approval of the Department or without securing sufficient
funding. In this case they clearly should not have committed
themselves to the project beyond the original one year period
without prior agreement for funding. A draft reply is attached.



R WESTNEY
SARD C
Rm P3/163
Ext 0606

6 July 1990                                   cc Mrs Dufffy, LEQ
17/15327                                            2 9 t h June 1990




Prcf'osaor Graham Ashworth,
Director General,
TiKi Tidy Britain Group,
The Pier,
WIGAvi
W112 4 EX


Dear Graham,,

     I acknowledge receipt of your letter dated 6th June and
apologise for the delay in replying which is. due tc my absence
on holiday-

     As you are aware, it was stressed at our initial meetings
that the Football League did not have funds of its own available
for this sort of project. The Football League did not,at any
tiae envisage making a contribution tc the schesse.Our major
input vas considered to be the provision of our clubs as a
vchicle for the scheme.

     Z - should also state that the initial delay in setting up
the project w s in fact due to your being unable tc employ a'
Football Co-Ordinator for the project.    It took some six months
to employ Emma in this capacity which obviously delayed the
project dramatically.    It has also been very difficult in that
the Lefxgti# has now dealt with three different people with regard
to tnis project,

      I accept the fact that at times there were certain delays
at this office in arranging meetings etc. This has been due in
the r.iain to pressure of work but I can assure you that the staff
her-; -it t-ytham St* Annes have given their full co-operation to
the project.
                                                 KJC   ■’ —>   I l_ -» I   '




     lan Henderson was asked to produce a paper for the
Management Committee outlining areas where the project and the
work of the Tidy Britain Group would be of benefit tc clubs. I
particularly refer to the possible saving of money with regard
to the new Environment Bill. 1 do not believe his subsequent
fax. addressed this issue and it was very difficult to put a
convincing case on behalf of the Tidy Britain Group to the
Management Committee,

     It has also been disappointing to note the time it has
taken to come up with something as basic ns a recommended bin
design for use at football grounds.

     I will, however, raise this matter with the President upon
his return from Italy after the World Cup Final to ascertain
whether the Management Ccsaittee would be prepared to reconsider
their position.




                        Yours sincerely#




                            Secretary*




c.c. Football Association
    Colift Uaynihaa
