                                       lo
From:   D J MOULD
        G2 Division
        (Ext 3099)

        22 September 1989

Mr Moriarty


HILLSBOROUGH: PROGRESS ON IMPLEMENTATION

I enclose a draft advice note and reply responding to
Miss Bannister's note of 20 September to you.    I am not sure if
you intended Ifl for me to reply direct and will do so if you
wish.

I have discussed the issues with Mr Mower and cleared the drafts
with Legal Advisers.

The telephone ''monitor” is still progressing. We still have some
way to go although I hesitate to draw firm conclusions.   I think
the response so far indicates that local authorities have been
active and that there is no real deliberate dragging of feet.
This is consistent with the results of earlier enquiries made of
the police and fire service.

For the reasons in the draft note I felt it probably better not
to refer to the Home Secretary's powers in writing to Mr Edey.
To do so will probably trigger off further correspondence etc on
why the powers should be invoked.

I have also resisted the temptation to draw attention to section
10B of the 1975 Act (as amended) which specifically places a duty
of enforcement on local authorities.         That duty includes
enforcement of any regulations so here again I felt, on balance,
it better to steer away from a reference which might provoke him.
Draft advice note and letter are attached.




                                        D J MOULD

FEP/89 35/48/88

FEP/89 35/48/109
hs.9.21/hillsb9.dm


From:     Mr M J Moriarty                       cc    Ms Craig
          Ext 3183                                    Ms Rex
                                                      Ms Nicholson
              September 1989                          Mr Yates
                                                      Mr Chilcot (o/r)
                                                      Mr Hammond
                                                      Mr Turney (o/r)
                                                      Mr Boys Smith
                                                      HMCIC
                                                      HMCIFS
                                                      Mr Mower
                                                      Mr Clayton
                                                      Mr Goddard
                                                      Mr Bolton (o/r)
                                                      Mr Whalley
                                                      Mr Mould
                                                      Mr Lidington
                                                      Mr Yeo
Miss Bannister
Private Office


HILLSBOROUGH:     PROGRESS ON IMPLEMENTATION


As requested in your note of 20 September a draft letter for your
signature to Mr Edey is attached.


2.      The answers to the queries raised in the first paragraph of
your note are as follows.       Regulations under section 6(2) of the
1975 Act would not give the Secretary of State the authority to
oversee safety certificates (paragraph l(i) of your note).                There
is no power under the 1975 Act for regulations made under it to
change the provisions of that Act.


3.      The Football Licensing Authority (FLA) will be a
non-departmental    public     body.     The    Secretary    of   State     for
Environment will     appoint   its members     in consultation with the
Home Secretary in relation to appointments which have a bearing
on   safety responsibilities under the         1975 Act.      The FLA will
nevertheless be a DoE rather than a Home Office body.


4.      I would not now feel inclined to volunteer the information
to Mr Edey about the powers contained in the 1975 Act to make a
statutory    instrument     under   section    15A   in   relation   to    the
contents of safety certificates. Such terms and conditions would
still have to be flexible enough to be applied by each local
authority      to    each       individual       ground.       The    option     of    such     a
statutory      order       still       remains    and     G2   have    already      begun      to
consider the sort of thing which might go into it.                               Even so it
would still not address Mr Edey's main point about oversight of
safety certificates by the Secretary of State.


5.     Early indications from our inquiries of local authorities on
the    progress       of        implementation      of     the    Interim       Report       are
encouraging     in that the             28 urgent recommendations have                  either
already been carried out or are underway and well advanced.                                  Some
authorities have also carried out the other 15 recommendations.
Only one authority so far is revealed to have not applied the 15%
capacity reduction from a calculated figure of 54 persons pex1 10
square    metres.          One     or   two     others    have   not       insisted    upon     a
further 15% reduction where the capacity works out at well below
that density level.               For example one authority has reduced the
authorised capacity of an area                     from    2,000 to        370 but     felt a
further 15% cut was unnecessary.


6.     We cannot of course prevent Mr Edey from making application
for judicial review.              If his application is granted we shall have
to    defend   it.         If    the    media    seek     comment     we    shall     have    to
acknowledge     the    action taken             by him     and maintain our present
position that there is no indication of deliberate, wide-spiread
unwillingness to apply the Interim Report recommendations to
football grounds and implement them quickly; but that we are
keeping the position under review and have not ruled out the
option of taking statutory powers                       should this be        shown to be
necessary.


                                                           M J MORIARTY
FEP/89 35/48/88
FEP/89 35/48/109
h® .9.21/hillsb9.dm                                       FILE NUMBER ..FEP/89 35/48/109.
DRAFT LETTER


ADDRESSEE'S REFERENCE


  TO                                  ENCLOSURES            COPIES TO BE SENT TO
Roy Edey Esq



Harrow
Middlesex


(F( Tj POSTAL ADDRESS)                                      (FULL ADDRESSES, IF NECESSARY

               LETTER DRAFTED FOR SIGNATURE BY ...PS.to S of S ......
                                                  (NAME OF SIGNATORY)


               When we spoke recently I undertook to come back to you on
               two specific points:        first on the regulation powers under
               the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975                (the 1975 Act) ; and
               secondly about the Football Licensing Authority (FLA).


               The statutory power under section 6(2)                of the 1975 Act to
               which you referred does not enable the Secretary of State to
               make   regulations     to   oversee    safety       certificates.    As    I
               explained in my letter of 18 September the issue of safety
               certificates is entirely a matter for the local authority.



               The status of the FLA will be that of an independent
               non-departmental public body.              Appointments to the FLA will
               be   made   by   the   Secretary      of    State    for   Environment    in
               consultation with the Home         Secretary        in respect of those
               appointments which have a bearing on the authority's safety
               role.
[I am sorry that you do not feel re-assured] but you would
be quite wrong to believe that the Home Office is complacent
about safety at football grounds or that the recommendations
contained   in the Interim Report    are not being addressed.
If, however you have evidence that in individual cases the
Report's recommendations have not been implemented we shall
investigate and, if necessary,      raise the   issues with the
local authority concerned.
