DUTCH FOOTBALL MEMBERSHIP CARD SCHEME


1.     The   first  discussions   between  the   Government,  the
Netherlands Football Association (KNVB), the city mayors and the
clubs took place in 1986/87.   The Government agreed in principle
to an experimental membership card in November 1987 and in
November 1988 the details were agreed, including a contribution
by Government of Dfl 600,000 (about £182,000) towards the cost of
the scheme which was estimated at Dfl 1 million (about £300,000).
The scheme was to be reviewed after one year in operation.

2.     In Holland the Mayor of a city, advised by his Police
Commissioner, is responsible for law and order would for example
be responsible for cancelling a football match if he thought it
necessary.   The co-operation of all 17 Mayors and of course the
clubs was essential to the setting up of the scheme and the delay
in starting the experiment was caused, at least in part, by their
having difficulty in agreeing on the details.
3.     The basic premise of the experiment was that it would only
apply to the five clubs with a history of hooliganism among its
supporters and that the cards would be required to obtain tickets
and to enter away matches only. The five clubs were:-

                       AJAX (Amsterdam)
                       FEIJENOORD (Rotterdam)
                       PSV (Eindhoven)
                       FC DEN HAAG (The Hague)
                       FC UTRECHT (Utrecht)

4.     The Ministry of the Interior acted as coordinator but it
was the KNVB'S scheme,not Government's. The KNVB was responsible
for effective and efficient implementation. The Mayors retained
their full responsibilities for law and order.

5.     Each club was to issue its own card (at a cost of Dfl 35
(£10.50). The KNVB was also to issue its card to those who were
not supporters of any one team but wished to take part in the
scheme. KNVB cards were issued only after names had been checked
with the records of the clubs closest to the applicant's home
address (if one of the five) and the State Police's Football
Intelligence Unit's central computer.   The cards are similar to
credit cards with a photograph of the holder on the face and a
magnetic strip and space for a signature on the reverse.      The
checking of cards and tickets at the gate was to be manual, at
least in the experimental year, but the card was designated to be
used at automatic turnstiles should it become necessary.

6.     The >main inducement to supporters to obtain cards was that
clubs and the KNVB would offer card holders special concessions
at friendly matches, special facilities to purchase tickets for
international matches and issue newsletters.     The intention was
to try to establish a cohesive club atmosphere and encourage all
the supporters to take up membership cards. In the event, only
some 25,000 cards were issued out of a total membership of some
50,000 for the five supporters clubs involved.     The majority of
these were issued not to supporters clubs members but to others
who wished to have the card because of the inducements offered.
7.     The scheme was put in place just before the end of the
1988/89 season and could have been tested then.   The Government
would have liked to see it introduced at matches in the last two
weeks of that season but the football authorities opposed this
because, they said, the football atmosphere at that time was
highly charged.  It was eventually agreed that the scheme should
start at the beginning of the 1989/90 season.

8.     Arranging of football fixtures for the season in the
Netherlands is done partly by computer and partly manually. When
the 88/89 fixtures were announced two of the five clubs involved
in the scheme were to be host to two of the others on the first
week of the season. Hardly surprisingly, the experimental scheme
failed its first test. The view is however that had Den Haag FC
not sold tickets in Amsterdam to non card holders for their match
at home to Ajax and had the Mayor and the Police Commissioner of
Utrecht not decided that the 700 to 1,000 supporters of
Feijenoord who had turned up without tickets should nevertheless
be admitted to the match, the scheme might have stood a chance,
perhaps with some modification. The supporters of opposing teams
joined forces, at least temporarily, to defeat the scheme by
various ticket purchase mechanisms, and in demonstrating against
it.
9.     A recent opinion poll showed that 72% of the general
public were in favour of the .scheme.   The football clubs were
reluctant participants and in the event at least one (FC The
Hague) defied the rules. The KNVB will discipline the club. The
KNVB are also in favour of the scheme but the majority of
supporters are opposed to it.
10.    Following those first matches of the season the scheme was
shelved. The 17 Mayors met on 18 August to discuss the position.
They could not agree to the scheme continuing, even with
modifications, nor could they agree on what might take its place.

11.    The Dutch Minister has announced that he will convene a
meeting of the national consultative body on football hooliganism
to consider whether a revised membership scheme should be
developed; it is possible that the pass scheme would be revived
in an improved form.   The Government, he said, had long favoured
a compulsory card for all football supporters.      They see the
partial nature of the scheme as the main reason why things went
wrong. Post in Amsterdam think that this later idea could
encounter fierce opposition from the general public.      Many it
seems agree that such a scheme would be so expensive (one figure
mentioned is Dfl 100 million or some £30 million) that more
effective control would be possible more cheaply with for example
more video cameras and extra policing.      The KNVB are not in
favour of a national scheme because they think that it will lead
to d^lay and consequent trouble at the turnstiles.

12.    A translation of the explanatory leaflet and application
form for the membership card is attached.
