 #             V
     HOME OFFICE
           G2 DIVISION
 Fire and Emergency Planning Dept
Queen Anne's Gate London SW1H 9AT
          Tel; 071-273 3 3 3 3 -
          Fax: 071-273 3964
        With Compliments




             ED
             Fire. Dont give it
                 a chance
hs.2.7/sstr.rjm


From:   R J Miles                        cc   Miss Hellmuth
        G2 Division                           Miss Rae
        x3322                                 Mr Turney
                                              Mr Peters
        7 February 1992                       Mr Hopley
                                              Mr R Smith, PRB
                                              Mr de Quidt, FLA
                                              Mr Badeu>* SARD/DES
                                              Mr McPherson, SOHHD

Mr Narey



SPORTSGROUND SAFETY: TAYLOR RECOMMENDATIONS

Thank you for your note of 4 February about the meeting on Friday
31 January called by the Minister to discuss the current high
level of media interest in the Taylor recommendations on
all-seater football grounds, and increasing pressure from some
clubs to review Government policy to allow some standing and/or
to extend the deadlines for all-seating, Ministers will wish to
know the latest developments.

LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S PRESENT VIEW

2.   In response to an article in 1The Independent on Sunday1 on
26 January (Annex A) in which it was said that Lord Justice
Taylor was understood to have changed his mind on all-seater
stadia, Lord Justice Taylor himself wrote to the editor to
confirm his original view.     His letter was printed in the
correspondence column of the paper on 2 February (Annex B ) .

3.   Lord Justice Taylor's     letter lends   support   to the
confirmation given by the Minister at Friday's meeting of the
intention to maintain robustly the Government's policy on
all-seated football stadia and to keep the pressure on clubs,
especially those in the current first and second divisions.

DET.AYS AND PROBLEMS EXPERIENCED BY CLUBS OBTAINING PLANNING
PERMISSION TO IMPLEMENT TAYLOR RECOMMENDATIONS

4.   Some clubs are anxious about the time it is taking to
consider   planning   applications   for  ground  developments/
redevelopments which may lead to their being unable to meet the
Taylor deadlines.    Suchapplications are a   matter for local
authorities to whom the Department of the Environment have
published   guidance   advising  sympathetic  consideration  to
proposals aimed at all-seated accommodation. This guidance also
recommends early consultation between clubs and authorities.

5.   Southampton FC   are one such club who are experiencing
problems although they are working closely with Southampton City
Council. There are problems finding a suitable site. Their case
has been taken up by Mr Christopher Chope MP with the Minister
for Sport. Enclosed at Annex C is a draft reply prepared by DES
officials for the Minister for Sport to send. This mentions that
the Chairman of the FLA is seeking a meeting with Ministers at
the DOE.

PREMIER T.KAfiUK AND MEMBERS FUTURE ACCESS TO MONIES AVAILABLE
THROUGH THE REDUCTION IN POOL BETTING DUTY
6.   Formation of a Premier League seems likely to take place in
time for the start of the 1992/93 season (August 1992).      The
Football Association hope      to obtain   final agreement    on
outstanding issues (mainly the eventual size of the new league;
the transitional arrangements and the period of transition) at
the next FA Council meeting on 20 February. This is a matter for
the football world to sort out but an important side issue is
Premier League clubs1 access to reduction in Pool Betting Duty
(RPBD) monies. This is a matter for Government.

7.   In presenting their 'Blueprint for the future of Football'
last year, the FA were optimistic about the additional revenue
likely to accrue to football by reorganising the sport (business)
to have the Premier League under direct FA management.     The FA
are either unable or unwilling to give a realistic account of
likely future income and how or whether it will be distributed
to the smaller (non-Premier League) clubs to assist with the cost
of implementing the Taylor recommendations.    There is a strong
suspicion that the PL clubs will retain the lion's share for
themselves.   This raises the question of whether they should
continue to have access to RPBD money once the PL is formed.

8.   It has been agreed that grants will be paid to current FL
first division clubs (who by and large will form the new PL) for
Taylor works completed or under way by August 1992.      Whether
Premier League clubs should have access to RPBD monies and if so
should such funds only be available in the form of interest free
loans which on repayment could become grant money for smaller
clubs, is presently under consideration.       The Minister for
Sport's Department leads on this matter. Mr Atkins is to discuss
with Mr Clarke whether a decision should still be deferred until
the FA provide a more detailed explanation of their financial
projections and plans for the distribution of available income.
The Minister for Sport may seek a meeting with Treasury and Home
Office colleagues in due course.    Briefing will be provided if
he does.

MINISTER'S VISIT TO A FOOTBALL LEAGUE CLUB

9.   The Football Licensing Authority (FLA) are aware of the
Minister's interest in visiting a FL club ground in the company
of an FLA Inspector. They are trying to arrange a visit to the
ground of a First Division Midland club on 17 February to suit
Lord Ferrers.  The FLA are of the view that only one visit can
be reasonably managed in a morning and suggest that in order to
get a better picture of the situation a visit to the ground of
a lower division club with problems should also be arranged for
another day. Details of the proposed visit(s) will be notified
as soon as the FLA have confirmed them.
FUTURE SUBMISSIONS
10. During the course of the next few weeks it will be necessary
to make submissions to the Minister on:-

       (a)   introducing an Order under section 11 of the Football
             Spectators Act 1989 giving a direction to the Football
             Licensing Authority as respects the seating of
             spectators at designated premises in relation to the
             licences that Authority will issue in time for the
             1992/93 football season;

       (b)   the manner and form of the licence application which
             are for determination by the Home Secretary;

       (c)   amending the Football Spectators (Designation of
             Football Matches in England and Wales Order) 1990 to
             reduce the matches covered in the current Order by
             excluding those which cannot or should not be
             licensed, and to take account of the new FA Premier
             League;

       (d)   the Management Statement   and Financial Memorandum for
             the Football Licensing      Authority which have been
             awaiting settlement with   the Treasury of the amount to
             be recovered by means of    the licence fee;

       (e)   recommendations   for additional members    for the FLA
             Board.

11. Ministers are requested to note the latest position.        They
will be kept advised of significant developments.




                                             R J MILES


Encs
                                                                                   the         INDEPENDENT ON SUNDAY
                                                                         -------------------                             ■                                     —   ;
                                                                                                                                                                   ______                                                                   26 UJANUARY]
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 i u i u m u j




All-seater football stadiums ^danireroii^
)HHEE SAFETY of football
                     footbali spectators
nay be jeopardised and the sport bank-
                                                                -------------------------
                                                    By Jonathan Foster
                                                                                                 T,    _ .
                                                                                                 The Taylor    report’s recommenda­
                                                                                                       layl?r reports     recommenda- ofofseating
                                                                                                                                             seatingis
                                                                                                                                                    is too
                                                                                                                                                       too shallow fnr them to see,
                                                                                                                                                           shallow for         „„„
 upted if the Government does not re-                                                         tions on seating were set in an idiom of                                                that is not to say present terracing is
                                                                                                                                         so they stand on seats. That is far more sate.                                             Ham have already caused contro
 ise its policy for all-seater accomm-                                                        violence, or its anticipation. Seated
                                          Yorkshire say Lord Justice Taylor told                                                         dangerous than standing on terraces.                                                       The clubs have asked their support
'dation at British grounds, a cross-                                                          spectators were thought less likely to                                                      The Football Supporters Association
                                          them his report would not have empha­                                                         One or two stand up, then everyone                                                          finance development of new g
  ction of police, local councils and                                                        misbehave and would be more promptly                                                     is to continue lobbying for a revision. A
                                          sised the need for terracing to be                                                            stands up. There are bound to be acci­                                                      stands; the fans have responded
iubs now believes.                                                                           identified by police. It also assumed                                                    Labour government would be sympa­
                                          replaced if he had known so many clubs                                                        dents when people fall and break limbs                                                      boycott campaigns and demonstra
   Seating installed at many stadiums                                                        clubs would keep perimeter fences — and are trapped.”                                    thetic to retaining terracing subject to
                                          would remove perimeter fencing.                                                                                                                                                              Ministers have misinterpretec
mce the 1989 Hillsborough disaster has                                                       barriers to movement which contributed                                                  stringent safety standards, David
                                             Safety factors have changed, police                                                           The Football Licensing Authority                                                        Taylor report’s findings, accordii
Iready caused problems, with support-                                                        more to the deaths at Hillsborough than                                                 Blunkett, environment spokesman and
                                         say- “Ground commanders across Brit­                the terraces.                              (FLA), a quango which assumes overall                                                      the Football Supporters Associ;
rs standing perilously on the seats be-                                                                                                                                              a Sheffield Wednesday supporter, said.
                                         ain will confirm we have removed the                                                           control of grounds this year, said that                                                    “Taylor never said standing up wa
ause their view is obscured.                                                                    John Stalker, former deputy chief                                                        Wednesday, whose Kop is the largest
                                         risk of hooliganism from most                                                                 some seated accommodation may be re­                                                     ktisafe,” Craig Brewin, its chairman,
   Lord Justice Taylor, whose official                                                      constable of Greater Manchester and                                                      terraced space in British football, said
                                         grounds,” a senior officer in the North­                                                      fused a licence if spectators cannot see                                                    “All-seater stadiums were recomrr
iquiry into the 95 deaths at the Sheff-                                                     consultant to Millwall FC, said: “All-                                                   the Kop’s capacity would be reduced
                                         west said. “It has happened much quick­                                                       the game properly. But John de Quidt                                                        ed as a form of social engineering v
 Id Wednesday ground recommended                                                            seater stadiums on green field sites are                                                from more than 16,000 to 11,000 if seats
                                         er than even the most optimistic had                                                          its chief executive, said deadlines for all-                                               we would argue is not needed now..
 !-seater stadiums, is understood to                                                        obviously one way ahead, but at older                                                   were installed. “In no circumstances can
                                         dared to predict, and it’s happened be­                                                       seater stadiums - by 1994 for English                                                      of people will be excluded by price
ave changed his mind. Council leaders                                                       stadiums it is just not desirable to put                                                I see that space being made safer by
                                         cause of closed circuit television and                                                        First and Second Division clubs -                                                          going to all-seater grounds. We wa
id football representatives in South                                                        seats in. I am seeing more and more                                                     installation o f seats,” Graham Mackrell
                                         much-improved intelligence.”                                                                  would be enforced. “There may be argu­                                                     see money spent on grounds, but s
                                                                                            people frustrated because the gradient                                                  the club secretary, said. Plans for all-
                                                                                                                                       ments that some terracing is safe, but                                                     providing facilities and amenities s
                                                                                                                                                                                    seater stadiums at Arsenal and West orters want.”
                          3.1
     iNo regrets over
     football terraces’ .
     death sentence
      IN YOUR report “All-seater             j
      football stadiums ‘dangerous' ”        |
      (26 January) Jonathan Foster as-       !
      serts that I am “understood" to
      have changed my mind about all-
    • seater football grounds. Not so.
          In the euphoria of escape from
      the identity-card scheme, the re-      i
      port was generally accepted. It
      was predictable: that when the
      cost of implementation loomed
      there would be some backsliding.
      But whatever the merits of the
      present, arguments • from the          1
      smaller clubs based on financial
)     hardship, it does not help to sug­
      gest incorrectly that .1 have
      changed my mind, that I was con­
      cerned with “social engineering”
      rather than safety, or that seating
      is more dangerous than standing.
          Of course, simply to stick seats
      on to existing terraces regardless
      of sight-lines is a recipe for trou­
       ble. That is why, on my recom-        ;
       mendation. the Football Stadia        |
      Advisory Design Council was set        ;
      up to assist clubs to adapt their      j
      accommodation as effectively and       j
      economically as possible.              !
      The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
      Royal Courts of Justice. London

     I AGREE football grounds need
     upgrading, but why at the expense
     of the terraces? Seats at football
     grounds offer minimal comfort: '
     they are like bus-shelter seats, j
     hard, plastic and cheap. Paying j
     £20 for them is an.injustice but
     that’s what awaits us.
        Football fans have reacted
     sluggishly to this imposition. It is
     up to those who want to preserve
     the terraces to become audible
     before we end up with sterile,
     overpriced football grounds.
     Mark Rowland-Evans
     Hemel Hempstead, Herts
                                                                                      M/E*.    C-




                         THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION & SCIENCE
          SANC TU ARY BUILDINGS GREAT SMITH STREET WESTMINSTER L O N D O N SW I       04 0 8/ 1056
                 SW ITC H BO AR D 071-925 5000 CEN TR AL FAX 071-925 6000 G TN 3060




Christopher Chope Esq OBE MP
House of Commons
London
SW1A OAA




Thank you for your letter of 3 January enclosing this copy of one from
the Chairman of Southampton Football Club to Michael Heseltine about
the club's applications for planning permission to build a new ground.

I understand that Mr Askham has now had a reply from the Department of
the  Environment     which  explains   that   Government   recognises  the
difficulties some clubs might experience in attempting to comply with
the recommendations of the Taylor Report. The Department of the
Environment,   in   consultation  with my     Department,   has  therefore
published guidance to local authorities on Football League Stadia in
Planning Policy Guidance note 17 (PPG17) on Sport and Recreation. The
note   advises    authorities to    give   sympathetic   consideration ^ to
development proposals which aim to achieve all-seated accommodation,
and in view of the urgency of such proposals it recommends early
consultation between clubs and authorities. It is encouraging to see
that Southampton FC have been carrying out consultations in the way
the PPG advised.

 However the choice of a new site is essentially a local matter between
 the club and the relevant planning authorities. In the circumstances I
 am sure you    will   appreciate  that  I am unable    to  comment  on
 Southampton's proposal in view of the possibility that the matter
 might eventually come before Michael Heseltine for decision should the
 club find  it necessary to lodge an appeal with him.

 Mr Askham also asks whether it is possible to speed up the planning
 process.   Government is concerned    generally  that  many   planning
 authorities take too long to determine planning applications and
 therefore colleagues in the Department of the Environment have set a
 target for authorities to determine 80% of applications within the
 statutory eight week period. Applicants have the      right of appeal
 against the non-determination of their planning application if a
 decision has not been reached after eight weeks. But this course would
 not appear to be appropriate for Southampton since from Mr Askham's
  letter it appears that their applications are to be considered in the
 not too distant future. It will be for the local planning authorities
    -srned to consider whether it         is   possible   to   speed   up   their
 ^ si d er at i on of the applications.

Finally I would like to assure you and Mr Askham that the Football
Licensing Authority is aware of the difficulties which the planning
process may cause to some clubs wishing to relocate. I understand that
its Chairman, Norman Jacobs, has sought a meeting with Ministers in
the Department of the Environment to discuss the matter.




ROBERT ATKINS
