 A




hs .3.1/hillsbl.peb                           FILE NUMBER

DRAFT LETTER
ADDRESSEE'S REFERENCE



TO                            ENCLOSURES         COPIES TO BE SENT TO
                                               David Alton Esq MP
Robert G Hughes Esq MP
House of Commons                              hidden copy:
LONDON    SW1A OAA                            Mr Peter Wright
                                              Chief Constable, South
                                                Yorkshire Constabulary
                                              (FULL ADDRESSES, IF
(FULL POSTAL ADDRESS)                         NECESSARY)


                  LETTER DRAFTED FOR SIGNATURE BY ..Lord Ferrers........
                                                      (NAME OF SIGNATORY)



                 You wrote to Martin Brandon-Bravo, the Home Secretary's
                 Parliamentary Private Secretary on 13 February enclosing
                 a letter from Mr Hicks about comments attributed to the
                 Chief Constable of South Yorkshire in the Sheffield Star.
                 The Home Secretary has had a similar letter from David
                 Alton and he has asked me to reply to both. I think you
                 know that my responsibilities at the Home Office
                 encompass both police issues and the safety of sports
                 grounds.


                 I have assumed that in writing to you rather than to the
                 South Yorkshire Police Authority Mr Hicks was not seeking
                 to make a complaint about the Chief Constable's conduct
                 to be investigated under the police complaints procedure.
                 That avenue is of course open to him.


                  I have read carefully the comments attributed to the
                  Chief Constable of South Yorkshire in the Sheffield Star.
                  It seems to me that in the article, the Chief Constable
                 has    not   questioned   Lord Justice   Taylor's   conclusions
about the immediate cause of the incident.     But he has
said that he finds it difficult to come to terms with the
view that the drinking by fans had no effect on the
events.


I do not want to add to the controversy about the part
that drink played at Hillsborough. I think it is proper
to point out that Lord Justice Taylor's interim report,
at paragraph    196,  considered particularly whether
drunkenness among fans was a major factor in the crisis
at the turnstiles and that his conclusions on the causes
of the tragedy are summarised in Chapter 16 of the
report.

I have no doubt that there will be some people who were
at Hillsborough on the day of the tragedy, whether fans
or policemen, whose individual perception of the events
does not accord with Lord Justice Taylor's conclusions.
Mr Wright's views are based on the views of the police
officers who were present on that day.     I think that
those of us who were not there, or who did not hear all
the evidence, really have no basis to question Lord
Justice Taylor's analysis or to comment on the genuinely
held views of those who were directly involved. I do not
propose to do so.

If additional evidence is produced at the inquest, I am
sure that the coroner will consider it objectively.

I have read with interest the        6 objectives of the
Hillsborough Family     Support Group.     Only 3    come
specifically within the area of    responsibility of the
Home Office.   I am sure that Mr    Hicks and his friends
will already have seen that the Government has announced
that it intends to act on each of them.
The Football Licensing Authority, which the Government
expects to appoint within the next few months under the
Football Spectators Act, will be given the responsibility
of reviewing the way in which local authorities carry out
their responsibilities for safety at sports grounds under
the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.


The Home Office already has in hand the revision of the
"Green Guide" on safety at sports grounds to incorporate
recommendations made by the Taylor Inquiry, and some
other changes, and will shortly be setting up a working
group to consider the revised guide before it is sent out
for wider circulation and comment.     We shall also be
considering an order under Section 15A of the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act 1975 which will have the effect of
requiring local authorities to include specific terms or
conditions in safety certificates.

The question of "no fault" compensation is for the Lord
Chancellor's Department, rather than for the Home Office.

You said that Mr Hicks had approached you about the
possibility of meeting with one of the Home Office
Ministers.    If Mr Hicks would like to see me with
representatives of the Support Group, I suggest he
contacts my Private Secretary on 273 2468 to arrange a
date and time.


If that proves difficult to arrange, and since the
particular objectives of the support group are already
being addressed, he might find it helpful as an
alternative to have a detailed discussion with the Head
of the Division within the Home Office who has
responsibility for taking these issues forward. His name
is Mr Peter Bolton and his telephone number is 273 3322.

I am sending a copy of this letter to David Alton.
