THE SPORTS COUNCIL                                             SC (89)   66

FOR INFORMATION


             THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER : THE TAYLOR INQUIRY


INTRODUCTION

1    The Hillsborough Stadium disaster occurred on 15 April 1989. The
     Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor was appointed to carry out an Inquiry
     with the following terms of reference: "To inquire into the events
     at Sheffield Wednesday football ground on 15 April 1989 and to make
     reccmrendations about the needs of crowd control and safety at sports
     events".

2    The Interim Report of the Inquiry was released by the Heme Office
      on 4 August 1989. The report states that its purpose is to propose
      instant measures capable of being implemented forthwith and where
     possible before the conmencement of the 1989/90 season.

3    The   Report, often graphic in presentation and stark in exposition
      of details relating to the disaster, concentrates on irrmediate imple­
      mentation of simple measures to help avoid a repeat of the problems
      at Hillsborough.

4    TheSports Council's written submission addressed itself principally
      to wider issues and not to the circumstances of the tragedy. These
      wider issues will be the subject of a second report by Lord Justice
      Taylor.

OBSERVATIONS ON THE INTERIM REPORT      .
5    In   its submission, noted by Members at their meeting on 12 June
      1989 (Paper SC (89) 45), the Council put forward a range of proposals
      relating to the location, design and management of stadia; ccrrmunica-
      tion within and outside football grounds and the need for legislation
      to encompass these elements within a revised "Green Guide" on safety
      at sports grounds. These and other issues will form part of Lord
      Justice Taylor's second report.

6    Within its submission the Council did however raise seme detailed
      issues which have been referred to in general terms within the first
      report. These include:

       (a)    Poor signposting outside the ground (paragraphs 198 and 295)

       (b)    The rake of the tunnel into the terracing being in excess of
              reconmended gradients (paragraph 287)

       (c)    The widths of the gates in the perimeter fencing being less
              than the 1.1 m reconmended minimum (paragraph 260 and 287)

       (d)    The poor design of perimeter fencing (paragraph 258)

       (e)    The deficiencies in coftmunication systems outside and within
              the ground (Chapter 10 in particular)
                                                                               2



     (f)   The general atmosphere and state of repair of facilities at the
            ground (Chapter 20 in particular)

7   More general proposals which the Council identified and which it is hoped
    will be dealt with in the second report included the following:

     (a)   Suggestions for crovri control:    The report identifies areas for
           major improvement in relation to specified incidents at Hillsborough.

     (b)   Making the "Green Guide" compulsory:      The report (paragraph 266)
            states "One of the matters for consideration at Stage 2 of this
            Inquiry will be whether, and in what respect, the Green Guide needs
            to be clarified and toughened.

     (c)   The need for further legislation in respect of safety providing,
            inter alia, a central licensing authority.     The report (paragraph
            314) states "Arguments have been put to me suggesting the need for
            seme national oversight or inspection of local authority certification
           procedures. This raises complex issues which I shall want to consider
            further at Stage 2 of the Inquiry."

     (d)   The future location of stadia

     (e)   The   standard, provision and management of stadia

     (f)   The repeated concern that the present building regulations are in­
            sufficient

     (g)   The need for a central licensing authority.      In this context the
           Interim Report appears to be suggesting that the provision of safety
           certificates should remain a function of the relevant local authority
           assisted by an Advisory Group consisting of "appropriate members
           of its own staff, representatives of the police, of the fire and
           ambulance services, of the building authority, of the club and of
           a recognised supporters1 club".     The Council may wish to express
           renewed concern that this may continue the lack of a standardised
           approach to safety at major stadia throughout the country.

FURTHER DEVELOPMENTS

8   Since the Disaster in April there has been heightened concern worldwide
     about safety at stadia. Various initiatives continue to be taken in Europe
     towards a Central European Norm (CEN) for stadia which would bring together
    recatmendations on a European scale and which might highlight the inadequacies
     of local authority control of safety.

9   It has become clear that there are many differences among standards adopted
     in the United Kingdom and other European countries - particularly West
    Germany and Italy where there has been much recent activity to provide
     safer and more comfortable facilities.     Many existing stadia in Italy
     have been upgraded for the 1990 World Cup and new stadia built.
SPORTS COUNCIL/RIBA SEMINAR

10   As reported in paper SC (89) 45 discussions are continuing with
     the Royal Institute of British Architects over the organisation
     of a joint seminar on stadia.    Originally planned in November 1989
     further consideration is being given to the date as ideally it should
     fall as soon as possible after the publication of Lord Justice Taylor's
     second report on the wider issues incorporated in his terms of reference.

CONCLUSION

11    It is recommended that Members note the publication of the Interim
      Report in the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster and those elements
      included in the Council's submission incorporated at this stage
      of Lord Justice Taylor's overall inquiry.




DCP DGC
10 August 1989
