I.                           CONFIDENTS                  'm   «NIOFTHEE«lM|
                                                              RECEIVED If
     NOTE OF A MEETING HELD ON 2 AUGUST 1989                   - 7 AUG 1989

                                                           PRIVATE OFFICE
     HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY


     Present:   Home Secretary             SofS for Environment
                Lord Ferrers               Mr Moynihan
                Sir Clive Whitmore         Mr Forsyth
                Mr Chilcot                 Lord Trafford
                Mr Turney                  Mr MacDonald )
                Mr Mower                   Mr Kingham    ) DoE
                Mr Mould                   Ms McLane )Scottish Off
                Mr Lidington               Mr Weir ) DoH
                Mr Storr
                Miss Bannister



         The meeting had been called to discuss Lord Justice
     Taylor's interim report on Hillsboroijoh^and handlina of its
     publication. The meeting£had before it a draft Home Secretary
     statement and a draft Home Office circular.

     2.  After welcoming his colle agues , the Home Secretary opened
     the discussion by commenting that the contents of the report
     were not u n e x p e c t e d . He expected that the overwhelming
     interest would be in the attribution of guilt rather than the
     recommendations.          This was spread between Sheffield City
     Council, Sheffield Wednesday Football Club and South Yorkshire
     Police, the latter receiving the heaviest criticism.           It had
     been arranged for the three parties criticised to have access
     to the contents of the report relating to them on the
     afternoon of Thursday 3 August.           The Home Secretary would need
     to consider further the police aspect before the report was
     published.

      3.  The Home Secretary said that the intention was to publish
      the report at 11 am on Friday 4 August.  Lord Justice Taylor
      would hold a press conference at the Home Office and the Home
      Secretary intended to issue his statement c x j - v-W,
            <x S publication of the report. It was agreed that there
      was no value in Ministers holding a press conference. The
      Home Secretary said that he would decide whether he would
      accept bids for interviews once he knew the reaction of South
      Yorkshire Police.
t
                                     CONFIDENTIAL
    FR
                                      2   .


         Circular

         4.    The Home Secretary said that the issue of a circular
         along the lines of the draft before the meeting to local
         authorities, the police, football clubs and others concerned
         wi t h the organisation of football matches had seemed to his
         advisers the right way to ensure that those concerned were
         notified of their responsibility for implementing
         recommendations in the report as quickly as possible.    The
         circular would be despatched on 4 August and should be
         received on 7 August, depending on the post.    Given the large
         numbers involved there did not seem to be a better practical
         metho d of distribution.   It was agreed that this was the most
         sensible method of notifying those concerned of their
         responsibilities.    The circular would also be attached to the
         statement.

         5.  The Home Secretary pointed out that at paragraph 9 the
         circular said that it was not envisaged that there would be
         significant long term resource implications for local
         authorities.  Officials had examined this carefully and had
         concluded that as the recommendations were simply inviting
         local authorities to carry out what they were already required
         to under existing legislation, while there would be an initial
         surge of activity, there should not be any need for extra
         staff or other resources.

         6.  Mr Moynihan said that the football clubs would be very
         concerned about having to implement quite stringent
         requirements, which would involve consultation with the local
         police, in a very short period of time.  However, it would be
         very difficult for them to criticise the recommendations
         themselves or deliberately fail to comply with them.

         7.  The Secretary of State for Environment said that he would
         like to see paragraph 5 of the circular more explicitly refer
         to the report and its recommendations, and state which were
         marked with an asterisk as requiring implementation before the
         start of the new football season or immediately thereafter.
         Home Office officials cautioned that the circular should not
         attempt to rewrite the recommendations.  It was finally agreed
         that paragraph 5 of the circular should be expanded to refer
         to the paragraph of the report containing the recommendations"
         to point out that they fell into two categories, one



                                                        /asterisked and




                                     CONFIDENTIAL'
                             CONFIDENTIAL'
                            3.



asterisked and one not; and to repeat the report's definition
of the two categories.   It was agreed that it was reasonable
for the circular to urge recipients to take urgent action on
both categories so as to put into effect as many of the
recommendations as possible before the start of the season,
although this was somewhat less strong than the preamble to
paragraph 316 as the asterisked recommendations^it was in line
with paragraph 304.   It would not be reasonablebexpect all the
asterisked recommendations to be put into effect within the
time available before the start of the season.

8.  Mr Forsyth pointed out that the football season in
Scotland started one week before that in England and Wales
and therefore there would be even less time for the
recommendations in the report to be put into effect.   However,
it was noted that the asterisked recommendations were required
to be implemented either before the start of the season or
immediately after.  The Home Secretary suggested that as well
as urging recipients to put into effect as many as possible of
the recommendations before the start of the season, the
circular issued by the Scottish Office might recognise
explicitly the increased difficulty in Scotland because of the
earlier start of the season.

Statement

9.  The Home Secretary said that the main thrust of the draft
statement was as follows.     The interim report did not
recommend changes in the law or r egul ation s. Rather it said
that the rules, including the Green Guide, had been set aside
or ignored.   The terms of the draft statement were agreed.
The Secretary of State for Environment pointed out that the
main report might well include recommendations for changes in
the law or r e g u l a tions.

10.  The follovring points relevant to the Government's
reaction to the report were noted:


(i)    the recommendation in the report which was likely to
       attract most attention was 2(b), the recommendation for
       a 15% reduction in capacity of the terraces.  It was
       noted that this would have major implications for the
       football clubs, but the Home Secretary did not think it



                                              /was for
FH.                             CONFIDE?
                                    4.




              was for Government to comment on these implications,
              which would include financial considerations.  He
              commented, however, that this should alter the economic
              balance somewhat in favour of moving to all-seater
              stadia.  The Secretary of State and Mr Moynihan agreed,
              but it was recognised that moving to all-seater stadia
              would still have a major impact on the clubs;

      (ii)    it was noted that the report generally shifted the
              balance between public order and public safety somewhat
              in favour of the latter, which was right in view of the
              events at Hillsborough.   This was particularly
              reflected in recommendation 8 - that where there are
              perimeter fences, all gates to -the pitch should be kept
              fully opened during the period when spectators are on
              the terrace.  It was noted that Lord Justice Taylor was
              particularly influenced by the situation at Anfield,
              which he had visited, where there were no gates but
              rather gaps in perimeter f e n c e s . Mr Moynihan wondered
              whether the police would oppose this recommendation.
              Home Office officials said that the police appeared to
              accept at present the need to swing the balance more in
              favour of public safety.   The Government would need to
              rely on the importance of adequate policing in
              answering concerns about public order.       It would be an
              operational decision for the police to decide how many
              officers were needed to man the gates, and the increase
              in manpower needed would be the main problem for the
              police and the clubs.   Lord Ferrers made the point that
              the need to close the gates where there was a risk of
              public disorder meant that there would still be a
              risk to public safety, whereas if there was no
              risk to public order, there was no need for any
              gate.  Lord Justice Taylor had stopped short of
              recommending the removal of perimeter f e n c e s .
              He would return to this issue in his final
              report;

      (iii)   it was noted that the report had no implications for
              the Football Spectators Bill.  The Government could,
              however, point to the fact that the Bill would permit
              the setting up of a new authority with powers to
              supervise the way in which local authorities carried
              out their responsibilities for the safety of sports




                                                       /grounds,
       grounds, if in due course this was considered necessary
       in the light of Lord Justice Taylor's final report (as
       mentioned in the Home Secretary's statement).      Mr
       Moynihan mentioned one issue which would probably
       emerge at report stage of the Bill which came up in the
       report.   This was the question of who should be in
       charge of crowd control at football matches, the police
       or the c l u b s . In the body of the report Lord Justice
       Taylor said that the clubs should be responsible but he
       made no recommendation.      He stated that he would
       address specific matters relating to the Bill in his
       final report and it was likely that he would return to
       this question there.

Parliamentary Handling

11.  It was noted that copies of the report, the statement and
circular would be sent to Liverpool, Nottingham and Sheffield
MPs, the members of the Committee on the Football Spectators
Bill (which included Mr Denis Howell) and Mr Hattersley at
11.00 am on Friday.  The Home Secretary said that he would
also write to Mr Hattersley.




Private Office                           MISS C J BANNISTER
3 August 1989                            Private Secretary
                                  confidential ,
FR
                                   6.



     cc.   Miss Nicholson
           Ms Rex
           Mr Yates
           Mr Chilcot
           Mr Moriarty
           Mr Turney
           Mr Boys Smith
           HMCIC
           HMCIFS
           Mr Mower
           Mr Bolton
           Mr Goddard
           Mr Mould
           Mr F Smith, F8
           Mr Gilbert
           Mr Lidington
           P S /S o f S f©r~Envij=©»m@-nk.
           PS/Mr Moynihan, DoE
           PS/SofS Scottish Office
           PS/Mr Forsyth, Scottish Office
           PS/Sofs for Health
           PS/Lord Trafford, DoH
           PS/SofS for Wales
