 hs.7.15/hillsb.peb

                                           cc   Mr Hiles
                                                Mr Fuller
                                                Mr Topping

 Mr Turney


 HILLSBOROUGH LEGAL BILL
     i                  i

  I have seen Mr Topping's note of 10 July. He had already spoken
  to me about this subject. I really do hope that we can resist
I the idea that the fire research budget should be raided to pay
  for outstanding legal bills arising from the Hillsborough
  Inquiry. This Division was not responsible for the Hillsborough
  Inquiry and we have made no financial provision for its costs.
  The only funds within the sub-budgfet which are even vaguely-
  related are the funds available to pay a grant to the Football
  Licensing Authority, but for the current year they are fully
  taken up.
  I have doubts, too, whether the money set aside for granting a
  safety certificate for Ascot racecourse should be used for this
  purpose. We are really getting to the point where the failure
  of the Home Office to provide a safety certificate for the Ascot
  stand (which is Crown property) in response to legislation
^introduced in 1987 could be severely criticised. If there were
  an accident at Ascot which could be attributed to lack of safety
  precautions, we would be in a difficult and invidious position.
  We have recently agreed with the legal advisers that we should
  approach Berkshire County Council to ask them whether they would
  be prepared to undertake the investigative work, (though it would
  fall to us to issue the certificate) . Coincidentally we have
  today received a letter written to my successor from the
  Berkshire Fire and Rescue Service asking us to meet them to
  discuss the Ascot stands.
  As to the Hillsborough Inquiry itself, there is no longer any
  specific financial provision for it and we simply have no way of
  knowing whether there are any outstanding bills. I do not know
  whose decision it was not to make any further provision in the
  current financial year.
  Ironically the bills relate to last year, when there was a
  significant underspend on the funding of the Football Licensing
  Authority which could have been used for the purpose if the bills
  had been submitted in time. The present inconvience is caused
  largely by the quirks of the accounting rules. To my mind this
  adds to the case for being awkward and passing the bill back to
  Finance Division 1.



                                           P E BOLTON
                                           G2 Division
  15 July 1991
