                                    (9
E.R.


                                                       cc Mr Turney (o.r)
       Mr Mould

       HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - HOME OFFICE EVIDENCE
       I mentioned to you on 5 May that Mr Whalley told me that Lord
       Justice Taylor would like Home Office evidence (in effect on
       current arrangements and policy) by Monday 12 June.
       2.   Mr Goddard (F8) will provide evidence on Part 2 of the
       Football Spectators Bill, and will I gather be asking DOE to
       provide evidence/some information about Part 1 and the
       Government's reasons for wanting the football membership scheme.
       The Inquiry is likely to approach ACPO direct for evidence about
       police policy on operations in connection with sports grounds.
       3.   Mr Whalley thinks it unlikely that Lord Justice Taylor will
       want to call upon the Home Office to give formal oral evidence.
       But he might want to question us informally in Mr Whalley1s room,
       with the Inquiry!s own Counsel (Andrew Collins?) present, to
       clarify points in our evidence.
       4.    We should check how we handled the King's Cross evidence;
       but I think we shall need to clear our draft evidence with
       Ministers before we send it to the Inquiry and that it should
       thensimply be sent by Mr Turney to Mr Whalley.
       5.     The timing is very tight and we have been unable so far to
       make a start on drafting the evidence.    The necessary timetable
       seems to be as follows:
            before Friday 19 May:    sections of draft to come from you
                                     to me as they are prepared
            by Friday 19 May:        first complete draft from you to me
                                     (earlier if possible)
            by Tuesday 23 May:       revised first complete draft
                                     from me to Mr Turney
            by Wednesday 31 May:     final draft from you to Mr Turney
            by Monday 5 June:        Mr Turney to submit draft evidence
                                     to Ministers
            by Monday 12 June:       Mr Turney to despatch evidence to
                                     Mr Whalley


                                                     R R G WATTS
       G1 Division
       9 May 1989

                                         1
