D epartm en t fo r Culture, Media and Sport                               Ground                     \
S p o r t a n d R e c re a t io n                                             2 -4 Cockspur Street       Fax 0 1 7 1 21 1 6 1 4 9
                                                                              L o n d o n SW1Y 5DH




To                T O N Y BANKS                cc      C h r is Ca rr (flag C on ly )
                                                       Keith G ibb ins (")
F ro m            Paul M c C o r m a c k               S i m o n Br o ad ley (“ )
                                                      C o lin J o n e s (")
                                                       Philip T o w n s e n d (“)
D ate             1 4 April 1 9 9 9
                                                      Lionel P i m l o t t (“ )


                                                      A n d y B u r n h a m (“ )




THURSDAY 15 APRIL - HILLSBOROUGH MEMORIAL SERVICE



Issue

1. You have agreed to attend the Hillsborough memorial service at Anfield tom orrow
afternoon. The Secretary of State and Home Office Ministers are aware.


Timing

2. The service, which is to be conducted by James Jones, the recently appointed Anglican
Bishop of Liverpool, is scheduled to take place in the centre section of the Kop End of
Anfield from 2.45pm to 3.30pm.

3. The football VIP's who are attending have been asked to arrive by 2.00pm at the
latest.

4. Peter Robinson, the Executive vice-Chairman of Liverpool has suggested that it might
be appropriate for vou to arrive slightly earlier, at 1.45pm. in order to spend a little while
w ith Trevor Hicks and a number of the other relatives/friends of the Hillsborough victims.


Who w ill be there?

5. We understand from Peter Robinson that the following people are expected to attend
the service:

-    Families, friends and relations of the 96 Hillsborough victims, including Trevor Hicks,
     Chairman of the Hillsborough Families Support Croup. 600+ likely to attend.

-    The current Liverpool squad and management team.
-    Many of the 1989 Liverpool squad and management team.

-    Representatives of Nottingham Forest.

-    Representatives of Sheffield Wednesday, including the club Chairman - David
     Richards.

-    Cordon Taylor/Brendan Baston from the Professional Footballers Association.

-    Sir Bert Millichip, former Chairman of The FA.

6. We understand that local media representatives, including TheLiverpootEcho, w ill also
be present.


Lines to take and background

7. Lines to take and a background note on developments in sports grounds safety since
Hillsborough is at flag A. Additional briefing, provided by the Home Office, on why the
Government w ill not order a new Inquiry into Hillsborough, is at flag B.

8. We understand that the quote on Hillsborough which we submitted to No.10 earlier
this week was used by the Prime Minister and appeared in The Liverpool Echo earWer this
week. A copy of the quote is at flag C.

9. Philip Townsend w ill be minuting separately w ith press lines to take.



r\



Paul McCormack
TENTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER



Lines to take

Introduction

- Welcome the decision by The Football Association to mark the tragic events which occurred at
  Hillsborough Stadium ten years ago by observing a one minute silence before last weekend's FA Cup
  Semi-Finals.

- Also welcome the decision by the Football League and the FA Premier League to encourage their
  member clubs to observe a one minute silence before league matches this coming Saturday (17 April).

AK-seater policy

-   Dramatic change in safety standards at football grounds in this country since 1989 both in terms of
    infrastructure and crowd management. English football grounds now recognised as amongst the
    safest and finest in the world. For example, Euro ‘96, held here in modern all-seater stadia with
    unrestricted views and the fans close to the action, was the most successful European Championships
    ever. The atmosphere generated at these matches was remarked upon throughout the world.

- This improvement bears testimony to the work o f the Football Licensing Authority, established in the
  wake of the Hillsborough disaster to oversee the implementation of the Government’s all-seater
  policy.

- Clubs in this country have spent £565m to date on redeveloping their stadia following the Taylor
  Report, helped by £160m from the Football Trust as a result of a reduction in Pool Betting Duty
  concession granted in 1990 to fund Taylor-related work. This is a magnificent achievement.

- The £55m funding package announced in 1997, and the extension of the reduction in Pool Betting
  Duty concession until March 2002 announced in this year's budget, are both designed to assist the
  Football Trust and demonstrate this Government's commitment to implement Taylor.

Safe Terracing Policy

-   The Government has no plans to review the Taylor Report's recommendations which identified all­
    seating as the factor that contributed most to spectator safety. We are, of course prepared to listen
    to comments about the provision of spectator accommodation at our top football grounds including
    proposals advocating the return of terraces. However, my personal view is th a t we have gone too far
    down the all-seater road to revert to terracing now.

-   Believe we are striking the right balance in providing some of the most modern all-seater facilities,
    in terms of safety and comfort, in the world at our top clubs, and allowing some standing
    accommodation at lower division grounds where the risk is reduced due to smaller crowds, subject
    to stringent safety requirements.

-   Most clubs in the lower divisions well on course to meet the safe terracing requirements which w ill
    come into force in August this year.

Sports Grounds Safety Authority

- Much has been done to improve safety standards. But there is no room for complacency. The
• Government announced in a consultation exercise last year its intention to revise the functions of the
  Football Licensing Authority to enable it to build upon its work on football and offer advice on sports
  grounds safety across a wide range of sports. This proposal was generally welcomed and we w ill take
  steps to reconstitute the FLA as the Sports Grounds Safety A uthority as soon as legislative time
  allows.
 The Football Task Force

,-   This Government has recognised the special role football plays in this country by establishing the
     Football Task Force to investigate issues of concern to all those involved w ith the game. The Task
     Force is currently considering the complex issues associated w ith the commercial aspects of the game,
     and I expect to receive its report on this important area by the end of June.

 The Green Guide

 - The Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds ('the Green Guide')has been revised twice - in 1990 and, more
   recently, in 1997 - to reflect changes in good practice in the design and management of sports
   grounds.


 Background

 1. In January 1990, Lord Justice Taylor's Final Report on the Hillsborough Stadium disaster was published
 following the tragic events at an FA Cup Semi-Final there on 15 April 1989, at which 96 people died. The
 Taylor Report contained 76 recommendations, many of which, including a reduction in the permitted
 crowd density on terraces and the removal of spikes from perimeter fences, were included in a revised
 edition of the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (‘the Green Guide'), published in 1990.

 2. By far the most im portant of Taylor's recommendations was th a t standing accommodation should
 be eliminated at all grounds designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975. The then
 Government accepted the Report, but chose to lim it the all-seater requirement to football, due to the
 particular problems of safety and crowd control experienced in that sport. Accordingly, clubs in the old
 Division 1 and 2 of the Football League were given until August 1994, and those in Divisions 3 and 4,
 until August 1999, to go all-seater.

 3. In order to help clubs meet the costs of implementing Taylor, the then Chancellor, in his 1990 budget,
 made available £100m over a five year period through the Football Trust by means of a reduction in the
 rate of Pool Betting Duty. In May 1996 this concession was increased from 2.5% to 3% and extended
 to run until March 2000. In the 1999 budget the concession was extended until at least 2002.

 4. The all-seater policy was reviewed in 1992 in order to ensure th a t it targeted more effectively those
 clubs where the risk is greatest, in July 1992 it was announced th a t all clubs in the FA Premier League
 and the First Division of the Football League would still be required to go all-seater by August 1994, in
 accordance w ith Taylor's recommendation. However, clubs in the Second and Third Divisions would be
 permitted to keep some standing accommodation, provided the terracing was safe.

 5. The all-seater policy for the 46 clubs in the top tw o divisions was implemented through the Football
 Licensing Authority's licensing system, established under the Football Spectators Act 1989. In July 1994
 the then Secretary of State issued an Order under Section 11 of the 1989 Act empowering the FLA to
 include conditions in their licences requiring clubs to have all-seater grounds by a given date. In the
 m ajority of cases this was 1 August 1994, but the then Secretary of State, after careful consideration
 of applications from 11 clubs for more tim e to comply, granted limited extensions of one year each to
 five relocating clubs (Derby County, Grimsby town, Middlesbrough, Portsmouth, and Sunderland), and
 to one club redeveloping on site (Newcastle United). He also confirmed that those clubs in the First
 Division of the Football League promoted since 1991 would be have three years from the date of their
 promotion to go all-seater.

 6. The safe terracing policy for clubs in Divisions 2 and 3 of the Football League w ill also be implemented
 using the FLA's licensing system. Such clubs have until August this year either to introduce all-seated
 accommodation or to ensure that any retained terracing meets minimum standards relating to the
 design, layout and strength of crush barriers. The FLA wrote to all lower Division clubs in June last year
 outlining the minimum standards that w ill be required for terracing to be retained. We understand from
 the Authority that most lower Division clubs are well on course to meet the safe terracing requirements.

 SARD C, A pril 1999.
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - BRIEFING

L IN ES T O TAKE

General

Understand the sense of frustration which the families and others feel that no individual
was personally held to account following the disaster.

A private prosecution brought by the Family Support Group against former Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield and former Superintendent Murray is now before the courts.
It would, of course, be inappropriate to comment on this.

"Why w o n 't th e G overnm ent order a new inquiry into Hillsborough?

The original Taylor Inquiry was very thorough and was unequivocal in identifying the
main cause of the disaster as a failure of police control.

The H om e Secretary, soon after taking office, asked Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to conduct
a scrutiny to determine whether there was significant new evidence about the disaster
which was not available to the original inquiry.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith carried out a thorough scrutiny, In his report, which was
published in February 199S, he considered 3II the material allegations about missing or
concealed videotape evidence, the alleged interference with witnesses and witness
statements and concerns about the use of the 3.15pm cut-off time at the Inquest.

 The Home Secretary considered the Judge’s report carefully and he accepted the
 conclusion which the Judge reached that the evidence submitted to him does not add
 anything significant to the evidence available to and considered by the Taylor inquiry and
 the inquests.

 W hat about th e alteration of police statements?

 Lord Justice Stuarr-Srmth investigated the alteration of police statements in detail in the
 course of his scrutiny.

 Although Lord Justice Stuart-Smith said that there were some alterations which it would
 have been preferable not to have made, he was satisfied that the procedure followed by
 South Yorkshire Police had had no material effect on the outcome of the Taylor Inquiry,
 the coroner’s inquest or the decision of the Director of Public Prosecutions.


 W asn’t th e appointm ent of N orm an Bettison (who was serving in the South
 Y orkshire Police at the tim e of Hillsborough) as Chief C onstable of M erseyside
 m isguided?

 The appointment of M r Bettison as the Chief Constable of Merseyside wax a matter for
 the Merseyside Police Authority. Mr Bettison was not on duty nr Hillsborough and
 neither th r Taylor Inquiry nor Lord justice.- Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny rrudc any criticism of
 him.



  WI.OJRBOO:’ G R O U P .Oppu\COMPLNTS\BRIEF -.mp-09l 6.doc
'Will the Government place copies of the evidence considered by Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny in Liverpool Central Library?

There are no plans to place copies in Liverpool Central Library. Most of the main
material considered by Lord Justice Suiarc-Smith is contained in the appendices to his
report. Much of the other material considered was already in the public domain from the
earlier Taylor inquiry and inquests.

We have placed as much as possible of the other material considered by Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith in the Library of the House of Commons.

What is the Government doing to ensure that police officers don’t escape
punishm ent in future?

The Government has implemented new police discipline procedures (from 1 April 1999).
The new procedures operate on the civil standard of proof and remove the double
jeopardy provision which used to restrict criminal and disciplinary action on the same
facts. The new procedures will also allow a discipline hearing to proceed in the absence
of The accused.

The Home Secretary has indicated that forces should s h o w greater commitment to their
powers to verify claims of sickness and disability and, where appropriate, to postpone a
request to retire on ill health grounds until the completion of disciplinary proceedings.




     U l K B O C . A G K f U N -' C ' p p . x G C > M N . N t t S '^ W E F vrn )> 0 '> K d o ,-
BACKGROUND

It is the tenth anniversary of the Hillsborough Disaster (15 April 1989) in which 96
people died. Lord Justice Taylor was appointed in the immediate aftermath of the tragedy
to conduct a public inquiry. The inquiry identified a number of causes of the disaster:

- The failure to cut off access to the central pens which were already overfull.
- There were no maximum safe capacities for the pens.
- There was no effective visual monitoring of crowd density.
- The protection afforded by the layout of barriers in the pens was inadequate.
- Inadequate planning led to dangerous congestion at the turnstiles.
- An unruly, drunken minority aggravated the problem.
- Sheffield Wednesday’s signs and ticketing were inadequate and confused.

O n balance, the inquiry found that, although there were other causes, the main reason
for the disaster was the failure of police control. The report was critical of the actions of
Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and statements attributed to him in the immediate
aftermath of the disaster.

The Coroner’s inquest into the disaster reached a verdict of accidental death in respect of
the victims.

The DPP concluded that no person should be prosecuted as a result of the disaster and
Chief Supt Duckenfield retired on medical grounds before disciplinary charges of negLect
of duty could be brought against him.

A Granada Television Drama about the disaster, broadcast on 5 December 1996, made
allegations of 10 unresolved questions about the disaster.

The Home Secretary announced on 30 June 1997 that he was appointing Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith to carry out a scrutin}- of new evidence. On 18 February 1998 the Home
Secretary’’ published his report.

 Shortly afcer the disaster, the police officers who had been present at Hillsborough were
 required to record their recollections of the day, The officers’ statements were
 subsequently subnutted to the force solicitors to advise whether they were in a suitable
 form for submission to the judicial inquiry led by Lord Justice Taylor. In the majority of
 cases, no recommendations were made on the officers’ statements. In some, though,
 advice was given to remove comment, hearsay or inappropriate language. The South
 Yorkshire Police’s own evidence collation team also recommended some amendments of
 a similar nature, without reference to the solicitors.

 Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report indicates that he investigated this matter thoroughly
 after it was brought to his attention by the South Yorkshire Police. He did nor criticise
 the procedure followed, but there were several statements where he believed it would
 have been preferable for the amendments not to have been, made, because wh.it was
 removed was either factual or comment where .tactual matters were implicit. I.ord Justice
 Stuart'Smith said that the Taylor Inquiry were aware that the statements h<id been vt-rted
 in this w:jy and hr was satisfied fhar it did not materially affect the outcome of the
 Inquire or other proceedings.




 W L 01R B 002 • G R O U P \ O p p u \ C O M P L N T S \ B R I H F \m p - C 9 l 6 .doc
                                                                                         I-
                            1   ; < i ' ji i   U l   -   i




The Hillsborough Family Support Group is pursuing a private prosecution against
former Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and former Superintendent Murray, the most
senior officers in charge at Hillsborough on the day of the disaster.

Following his appointment as Chief Constable of Merseyside last year, there have been
allegations made about Norman Bettison. Mr Bettison was serving in the South
Yorkshire Police at the time of Hillsborough and was among the officers involved in the
force’s follow up work to prepare for the judicial inquiry and inquests. It is alleged thar
he was involved, therefore, in the force’s ' cover-up5of the police’s responsibility for the
disaster.




  ALC1RBG:!’ X.»KOL7'\O ppu\CO M PLN TS\BRIFFunp'Q91'i.doc
DRAFT QUOTE CLEARED BY T O N Y BANKS RE: HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER



It is right and proper that we take a moment this week to reflect on the tragic events which occurred
at Hillsborough ten years ago. The past decade has seen dramatic improvements in safety and comfort
at football grounds in this country, and the way in which football matches are controlled. However there
is no room for complacency and the Government are determined that the improvements in spectator
safety since 1989 are built upon in the new Millennium. That is why we intend to establish a Sports
Grounds Safety Authority to enable other sports to benefit from the expertise of the Football Licensing
Authority. We must never have a repeat of the Hillsborough Disaster.
