                      THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION & SCIENCE
                     ELIZABETH HOUSE YORK ROAD L O N D O N SEI 7PH
                 SWITCHBOARD 071-934 9000 FAX 071-934 9082 G TN No. 3914




P E Bolton Esq
Home Office                                                          July 1991
Fire and Emergency Planning Department
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London
SW1H 9AT




IMPLEMENTATION OF ALL-SEATED ACCOMMODATION: UEFA "HIGH RISK" MATCHES
AND RUGBY GROUNDS

Thank you for your letters of 10 and 12 June concerning the
application of Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations on all-seating at
UEFA "high risk" matches and at rugby union and rugby league grounds.
I apologise for the delay in replying. I have also seen John
Goddard's comments dated 17 June.

I am content to support your proposed approach to Ministers that
strict compliance with the FIFA resolution is a matter for the
Football Association and the clubs concerned. As far as Government is
concerned I agree that the crucial test is whether adequate progress
is being made towards all—seated accommodation in accordance with the
August 1994 and August 1999 deadlines.

I am also content that you should put to Ministers the case for not
introducing primary legislation to extend the all—seated requirement
beyond association football grounds designated under the 1975 Act.
There ^is clearly a presentational difficulty here as you point out in
relation to the recent reaffirmation of the requirement in respect of
smaller clubs within the Football League. Presumably, however, we
would argue that we see no reason to depart from the voluntary
approach of encouraging other sports with grounds designated under the
1975 Act to provide all-seated, accommodation for reasons of safety and
comfort. To go beyond this voluntary approach is unnecessary at this
stage given the arguments you put forward in your letter although no
doubt Ministers would wish to state publicly that the matter will
continue to be kept under review since we cannot afford to be
complacent.

I look forward to seeing your draft submissions on both of these
issues as well as a sight of your revised guidance to clubs on the
reduction in standing accommodation which we expect to see over the
next 8 years at individual grounds. If there is any further help or
assistance which we can provide on these matters please do not
hesitate to get in touch.

Yours sincerely




COHJ? VAUGHAN
Sport and Recreation Division




                                                                  2
