                 With Compliments

Emergency Planning Division
Home Office
Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON SW1H 9AT
Tel:   071 273
                 r
   Home Office




Dealing with

   Disaster
Home Office




Dealing with Disaster




LONDON: HMSO
© Crown copyright 1992
Applications fo r reproduction should be made to HMSO
First published 1992

ISBN 0 11 341044 1
Introductory Note




There are variations from one part of the United Kingdom to another in the
roles and responsibilities of central and local government, in the offices held
and in the terminology used within governmental and other organisations
referred to in this guidance. To try to reflect all these variations would make
the text much lengthier and considerably less readable. Accordingly, while
much of the principle is universally applicable, the guidance reflects the
arrangements and terminology commonly used in England and Wales.




                                                                             iii
               Contents




Page vii   Foreword by the Home Secretary


       1    1    Introduction


      4    2    The combined response

      4    Agencies providing or contributing to the local response
      6    Objectives for a combined response
      6    The response to a disaster at a single site
      9    Handling widespread disasters
     10    Debriefing, inquiries and lessons emerging


     11    3    The immediate care and treatment of disaster victims

     11    Care of uninjured survivors
     11    The injured
     12    Fatalities
     12    Casualty bureaux
     13    Friends and relatives
     13    Evacuation and shelter
     15    Social and psychological support
     15    Religious and cultural needs


     16    4    Relations with the media

     16    Introduction
     16    Assisting the media
     16    Initial actions
     19    A media response organisation
     19    Media centre
     20    Transfer of the media operation to local or health authority control
     20    Remote handling
     20    Liaison with central government
     21    Visits by V IP s
     22    Sustainability




                                                                                  v
23    5   The voluntary sector

23   Introduction
23   Planning the voluntary sector’s contribution
24   Training and exercising
24   Action following a disaster


25   6    Central government and lead departments

25   The lead department concept
25   Nomination of the lead department
26   The role of the lead department
27   The territorial departments
27   Regional Emergency Committees (R EC s)
27   Inspectorates


29   7    The combined approach to planning, training and exercising

29   Introduction
29   The combined approach to preparedness
29   Planning
30   Joint training and exercising


34   Annexes

34   A    Definitions of major incident
35   B    Guidance addressed to emergency services, local authorities and other
          organisations
37   C    The East Coast floods-Jan uary 1953
41   D    Examples of activities which can be undertaken by the voluntary sector
          in support of the statutory services
43   E    Co-ordination of statutory and voluntary services
44   F    Lead Government Departments


     Glossary


     Bibliography
Foreword by the Home Secretary




Disasters usually strike suddenly, unexpectedly and with ferocity. The
response invariably involves the emergency services as part of their duties and
it generally involves local authorities as an extension of their responsibilities.
   A range of other organisations may also be involved, such as electricity,
gas, water and telecom companies, manufacturing and transport industries.
Experience indicates that we should not underestimate the pressure on those
who respond. Not only should they know their own roles in the event of
disaster, but they should also appreciate the way in which their roles interact
with others. It is, therefore, prudent to prepare.
   I commend this guidance, put together by my Civil Emergencies Adviser,
as a contribution towards preparedness. I know that he has received
considerable advice and assistance from many people in the emergency
services, in local authorities and elsewhere, and would like to thank them all
for their cooperation.
   The guidance is not in any sense meant to be prescriptive nor does it replace
existing single service guidance. The key message which it brings across is the
need for the principal players in the disaster response to cooperate in its
preparation-planning, training and exercising-and in the event. That is a
sentiment which I strongly endorse and, if this guidance succeeds in getting
that message more widely understood, then it will have served its purpose.




                                       The Rt. H on. Kenneth Clarke Q C M P
1     Introduction




1.1 The purpose of this document is to assist those involved in the
preparation for and response to disasters. It offers advice on good practice
based on the experience of those who have had to handle disasters in the past.
The guidance is designed to show any who might be involved how they can fit
into the overall disaster response. It is intended to supplement and not to
replace existing ‘single-service’ guidance on disaster preparedness and
response which is available within many organisations.

1.2 The advice is general in nature and covers those topics which are of
interest to all who might be called upon to respond. This includes organis­
ations for whom emergencies are part and parcel of everyday life-police,
fire, H M Coastguard, the N H S ambulance and emergency medical services
and local authorities-through to a great many others for whom involvement
is a more occasional matter but who may nevertheless be called upon to
respond quickly when the need arises. These include central government
departments, the armed forces, voluntary organisations and commercial and
industrial concerns, including the utilities (water, gas, telephone and elec­
tricity companies).

1.3 Above all, this guidance is not intended to be prescriptive. It is meant to
inform but not dictate the decisions that have to be taken either in the often
chaotic situation following a disaster or in the more measured atmosphere of
response preparation. No single organisational arrangement will be appropri­
ate to each and every disaster, nor will a single organisational blueprint for
planning meet every need. The key to an effective response is to apply sound
basic principles to the problem at hand. Where examples of organisations or
structures are offered in this guidance they must be seen as no more than
examples. They are not, and should not be regarded as, the ‘right’ solution
for all circumstances.

1.4   Disasters can have a variety of causes, such as:

Natural        -S torm s, floods, snowfall, landslides, forest fires, earth­
                 quakes.

Technological -D am age to structures and buildings; industrial (eg
               explosion, release of toxic or radioactive substances);
               transport accident (air, sea, inland water, rail, road).

Social         -H ealth emergencies (epidemics), poisoning of the food
                 chain.

Environm ental-A ir, water and land pollution or contamination.

Hostile Acts    -T errorist acts or actions of a hostile state.

                                                                               1
   1.5     A disaster is commonly understood by the general public as a greai
misfortune or calamity. In the context of emergency planning, a useful
working definition of a disaster is any event (happening with or withoul
warning) causing or threatening death or injury, damage to property or the
environment or disruption to the community, which because of the scale of its
effects cannot be dealt with by the emergency services and local authorities as
part of their day-to-day activities.


1.6 This working definition encompasses the definitions used by the
emergency services for a ‘major incident’. Some of these are set out in Annex
A to this guidance. In defining a major incident, the emergency services
recognise that there will be a need for special arrangements to be brought into
play to respond to such an incident. That the emergency services should use
the term ‘m ajor incident’ is right because their contingency arrangements and
operational response must be geared to any situation beyond their normal
day-to-day activities. However, not every m ajor incident will become a
disaster: for example, a serious accident on a motorway involving a large
number of vehicles will be a major incident if it demands special arrange­
ments on the part of the police, fire and the N H S (both ambulance and
hospital-based services) but unless it has some wider ranging effects on the
community it is unlikely to be regarded as a disaster.


1.7 While the causes of disaster may be sudden and unpredictable, certain
kinds of industrial activity carry known risks and are subject to legal
requirements for emergency planning. These include known chemical or
nuclear hazards at fixed locations, where the most probable types of incident
and their likely consequences are largely foreseeable. For this reason it is
possible to make detailed plans in advance for the appropriate action to be
taken. The existence of such plans reduces the likelihood of errors resulting
from decisions being taken under crisis conditions. The requirements are
contained in the Control of Industrial M ajor Accident Hazards (C lM A H )
Regulations 1984 and in conditions attached to licences issued under the
Nuclear Installations Act 1965 (which is expected to be supplemented by off-
site nuclear emergency planning regulations). The response to emergencies
where these requirements are relevant is not addressed in detail in this
guidance.


1.8 Additionally, the guidance is directed mainly at disasters occurring on
land and within the UK. Marine accidents and aviation accidents which occur
over the sea or abroad are not addressed so far as the immediate response is
concerned. But such disasters may have major ramifications within the UK
(for example, in respect of investigation and of the post-disaster treatment of
survivors, relatives and friends) where a substantial number of British
subjects are involved. Indeed this may apply to any other disaster abroad.
The guidance in the following chapters should therefore be kept in mind by
those likely to have to deal with such cases.


1.9 Disasters have a variety of effects on society and the environment. Thus
they demand a combined and co-ordinated response, linking the expertise
and resources of the emergency services and the local authorities, sup­
plemented as appropriate by other services and organisations. There is no
single agency within the U K which has all the skills and resources which may
be needed. Moreover, a Home Office review1 concluded that the disaster
response would not be helped by the creation of anything in the nature of a
national disaster squad: prime responsibility for handling disasters should
remain at the local level where the resources and expertise are found. This
guidance is aimed primarily at assisting that local response.




•Home Office Review o f Arrangements for Handling M ajor Civil Disasters in the UK . Hansard 15 June
1989 column 515-516.
                             2     The combined response




                             2.1 There can be no one ideal response to disaster; the response will vary
                             just as the nature and effects of the disaster will vary. Nevertheless, any
                             response must be a combined and co-ordinated operation and certain other
                             features will be common to the response to many disasters. Some key features
                             are addressed in this chapter:

                             a. The core of the initial response will normally be provided by the
                             emergency services supported by the appropriate local authority or author­
                             ities and voluntary organisations. Depending on the circumstances, crucial
                             parts may also be played by a range o f agencies and organisations including
                             any industrial or commercial organisation involved, other industrial or
                             commercial concerns, utilities, armed forces and central government (see
                             paragraphs 2.3-2.5).

                            b. The basic objectives of the combined and co-ordinated response will be
                            similar on each occasion (see paragraph 2.6).

                            c. The same basic management structure will often be applicable (see
                            paragraphs 2.7-2.31) and

                            d. There will be a need to ensure that essential records are kept for
                            debriefings, formal inquiries and publicising lessons learnt (see paragraphs
                            2.32 and 2.33).

                            2.2 To be effective, the combined response must be prepared in advance
                            through planning, training and exercising. Guidance on these activities is
                            contained in Chapter 7.


Agencies providing or       2.3 The initial response to a disaster is usually provided by the emergency
contributing to the local   services supported by the local authority but many agencies can become
response                    involved. The emergency services maintain a state of readiness so that they
                            can provide a rapid response and alert local authorities and other services as
                            soon as possible. All organisations who need to respond quickly to a disaster
                            should have arrangements which can be activated at short notice. These
                            arrangements should be clearly established and promulgated.

                            2.4 Single service guidance documents have already been produced by or
                            for a number of services. Some of these documents are listed in Annex B. This
                            chapter draws on them to offer guidance on how the procedures and
                            operations of each of the organisations involved can be combined and co­
                            ordinated to provide an efficient and effective response to disaster.

                            2.5 Each service or agency working at the scene of a disaster has its own role
                            and functions:

4
1




    a. The police co-ordinate the activities of all those responding at and around
    the scene, which m ust-unless a disaster has been caused by severe weather or
    other natural phenom ena-be treated as the scene of a crime and preserved
    accordingly. They oversee any criminal investigation. They also facilitate
    inquiries carried out by the responsible accident investigation body, such as
    the Health and Safety Executive, Railway Inspectorate or the Air or Marine
    Accident Investigation Branch. The police process casualty information and
    have responsibility for identifying and arranging for the removal of the dead.
    In this task they act on behalf of H M Coroner who has the legal responsibility
    for investigating the cause and circumstances of deaths arising from a
    disaster.

    b. The first concerns of the fire service are to rescue people trapped in
    wreckage or debris and to prevent further escalation of the disaster by
    tackling fires an d /o r dealing with released chemicals and other hazards.

    c. The ambulance service, in conjunction with the medical incident officer
    and medical teams, seeks to save life through effective emergency treatment
    at the scene and by transporting the injured in order of priority to receiving
    hospitals.

    d. The primary responsibility of H M Coastguard is to initiate and co­
    ordinate civil maritime search and rescue within the United Kingdom Search
    and Rescue Region. This includes mobilising, organising and despatching
    resources to assist people in distress at sea or in danger on the cliffs or
    shoreline.

    e. In the immediate aftermath of a disaster, the principal concerns of local
    authorities include support for the emergency services, support and care for
    the local and wider community and co-ordination of the response by
    organisations other than the emergency services. As time goes on, and the
    emphasis switches to recovery, the local authority will take a leading role in
    rehabilitating the community and restoring the environment.

    f. Volunteers can contribute to a wide range of activities, either as members
    of a voluntary organisation or as individuals. The valuable part which
    volunteers can play is addressed in Chapter 5.

    g. Industrial or commercial organisations, including the utilities, may play a
    direct part in the response to disaster if their personnel, operations or services
    have been involved. Other industries or commercial organisations may
    provide support, for example by providing equipment, services or specialist
    knowledge.

    h. Military assistance may be used in support o f the civil authorities. This has
    been an im portant part of many disaster responses in the past. Resources and
    skills which may be available and methods of requesting military assistance
    are set out in ‘Military Aid to the Civil Community: A Pamphlet for the
    Guidance of Civil Authorities and Organisations’. (Ministry of Defence 1989,
    third edition: AC 60421.)

    i. Central government may provide advice or support. The role of central
    government is discussed in Chapter 6.




                                                                                     5
Objectives for a combined    2.6 The roles and responsibilities just described must be seen in the context
response                     of the objectives of the disaster response. All services and agencies respond­
                             ing to a disaster will be w orking-notwithstanding their particular respon­
                             sibilities-to these common objectives. They are:

                             a. to save life;

                             b. to prevent escalation of the disaster;

                             c. to relieve suffering;

                             d. to safeguard the environment;

                             e. to protect property;

                             f. to facilitate criminal investigation and judicial, public, technical or other
                                inquiries; and

                             g. to restore normality as soon as possible.


The response to a disaster   2.7 Within the UK, there is ample experience of disasters occurring within
at a single site             the bounds of relatively small areas. Many of the principles which emerge can
                             also be applied to more widespread disasters, as discussed in paragraphs
                             2.25-2.31.

                             2.8 The scene immediately after disaster has struck is likely to be chaotic.
                             Survivors may be helping each other and those who happen to be nearby may
                             also be assisting. To bring some order to the chaos, it is im portant that the
                             emergency services establish control over the immediate area and also build
                             up arrangements for co-ordinating the contributions to the response. Experi­
                             ence has shown that an effective response depends on sound decisions being
                             made and appropriate actions set in train at the outset.

                             2.9 It is generally accepted that the first member of the emergency services
                             to arrive on the scene should not immediately become involved with rescue
                             but should make a rapid assessment of the disaster and report to that service’s
                             control. Such information as is immediately available should be provided
                             about the nature of the disaster and its location; the number of dead, injured
                             and uninjured; hazards actual and potential; access to the site and possible
                             rendezvous points; and which emergency services are present or required.
                             Additionally, each of the emergency services has its own requirements; for
                             example, in the case of the fire service, the number of pumps and appliances
                             likely to be needed.

                             2.10 The control which receives the initial message should immediately, and
                             in accordance with established plans, alert the other emergency service
                             control rooms, the local authority and (where appropriate) the commercial,
                             industrial or other organisation(s) involved. Where a commercial organis­
                             ation has raised the alarm and taken initial action, for example in the case of
                             an air accident at or near an airport, the same procedures should be followed.

                             2.11 At the scene, it is vital that the emergency services establish control and
                             co-ordination arrangements at the earliest stage. Each service needs to
                             establish its own control arrangements but continuing liaison between the
                             various controls throughout the response phase is essential. The underlying

6
principle is that the police assume the role of overall co-ordination, thus
enabling the other services to concentrate on their specific tasks.

2.12   A number of arrangements may have to be made, for example:

a. assigning the control of specific functions to one of the emergency services
or other agency, taking account of the circumstances of the disaster, the
professional expertise of the emergency services and other agencies and any
statutory obligations;

b. setting up an inner cordon to control access to the immediate scene both to
prevent interference with fire-fighting and rescue operations and to preserve
evidence at the disaster site;

c. the location of a collection point for survivors before they are taken to a
survivor reception centre; the location of a casualty clearing station to which
the injured can be taken; and an ambulance loading point for those who need
to be taken to hospital;

d. the location of a rendezvous point or points for the emergency service,
volunteers and other non-emergency services personnel;

e. the positioning of emergency service and other vehicles when they arrive at
the scene, traffic flow into and out of the site, the location of a marshalling
area; and

f. the location of a media liaison point (see paragraph 4.6b).

2.13 The possible need for evacuation may also have to be addressed at a
very early stage. Chapter 3 deals with this in more detail.

2.14 Where the response is likely to prove prolonged or complex, each
service may establish management arrangements at the site to oversee the
control and co-ordination of its response, often from specially designed
vehicles equipped with suitable communications. Figure 1 shows an example
of a typical organisation for dealing with disaster.

2.15 Again, liaison in the establishment of incident controls is vital. The
location of each emergency service’s incident control must depend on
circumstances but they would normally be in the vicinity of the disaster site
and experience of previous disasters has shown that it makes for better co­
ordination if the incident controls are located together.

2.16 Two other issues may need to be addressed as soon as the situation
permits. First, if practical, an outer cordon may have to be established
around the scene of the disaster to control access to the whole of the disaster
site. Secondly, emergency flying restrictions may be required. Downdraught
and noise from helicopters can disrupt rescue and fire-fighting operations,
cause hazards to fire-fighters and rescuers, damage property and destroy
evidence. The presence of unauthorised aircraft poses collision hazards to
police and rescue helicopters operating in the area. It may therefore be
necessary to regulate flights in the vicinity of the disaster and the National Air
Traffic Services (N A T S ) Instructions for Establishing Emergency Flying
Restrictions within the United Kingdom 1989 describe how these restrictions
are imposed.

                                                                                 7
                 Figure 1   Example o f a typical organisation for dealing with disaster



                             Rendezvous                                      Media
                                Point                                        Liaison
  Marshalling                                                                 Point
    Area                               Temporary
                                        Mortuary


                                     Body Holding
                                     Area (if used)                                         Survivor
                                                                                           Reception
                                                                                             Centre
 Receiving
 Hospitals

              Ambulance                                                               Local Authority
             Loading Point                                                            & other liaison
                                                                                         officers
          Casualty Clearing
              Station

             Ambulance                    Police Incident                  Fire Service
              Incident                     Control Post                      Incident
            Control Point                                                  Control Post


              Ambulance                   Police* Forward                  Fire Service
               Forward                     Control Point                     Forward
             Control Point                                                 Control Point




*May be withdrawn once Police Incident Control Post is established


2.17 It is good practice to plan for an officer who can represent the interests
of the relevant local authorities to be present at the scene. This person should
maintain contact with the incident controls as necessary. Arrangements
should be in place for calling to the scene liaison officers from other
organisations which may need to contribute to the disaster response, for
example, H M Coastguard, the National Rivers Authority, gas, electricity or
water companies or industrial or commercial concerns.

2.18 Liaison officers at the scene should be equipped with their own
communications so that they can remain in contact with their own organis­
ation to ensure that further support can be rapidly provided as necessary.
Where local authority services might be required at short notice, resources
should be mustered off-site so that they stand ready for immediate action if
called upon by the emergency services.

2.19 If the disaster occurs within the perimeter of an industrial or other
establishment it is advisable to appoint a site incident officer from the
affected organisation to ease access to facilities within the establishment and
                      act as a link to the establishment’s senior management and emergency
                      management structure.

Maritime disasters    2.20 If there are no standing arrangements already in place, the response to
                      a maritime disaster will be co-ordinated by the appropriate Maritime Rescue
                      Co-ordination Centre. However, reception of survivors ashore is the
                      responsibility of the land-based authorities. It is essential that land and
                      maritime authorities liaise at the earliest opportunity to tackle the particular
                      problems caused by maritime disasters, including wreckage and pollution.

Senior management     2.21 Disasters can place considerable demands on the resources of the
arrangements          organisations called upon to respond, with consequent disruption to day to
                      day activities. They may have long-term implications for people or the
                      environment. Such matters require attention by senior management and, in
                      local authorities, by elected members. The issues which arise will undoubt­
                      edly affect the responsibilities or activities of more than one organisation and
                      experience has shown that such issues can best be addressed by establishing a
                      co-ordinated approach at senior management level as well as at the scene.

                      2.22 The precise arrangements for putting the co-ordinated approach into
                      effect at a senior level must depend on the nature of the disaster. But with a
                      single site disaster, such as a train crash, one approach is to establish a single
                      senior co-ordinating group based on the planning group described in
                      paragraph 7.2. Whatever the arrangements, they need to be put in place
                      quickly.

                      2.23 The emergency services and the local authorities are likely to be
                      involved in the arrangements in the great majority of cases. It is also good
                      practice to ensure that the needs of the media are addressed at this senior
                      level, and where a co-ordinating group is established it should include a public
                      relations manager whose role is described in paragraph 4.14. Other organis­
                      ations which have a significant contribution to make to the disaster response
                      should also be included, for example specialist police forces, commercial
                      organisations, utilities, central government and the military authorities if
                      military assistance is required. It is im portant that members of the group have
                      the authority to make decisions and commit resources.

                      2.24 The purpose of the corporate approach at senior level is essentially to
                      take strategic decisions in relation to the disaster response. Typical issues
                      which may need to be addressed include the adequacy of resources for dealing
                      with the disaster and support for those working at the scene; care of those
                      dealing with or affected by the disaster including the relatives and friends of
                      victims; longer-term implications for the community or the environment;
                      relations with the media; visits by V IP s ; and contacts with central
                      government.



Handling widespread   2.25 Historically the U K has been more fortunate than some other coun­
disasters             tries, suffering less from widespread disasters caused, for example, by
                      storms, flooding or earthquakes. There is enough experience, however, to
                      highlight some characteristics of the response to widespread disaster.

                      2.26 In a generally densely populated country, where widespread disasters
                      are likely to affect large numbers of people, self-help is likely to be the first
                      response. The disaster will probably overwhelm local resources, disrupt

                                                                                                       9
                            telecommunications and block the usual access routes. Any organisel
                            response to a widespread disaster may well start at a local-shire district 01
                            metropolitan borough-level, or at parish level in rural areas. In all cases tin
                            response would probably be supported by the relevant voluntan
                            organisations.

                            2.27 It may be some hours before the scale and extent of a widespread
                            disaster can be established and recovery plans activated. The managemeni
                            arrangement will need to be adapted to the task in hand and should be flexible
                            enough to adapt to changing circumstances, but good practice is again to
                            adopt a corporate approach using the principles already described in para­
                            graphs 2.21-2.24. The precise arrangements, including which organisation
                            should take the lead, will be determined by the nature of the disaster and its
                            geographic extent. It may, for example, be necessary to establish co­
                            ordination arrangements at several levels, national, regional, county and
                            below.

                            2.28 Where the most severe, localised damage has occurred, for example, if
                            residential buildings in different areas have collapsed, a single site might be
                            managed along the lines suggested in paragraphs 2.7-2.19 and a number of
                            sites might be managed by a single co-ordinating group along the lines set out
                            in paragraphs 2.21-2.24.

                            2.29 Arrangements for responding to the complexities of a widespread
                            disaster are difficult to devise under pressure in the early stages. Planning,
                            involving the identification of possible disasters and the appropriate
                            response, needs to address the kind of management structures which would
                            be appropriate.

                            2.30 Resources will almost certainly be stretched by a widespread disaster.
                            The authorities may have to call on the resources which industry and the
                            armed forces can provide. Such resources can be mobilised more quickly if
                            their availability and means of obtaining them have also been identified in
                            advance. The role of central government in these and other circumstances is
                            addressed in Chapter 6.

                            2.31 As already noted, there is no one model for dealing with the complex
                            problems which widespread disasters pose and there has been little recent
                            experience of them in the U K on which to base guidance. But the basic
                            principles do not change and a short account of the initial response to the East
                            Coast floods of 1953, illustrating some aspects of dealing with widespread
                            disaster, is given at Annex C.


Debriefing, inquiries and   2.32 In order to facilitate debriefing and to provide evidence for inquiries
lessons emerging            (whether judicial, public, technical or of some other format), it is essential
                            that all events, decisions and actions taken are recorded. Each service,
                            organisation or agency should maintain its own records. Chief officers and
                            chief executives should consider instituting a formal debriefing system, on
                            both a single- and multi-agency basis. Experience has shown that video
                            recordings can be useful for these purposes.

                            2.33 Good record keeping serves a further purpose, whether or not there is a
                            formal inquiry. It allows the lessons learnt from the disaster to be identified
                            and made more widely available for the benefit of those who might be called
                            upon to respond to other disasters in the future.

10
                    3     The immediate care and treatment of
                          disaster victims




                    3.1 The care and treatment of those involved in a disaster lies at the heart of
                    the response. This applies to the care and treatment not only of victims but of
                    their relatives, friends and the rescue workers themselves who may be greatly
                    affected by their experience.

                    3.2 Survivors or casualties may be thrown some distance away from the
                    disaster site by the force of a crash or explosion. Other survivors may wander
                    away in confusion. It is therefore im portant to consider the need to search the
                    area surrounding a disaster. If this is necessary the task should be co­
                    ordinated by the police incident officer. Where the task may be labour
                    intensive and cover a wide area it may be appropriate to seek assistance from
                    volunteers or the military, or both.



Care of uninjured   3.3 Those who have survived a disaster uninjured (or with only minor
survivors           injuries) may nevertheless be suffering from shock, intense anxiety and grief.
                    They will, therefore, need to be treated with great sensitivity.

                    3.4 Survivors will often be able to provide crucial information about what
                    happened and may be im portant witnesses at any trial or inquiry. A balance
                    has to be struck between the requirement to gather evidence from survivors
                    and the reluctance of some to remain at the scene of their distress. For
                    example, prioritising information might help, so that only names and
                    addresses are taken from those anxious to leave, with further details being
                    obtained later. Information will usually be gathered at the survivor reception
                    centre, a secure area to which all survivors who are uninjured or have only
                    minor injuries should be taken.

                    3.5 Survivors’ initial needs are likely to include support in their distress,
                    food, drink, first aid to treat minor injuries and perhaps spare clothing and
                    changing, washing and toilet facilities. They may also need immediate social
                    and psychological support including help in finding temporary accommo­
                    dation, in contacting family and friends, with transport back home and
                    financial advice and assistance. It is possible that some apparently uninjured
                    survivors will later display adverse symptoms. For this reason, medical and
                    social services staff should be present at the survivor reception centre and, if
                    necessary, at rest centres.



The injured         3.6 Injured survivors should be taken to a casualty clearing station (CCS)
                    where medical and paramedical personnel will carry out triage and any
                    appropriate stabilisation measures and ensure that casualties are evacuated in
                    accordance with priority for hospital treatment. The C C S is usually sited in a
                    building, tent or temporary shelter close to the ambulance loading point.

                                                                                                  11
                   3.7 Responsibility for ensuring the proper establishment of medical com­
                   munications on site, the transport of medical teams, the distribution and
                   replenishment of medical and first aid supplies, the provision of all am bu­
                   lance resources necessary for the ongoing treatment of casualties and (in
                   liaison with the medical incident officer) conveyance of casualties to the
                   receiving hospital(s) all lie with the senior ambulance incident officer. Where
                   appropriate, this officer will also have responsibility for making arrange­
                   ments to take casualties to distant specialist hospitals by helicopter.



Fatalities         3.8 The authority of H M Coroner is required before those who have been
                   pronounced dead can be removed; arrangements are then the responsibility
                   of the police. Until a doctor has pronounced life extinct and labelled the body
                   accordingly, bodies (or parts of bodies) must not be moved except to preserve
                   them from destruction by fire or chemicals or to rescue or provide medical
                   treatment for trapped survivors. If it is necessary to move bodies, both they
                   and the positions from which they were moved should be marked appropri­
                   ately to provide those investigating the circumstances of the deaths with the
                   necessary information about the bodies’ positions at the time of death.

                   3.9 The usual practice is for bodies to be taken to a temporary mortuary
                   where autopsies can be carried out, although they might be taken first to a
                   temporary holding area. The ambulance service may assist in removing the
                   dead from the scene. The need to preserve evidence at the scene of a
                   disaster-including that identifying the deceased-m ust be borne in mind. For
                   this reason, valuables, which can help in identification, should not be
                   removed from bodies for safekeeping.



Casualty bureaux   3.10 In the event of a disaster the role of the police casualty bureau is to
                   provide a central contact point for all those seeking or providing information
                   about persons who might have been involved and to collect data and collate
                   all records. As part of this process the police may send documentation teams
                   to each receiving hospital, the mortuary and the survivor reception centre.
                   The functions of the bureau are:

                   a. handling enquiries from the general public about relatives and friends who
                   might have been involved;

                   b. collating details of survivors, their condition and their whereabouts;

                   c. informing enquirers of the condition and whereabouts of the survivors;

                   d. confirming areas of evacuation and the location of evacuees;

                   e. gathering data to assist in the identification of casualties; and

                   f. compiling a list of persons believed to have been involved who are now
                   missing.

                   3.11 Once the casualty bureau has been established, its telephone number(s)
                   will be publicised through the media, with the public being asked to provide
                   information on persons thought to have been involved in the disaster who
                   have not been accounted for. This information assists the police in their task
                   of identifying casualties and the deceased.

12
                         3.12 The task of identifying the dead is carried out by the police identifi­
                         cation commission, which is overseen by the police incident officer. The
                         functions of the identification commission include liaison with, and compil­
                         ing identification evidence for submission to, H M Coroner and controlling
                         the running of the mortuary. When a positive identification has been made, it
                         is the responsibility of the police to inform the next of kin and this would be
                         done in person.

                         3.13 In the event of an air crash, the Emergency Procedures Information
                         Centre (E P IC ) managed by British Airways at Heathrow may open. If so, its
                         telephone number will be broadcast. E P I C would act as a central airline
                         information co-ordinating point, collating information about reservations,
                         next of kin and other relevant data, and would work in support of the police
                         and H M Coroner.

                         3.14 If foreign nationals have b e e n -o r are thought to have been-involved
                         in the disaster, the Foreign and Commonwealth Office will refer any
                         enquiries from foreign consulates, embassies or high commissions to the
                         casualty bureau. The police will, in accordance with the Vienna Convention
                         on Consular Relations, inform the consular authorities of the death of any of
                         their nationals. The ambassador or high commissioner may wish to visit the
                         disaster scene. Arrangements for V IP visits are discussed in the next chapter.


Iriends and relatives    3.15 Recent experience of disasters has shown that, if they believe their
                         friends and relatives may have been involved, it is likely that many people will
                         travel to the scene. If necessary, a reception centre for friends and relatives
                         will be established by the police (usually in consultation with the local
                         authority and commercial, industrial or other organisations concerned) and
                         staffed by the police, local authority and suitably prepared voluntary
                         organisations, including representatives of churches and other faith groups.
                         The fullest possible information should be given to enquirers seeking news of
                         those involved in a disaster. Friends and relatives, who may be feeling intense
                         anxiety, shock or grief, need to be treated with sympathy and understanding.
                         Access to the reception centre should be controlled to prevent those inside
                         being disturbed by media representatives or onlookers.


Evacuation and shelter   3.16 In some circumstances it may be necessary to advise the public on
                         whether they should evacuate a given area or stay put and shelter indoors.
                         Such circumstances include risks to life or health from:

                         a. the release or threatened release of radioactive materials;

                         b. the release or threatened release or other hazardous substances;

                         c. the spread of fire;

                         d. explosion;

                         e. severe storms;

                         f. flooding;

                         g. earthquake;

                         h. environmental contamination.

                                                                                                       13
3.17 The possible need for evacuation in the event of the release or
threatened release of radioactive material is addressed in ‘Arrangements for
Responding to Nuclear Emergencies’ published by H M S O on behalf of the
Health and Safety Executive (ISBN O i l 885525 5) and so is not considered
further in this chapter.

3.18 In the event of the release or threatened release of non-radioactive
hazardous materials, additional information on the nature of the risk may be
obtained from the fire service, from chemical data systems and other
accredited sources. One crucial factor in determining the area to be evacuated
will be the forecast speed and direction of the wind which, together with other
‘Chemet’ advice, can be obtained from the appropriate Regional Weather
Centre.

3.19 Warnings of severe storms or other adverse weather are issued by the
Meteorological Office a n d /o r Regional Weather Centres in the form of
severe weather warnings. In addition, warnings of abnormally high tides that
could possibly lead to flooding are issued by the Meteorological Office to the
police and to the National Rivers Authority. The National Rivers Authority
in collaboration with the police decide whether local flood warnings should
be issued.

3.20 It is normally the police who decide whether or not to evacuate and
define the area to be evacuated. Their decision will take account of advice
from the fire service on risks associated with fire, contamination and other
hazards, from the ambulance and social services on problems associated with
moving people who are frail or disabled or at risk for any other reason and
from the local authority on possible places of shelter within the area. The
police, however, can only recommend evacuation and have no power to
require people to leave their homes. Past experience has shown that people
with domestic pets may be unwilling to leave their homes unless arrangements
include their pets.

3.21 In considering or executing evacuation, care must always be taken not
to put people at risk by bringing them outdoors when they might be more
effectively protected by sheltering indoors. This is particularly im portant in
the case of the release of hazardous substances.

3.22 The physical difficulties of large scale evacuation should not be
underestimated. If it is decided to evacuate a given area, evacuation assembly
points should be set up near the area and, if time permits, signposted. Those
in the affected area should be advised to go to their nearest evacuation
assembly point. This can be done by house-to-house calls or by using loud-
hailers, mobile public address systems, radio or TV announcements or any
combination of these methods. People taking prescribed and other medi­
cations should be reminded to carry these with them. At the evacuation
assembly point, local authority officers should co-ordinate the dispersal of
evacuees to reception and rest centres.

3.23 The emergency services and the local authority should, as far as is
practicable, take steps to ensure the security of property left empty after
evacuation. When arrangements are being made for evacuation and for
securing property, attention must be paid to the safety of emergency service
and local authority workers who might be exposed to risk whilst working
outdoors.
                           3.24 Local authority staff should maintain a comprehensive index of
                           evacuees and their whereabouts. This information will be needed by the
                           police for casualty bureau purposes and later if it is necessary to interview
                           witnesses. In order to account for all people evacuated from an affected area,
                           it is im portant that those leaving reception or rest centres and intending to
                           stay with friends or relatives are encouraged to register their eventual
                           destination at the centre.


Social and psychological   3.25 There may be an immediate need to provide social and psychological
support                    support to those who are suffering from the effects of the disaster, including
                           members of the emergency services and others called upon to respond. There
                           will undoubtedly be a need for social and psychological support services to be
                           set up in the immediate aftermath and possibly in the longer term. Much will
                           depend on the nature and scale of the disaster. Local authorities might find it
                           helpful to refer to the guidelines for an action plan for local authority social
                           service departments which are set out in P art 2 of ‘Disasters: Planning for a
                           Caring Response’ published by H M S O on behalf of the Disasters Working
                           Party (ISBN 0 11 321370 0).


Religious and cultural     3.26 Any disaster occurring in the U K may involve foreign nationals and
needs                      members of ethnic and religious minorities, whether they are resident here or
                           visiting from abroad. Emergency services, local authorities and others
                           responding to the disaster should therefore bear in mind that survivors may
                           not be fluent in English and may have particular requirements in terms of diet
                           and medical treatment. Similarly, there may be particular requirements
                           concerning the handling of the dead and arrangements for burial. Language
                           problems and special dietary needs may also have to be taken into account at
                           reception centres for survivors, friends and relatives and for evacuees at
                           reception and rest centres.




                                                                                                         15
                      4     Relations with the media




Introduction          4.1 Recent years have seen a rapid advance in telecommunication and
                      information technology capabilities. Television channels devoted entirely to
                      news and extended news programmes on other channels are with us to stay.
                      The impact made at the scene of a disaster by those engaged in gathering
                      material for the media can be massive and it is vital to prepare for the influx of
                      media representatives-local, national and international. In little more than
                      12 hours after Pan American Airways flight 103 crashed there were at least
                      500 media people at Lockerbie, including 17 TV crews and a vast array of
                      equipment-vehicles, cameras, communications and so on.

                      4.2 The purpose of this chapter is therefore to highlight some of the
                      problems which can arise in handling the media’s voracious appetite for
                      information in the event of a disaster and to suggest arrangements for
                      overcoming those problems. It is also worth noting too that certain incidents,
                      such as the Hungerford shootings in 1987, may not necessarily be regarded in
                      this context as disasters but will nevertheless generate a high level of ongoing
                      media interest, posing similar difficulties.



Assisting the media   4.3 In the first instance, the load in coping with media pressures usually falls
                      to the police in their role as co-ordinators of the response at and around the
                      scene of disaster and with their responsibility for criminal investigation. But
                      there are other aspects of a disaster-tem porary accommodation for victims
                      and perhaps their relatives and friends, safety of damaged buildings, road
                      access and so o n-w hich would call for a quick reaction by local authorities
                      and so they too must be involved in the media response from the outset.
                      Depending on the nature of a disaster, attention may also focus on industrial
                      operators and commercial or other organisations; for example, Occidental
                      Petroleum (Caledonia) Ltd was in the front line of media attention after the
                      Piper Alpha disaster.

                      4.4 The guidance in this chapter is offered primarily to the emergency
                      services, in particular to chief police officers in their role as co-ordinators at
                      the scene, and to local authority chief executives. However, it is hoped that
                      the guidance will also be of use to other organisations which may become
                      involved in the disaster response.



Initial actions       4.5 Media personnel will arrive very quickly. They will often have learnt of
                      the disaster at the same time as the emergency services and, when they arrive,
                      will expect to have access to the facilities they require. They will also expect an
                      instant response to their requests for information and briefing. Demands
                      from local and regional media will quickly be augmented by demands from
                      national and - depending on the nature of the disaster-international media.

16
If these demands are not anticipated, media representatives are likely to add
to the confusion.

4.6 Experience has shown the value of immediately dealing with the
following points:

a. control of access to the disaster site. This is a police responsibility, put in
place whenever practical, intended to allow rescue services to carry out their
work unhindered and to preserve evidence at what may be the scene of a
crime. It must be anticipated that the broadcasting media in particular will
bring large vehicles to the scene. In addition, helicopters are often deployed
and control of the airspace may be an early consideration (see paragraph
2.16).

b. establishing a media liaison point. This is a designated point at the disaster
scene, preferably outside the outer cordon, for the reception of media
personnel, accreditation (see paragraph 4.11) and briefing on arrangements
for reporting, filming and photography. It may be little more than a
rendezvous point with further facilities provided at a media centre as
described at paragraphs 4.15-4.17.

c. nominating a media spokesperson. The swift attendance at the scene of a
spokesperson (likely to be from the police) should ease the pressure from the
media. Failure to arrange this will prompt media representatives to approach
anybody available, which could lend credibility to inaccurate sources. While
the spokesperson takes the load off those coping with the disaster, brief
interviews with the senior police, fire, ambulance or other officers at the site
will add authority to the information being given.

d. assistance from the Central Office of Information (C O I). Consideration
should be given to seeking reinforcement from one or more experienced CO I
press officers. (See also paragraph 4.15).

4.7 The services involved are likely to receive various approaches from the
media. Lack of co-ordination and information-sharing will result in differ­
ent, and even contradictory, messages emerging. It is therefore important
that the media response is co-ordinated through the nominated spokesperson
from the earliest possible stage.

4.8 In addition, at this most difficult initial stage o f the disaster response, it
may be helpful for the following points to be borne in mind:

a. the media may need to be reminded that in the period immediately
following a disaster, no-one can know precisely what has happened. Initial
statements should focus on what is happening, what the limitations of
knowledge are at the time and what is being done to arrive at a fuller
appreciation of the situation. If such statements are backed by a commitment
to provide accurate information as soon as it is available, media personnel are
more likely to attend briefings and thus accept a measure of control,
particularly if the briefings are scheduled at regular intervals.

b . meanwhile, any f actual statements - particularly from emergency services ’
eye witnesses-will be welcomed. However, such statements should not
include speculation on the cause of the disaster, nor premature or uncorrobo­
rated estimates of the numbers of casualties.

                                                                                 17
c. care should be taken that information about casualties is not released until
details have been confirmed and the next of kin informed. It may be necessary
to explain that it can take a long time to identify victims.

d. limitations on the release of information should be frankly explained,
particularly the need not to prejudice what may become a criminal
prosecution.


4.9 There will be great pressure on reporters to seek interviews with
survivors and relatives but many will feel too shocked and distressed to give
interviews. The first consideration should always be the well-being of the
individual. It does, however, relieve pressure on all concerned if a willing and
able survivor, relative or friend agrees to speak at a press conference to
characterize the disaster for all. The Broadcasting Standards Council’s
monograph ‘Survivors and the M edia’ by Ann Shearer (John Libbey and
Company Ltd, 1991) is recommended to all those who might be involved in
the media response to disaster. In addition, the Press Complaints Com­
mission is administering a self-regulatory code of conduct drawn up by the
newspaper industry. The code deals with many types of journalistic abuse
which may cause particular stress at the time of disaster, including harass­
ment, invasion of privacy, intrusion into grief and shock, unwanted involve­
ment of relatives and friends and interviewing or photographing children.

4.10 It is important to develop the best possible relationship with media
personnel from the start. Pressure of competition between media teams and
individuals will make them sensitive to any restrictions which appear to them
to be unfair. If they feel they have been treated unreasonably, some
representatives of the media will try to make their own arrangements which
may obstruct rescue work and compromise evidence for any necessary
investigation. Well managed media relations should alleviate these problems
and should also allow positive advantage to be taken of the help which the
media can provide, for example by broadcasting messages asking people to
avoid the disaster area, publicising details of any evacuation planned and
broadcasting casualty bureau telephone numbers.

4.11 When circumstances permit, police incident officers may wish to
consider whether there should be on-site facilities for issuing passes to media
personnel or otherwise accrediting media representatives. Any system
adopted should allow rapid identification of those allowed access to certain
areas.

4.12 The management of large numbers of media representatives can be
assisted through pooling arrangements, particularly if safety or security
considerations restrict access to a disaster site. A pool might, for example,
comprise one television crew, one newspaper reporter, a stills photographer
and a radio reporter. Although a limit can be set on the number of media
personnel to be allowed access to the site, such restrictions are seldom
welcome and it is best to allow the media to decide who their representatives
should be. Additional pooling facilities may be required for overseas media
representatives. It is helpful to identify suitable sites for coverage of the
disaster by media personnel who are not, at the time, included in pooling
arrangements.
A media response   4.13 In the event of a disaster, the initial actions just described may be no
organisation       more than holding arrangements. As events develop, the need for a compre­
                   hensive media response organisation headed by someone who equates to a
                   public relations manager may become apparent. It is recognised that not all
                   organisations or agencies have such a person, but experience has shown it to
                   be extremely helpful. The public relations manager for the disaster can be
                   from the police or appropriate local authority, depending on circumstances
                   and locally agreed plans.


                   4.14 It is essential for the public relations manager to be fully involved in
                   the senior management arrangements for the disaster (see paragraphs
                   2.21-2.24), for example by attending senior level meetings, so that he or she is
                   fully in the picture and can plan the media response. It is recommended that
                   the public relations manager oversees all aspects of the media response,
                   including:

                   a. activities at the media liaison point;

                   b. arrangements for the media to visit the site, possibly including transport
                   where the disaster is in a remote area;

                   c. accreditation of media personnel;

                   d. management of the media centre when one is established (see paragraphs
                   4.15-4.17); and

                   e. monitoring of likely media activities related to the disaster but at locations
                   remote from the disaster scene (see paragraph 4.21).



Media centre       4.15 A disaster may also justify the establishment of a media centre to
                   provide working accommodation for media personnel, a news conference
                   and briefing area, facilities for monitoring television, radio and newspapers
                   and a press office with communications equipment. The media centre may be
                   set up by the police or by the local authority; responsibility for establishing
                   the centre should be agreed in advance as part of the planning process. It
                   should wherever possible be close to the scene of the disaster and staffed by
                   representatives of the major organisations with responsibility for handling
                   the disaster; these should be people familiar with media relations-press
                   officers wherever possible. Consideration should be given to inclusion of
                   government press officers (see paragraphs 4.22-4.24) and seeking assistance
                   from the regional Central Office of Information which has expertise in setting
                   up media centres and also has resources to help run them.

                   4.16 Chief police officers and local authority chief executives may have
                   identified buildings in their emergency plans which could be used as a media
                   centre, although experience has shown that facilities can be set up rapidly in a
                   suitable building not previously designated as such. An initial, temporary
                   option is to use a large and suitably equipped vehicle, for example an adapted
                   police command vehicle. This can provide limited facilities but will not
                   accommodate the numbers of media personnel likely to be covering a
                   disaster.

                   4.17   A media centre offers a number of advantages to all concerned:

                                                                                                  19
                           a. it provides the media representatives with a known source for the most
                           accurate and up-to-date information which the authorities can make
                           available;

                           b. once links with the rescuers and others central to the disaster response are
                           in place and spokespersons have been nominated, smooth flows of infor­
                           mation can soon be established, compared and co-ordinated;

                           c. there is then a better chance of identifying and dealing with any potential
                           differences in approach and agreed approaches can be quickly relayed to the
                           emergency services and other control centres;

                           d. oversight from the media centre should help to control media presence at
                           the site, whether this is for photo-opportunities or briefing;

                           e. monitoring arrangements may be set up at the media centre to enable all
                           concerned to be aware of what the media are broadcasting or publishing;

                           f. in the event of a widespread or multi-site disaster, a single media centre
                           could serve as a focus for several media liaison points at differing locations;
                           and

                           g. the same media centre may suffice for both initial and recovery phases of
                           the disaster response.


Transfer of the media      4.18 It has already been noted that the police are likely to take the lead
operation to local or      initially in dealing with the media in their role as co-ordinators of the disaster
health authority control   response. As the emphasis switches to the recovery, the overall lead may pass
                           to the relevant local authority, who might then take the lead in coping with
                           continued media interest and providing any necessary public advice and
                           information. Close and continuing co-operation between the police and local
                           authority media teams from the outset will achieve a smooth handover.

                           4.19 Experience has shown that local authority arrangements must be
                           agreed between the local authorities involved to avoid the risk of contradic­
                           tory messages emerging. The police should also be consulted.

                           4.20 In some circumstances—when, for example, after the initial phase of
                           the disaster response the focus of media interest moves to N H S hospitals-it
                           may be appropriate for the local health authority to take control of the media
                           operation. Again, a handover will be facilitated if the police (particularly the
                           casualty bureau) and N H S media teams have been working in close
                           cooperation from the outset.

Remote handling            4.21 In some disasters, attention has focused on communities and individ­
                           uals living many miles from the scene who nevertheless become a centre of
                           media attention. An example is the home town of those killed whilst
                           travelling. This, too, may require co-ordinated media-handling arrangements
                           to ensure an efficient and coherent response from the authorities, which may
                           need to include measures to protect people from excessive media attention.


Liaison with central       4.22 A disaster brings with it calls for ministerial statements to Parliament
government                 and the media. It is the responsiblity of the lead department to co-ordinate a
                           consistent and properly considered response by government (see Chapter 6).

20
                    On media matters, therefore, chief officers of police and local authority chief
                    executives should look to the lead department’s press officers as their main
                    central government contact at the scene.

                    4.23 In practice, government press officers may need to be quickly at the
                    scene in order to:

                    a. explain the involvement of government or the relevant regulatory body in
                    the disaster response;

                    b. be involved with any arrangements for V IP visits (see paragraphs
                    4.25-4.30); and

                    c. provide feedback to central government.

                    4.24 When central government accident investigators are called in, the
                    relevant government department’s press office’s involvement may continue
                    far beyond the initial stages of the disaster.


Visits by V I P s   4.25 A government minister may make an early visit to the scene of a
                    disaster and the injured, not only to mark public concern but also to be able to
                    report to Parliament on the disaster response. If a government minister is to
                    visit the scene, he may be accompanied by the local Member(s) of Parliament;
                    this would be arranged by the minister’s private office. It is possible that the
                    scale of a disaster may in addition prompt visits by a member of the Royal
                    Family a n d /o r the Prime Minister. Local V IP visitors may include the Lord
                    Lieutenant, the High Sheriff, religious leaders, local M P s , mayors, chairper­
                    sons and other elected representatives. If foreign nationals have been
                    involved in the disaster, their country’s ambassador, high commissioner or
                    other dignitaries may also want to visit the scene.

                    4.26 Visits to the scene need to take account of the local situation and the
                    immediate effects of the disaster on the local community. It may be
                    inappropriate for V IP visitors to go to the disaster site itself whilst rescue
                    operations are still going on, particularly if casualties are still trapped. V IP
                    visits should not interrupt rescue and life-saving work and the police, as co­
                    ordinators of the disaster response, should be consulted about the timing of
                    visits.

                    4.27 V IP visits will inevitably cause some disruption, and visitors will want
                    this to be kept to a minimum. However, there are also dividends to be gained
                    from such visits as they may boost the morale of all those involved, including
                    the injured and the emergency services, and give an opportunity to place on
                    record public gratitude for what has been done.

                    4.28 Local services are, of course, experienced at handling V IP visits in
                    normal circumstances and many of the usual considerations will apply to
                    visits to a disaster site. It may be necessary to restrict media coverage of such
                    visits, in which case pooling arrangements may be made (see paragraph 4.12).

                    4.29 Visiting ministers and other V I P s will probably require briefing
                    before visiting the site (which they will doubtless want to see) and will
                    certainly require briefing before any meetings with the media. In the case of
                    government ministers, arrangements should be agreed with the government
                    press officer.

                                                                                                   21
                 4.30 In addition, V I P s are likely to want to meet those survivors who are
                 well enough to see them. It will be for the hospital authorities to decide, on the
                 basis o f medical advice and respect for the wishes of individual patients,
                 whether it is appropriate for V I P s an d /o r the media to visit the casualties. If
                 the media cannot have access to wards, the V IP can still be interviewed
                 afterwards at the hospital entrance about how patients and medical staff are
                 coping.


Sustainability   4.31 Disasters place enormous demands on all involved in the response.
                 Media interest, particularly if it is international, can create pressure through­
                 out a 24 hour period. Chief officers of police and local authority chief
                 executives will wish to take sustainability into account during the response to
                 a disaster and seek mutual aid accordingly. The pooling of resources in a joint
                 media centre should be helpful in this respect.
                         5     The Voluntary Sector




Introduction             5.1 Disasters can overstretch the resources of the emergency and local
                         authority services and the value of additional support from the voluntary
                         sector has been demonstrated on many occasions. These occasions have also
                         shown that voluntary activity is more effective if planned for in advance. This
                         chapter describes the principles to be followed.

                         5.2 The voluntary sector in the UK is large and often well organised. Those
                         preparing disaster responses should take into account four kinds of voluntary
                         effort:

                         a. established organisations such as the British Red Cross Society, St John
                         Ambulance, Salvation Army and the W om en’s Royal Voluntary Service;

                         b. specialist skills offered by, for example: groups of doctors (such as the
                         British Association of Immediate Care), voluntary radio operators (such as
                         the Radio Amateurs Network, RAYNET) and search and rescue organis­
                         ations including the Royal National Lifeboat Institution and cave and
                         mountain rescue teams;

                         c. individuals, not necessarily in recognised voluntary organisations, whose
                         help is offered or requested on the day; and

                         d. organisations which specialise in providing emotional support such as
                         Cruse and the Samaritans.

                         5.3 Examples of the wide range o f activities which can be undertaken in
                         support of the statutory services are set out in Annex D to this guidance.


Planning the voluntary   5.4 General issues of planning and preparing the disaster response are
sector’s contribution    discussed in Chapter 7. But in planning how the voluntary sector might
                         contribute, the following points are particularly relevant:

                         a. the skills and expertise available from the voluntary sector will vary from
                         place to place. In establishing what is available locally the statutory author­
                         ities should not overlook voluntary wartime skills in addition to those
                         normally associated with the disaster response. A record of available local
                         voluntary resources should be made and kept up to date;

                         b. the voluntary sector must be able to demonstrate its capabilities to the
                         statutory services. It is o f vital importance that, if disaster strikes, the
                         voluntary sector should be able to contribute what has been mutually agreed
                         and written into local plans. Voluntary agencies must therefore be able to
                         demonstrate that their* support is reliable, consistent and sustainable to the
                         required standard;

                                                                                                     23
                          c. the statutory and voluntary sectors should be clear about their respective
                          roles in a disaster. Voluntary organisations must appreciate that the statutory
                          services bear the responsibility for the overall disaster response but, equally,
                          the statutory services must develop an understanding of the voluntary
                          organisations’ own structures and constraints; and

                          d. there should be agreement as to how, on the day, voluntary effort will be
                          called out, what it will do, how it will be organised and how volunteers will be
                          identified.

                          5.5 Planning will be more effective if it is carried out with the voluntary
                          sector within a well-defined and mutually agreed structure kept up-to-date by
                          regular formal and informal contact at a local level. One possible model, in
                          which voluntary organisations are grouped on the basis of functions and
                          linked to the statutory authority responsible for those functions, is described
                          at Annex E to this guidance. But there are many other possibilities; the
                          essentials are that there should be a structure which suits local circumstances,
                          which is understood by all concerned and that points of contact are clearly
                          identified.

                          5.6 When disaster strikes, people who are not part of any voluntary
                          organisation will also wish to help and will offer their services. The local
                          authority, in conjunction with the police, should establish a volunteer
                          receiving point away from the scene to deal with such approaches. If the
                          volunteer receiving point wishes to accept the offer of help, the volunteer can
                          then be asked to report to the rendezvous point or to any other designated
                          position. It should be noted that individual volunteers may require a
                          considerable amount of management and leadership if they are to be
                          effective: experienced members of established voluntary organisations may
                          be able to help with this.


Training and exercising    5.7 General issues of training and exercising are also discussed in Chapter 7.
                           When considering the particular contribution which the voluntary sector can
                           make to the disaster response, it should be noted that established voluntary
                           organisations and volunteer groups will usually have their own arrangements
                           for training and exercising. Wherever possible these should be demonstrated
                           to the local statutory services. Additionally, the statutory services and
                           voluntary agencies should aim for joint training and exercising so that
                           problems can be identified, plans and procedures updated and working
                           relationships fostered.


Action following a         5.8 Plans should include provision for voluntary organisations to be alerted
disaster                   or called out by, or at the same time as, the local statutory services or
                           authorities they support; voluntary organisations should not normally attend
                           the scene unbidden. Where volunteers are asked to go to the scene they should
                           normally be asked to assemble at the rendezvous point described in paragraph
                           2.12d before being assigned to tasks. Where there are a number o f voluntary
                           organisations providing support within the same or related functional areas,
                           a ‘cascade’ call-out system may prove useful.

                           5.9 A prolonged disaster may require voluntary organisations to operate a
                           shift system. In planning for this eventuality the use of mutual aid from
                           neighbours or from further afield should be considered.


24
                          6     Central government and lead departments




The lead department      6.1 It is fundamental to the arrangements for dealing with disasters in the
concept                  UK that the first response is at the local level. Where local services find that
                         the scale of a disaster puts it beyond the capacity of their own resources, their
                         recourse is usually to mutual aid arrangements with services in adjacent areas.

                         6.2 More often than not, however, central government will also have a role
                         to play. This may be an active role—where, for example, local services seek
                         specialist advice or assistance from a central government department or the
                         main source of information about the disaster lies at central government level
                         (eg in the case of overseas nuclear accidents or satellite accidents). On other
                         occasions the central government role may be limited to dealing with
                         parliamentary, media and public enquiries. In either case, a specific govern­
                         ment department will be nominated to take the lead.

                         6.3 The nomination of a lead department does not affect the underlying
                         principle that wherever possible day-to-day procedures and links should be
                         used for dealing with disasters. Local organisations should therefore aim to
                         use normal links with government departments rather than channelling all
                         dealings through the lead department. If, exceptionally, special arrangements
                         need to replace these normal day-to-day links (for example to co-ordinate
                         public inform ation as described in paragraph 4.22) this would be made clear
                         to all concerned.



Nomination of the lead   6.4 Responsibility for ensuring that a lead department is nominated in good
department               time to respond to an emergency rests with the Cabinet Office, as part of its
                         normal role in co-ordinating activities which involve a number o f government
                         departments. The work is carried out by the secretariat o f the Civil
                         Contingencies Unit (C C U ), a group o f ministers and officials which meets
                         when necessary under the chairmanship of the Home Secretary to consider
                         the handling of emergencies. The C C U secretariat will remain in close
                         contact with the nominated lead department throughout the emergency and
                         arrange meetings o f ministers and officials whenever that is required.

                         6.5 The arrangements for deciding which is the appropriate lead depart­
                         ment are regularly reviewed by the C C U secretariat; the aim is to ensure that
                         there are clear criteria for nomination so that departments know in advance
                         the circumstances in which they will be expected to take the lead and can plan
                         ahead and be ready to move into action immediately. The choice o f lead
                         departments is based on:

                         a. The nature o f the disaster. There is usually a clear link between the nature
                         o f a disaster and the normal business o f the department.

                                                                                                       25
                       b. Access to information. Ready access to a flow of up-to-date and accurate
                       inform ation is essential for a lead department. The chances of achieving this
                       are greater if officials o f the department, agencies and organisations con­
                       cerned know each other and have worked together. The public information
                       division of the lead department has a special responsibility for ensuring that
                       information originating from central government is consistent with that being
                       given locally.

                       c. The availability o f facilities. Where a disaster is large-scale or protracted,
                       it may be necessary to use a dedicated emergency room and communications.
                       Those departments most likely to be called upon to act as lead departments
                       have such facilities.

                       Departments currently nominated to act as lead department for the different
                       categories of emergencies specified are set out in Annex F. If the circum­
                       stances do not exactly fit these categories, the C C U secretariat decides which
                       department will take the lead.

                       6.6 Circumstances may change as a disaster develops or as the recovery
                       phase is entered and it may become appropriate for the department originally
                       nominated to lead to hand over the task to another department. This
                       happened in the aftermath of the storms in October 1987 when the Home
                       Office took the lead initially but handed over to the Department of the
                       Environment at a later stage. The C C U secretariat would ensure that any
                       such change was agreed interdepartmentally before being implemented and
                       notified to everyone concerned.



The role of the lead   6.7 A central government lead department is expected to be prepared to
department             undertake some or all of the following tasks:

                       a. Co-ordination of the activities of central government departments in the
                       response to a disaster, providing a framework within which individual
                       departments can discharge their specific responsibilities. (An im portant part
                       of this work will be to ensure that the necessary links are established with the
                       local response.)

                       b. Co-ordination of the collection of inform ation on the disaster and its
                       effects for the purpose of

                       i.     briefing ministers,

                       ii.    informing Parliament, and

                       iii.   providing information to the public and the media at national level.

                       6.8 The way in which a government department performs its lead depart­
                       ment role will depend on the circumstances. In straightforward cases no
                       special arrangements may be necessary: lead department officials will work
                       from their normal offices or, out of normal working hours, from home.

                       6.9 Where circumstances demand, the lead department would activate
                       special procedures, such as opening an emergency room, and may need to
                       arrange regular meetings o f the relevant departments (either directly or
                       through the C C U secretariat).

26
                     6.10 However these activities are organised, it is incumbent upon the lead
                     department to ensure that there is no unjustified duplication in requests for
                     information from those busily engaged at the scene. Departments are
                     expected first to check whether information they require for their own
                     purposes is already available within the lead department. In a great many
                     cases the lead department will be able to obtain inform ation collected by
                     other departments for their own use, avoiding the need to trouble people at
                     the scene.



The territorial      6.11 If a disaster affected only Scotland, Wales or Northern Ireland the
departments          respective territorial department would, where appropriate, take the lead.
                     Even if not nominated to lead, the territorial departments would have an
                     im portant role in those parts of the UK for which they are responsible, acting
                     in close co-operation with the nominated lead department. (One example is
                     the crash of Pan American Airways flight 103 in December 1988. The
                     Department o f Transport was in the lead, but the Scottish Office played a
                     major role in co-ordinating central government action in Scotland in support
                     o f the combined response based at Lockerbie).



Regional Emergency   6.12 Contingency arrangements are in place under which ministers may
Committees (RECs)    activate what are known as Regional Emergency Committees (RECs) should
                     it be felt that the additional stresses caused by a disaster require support to be
                     given to the normal administrative machinery at the local level. R E C s are not
                     an additional level of government; they are an integral part of central
                     government standing ready to operate when required. They have no executive
                     authority other than that delegated to departmental representatives by their
                     parent departments.

                     6.13 In England, R E C s (which are based for convenience on existing Home
                     Defence regions) are chaired by the Regional Directors of the Department of
                     the Environment. In Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland a senior official
                     o f the respective territorial department chairs an equivalent committee. Other
                     departments are represented by officials from the appropriate regional office
                     or from headquarters. The emergency services are normally represented, as
                     are other relevant organisations such as British Telecom. Representatives of
                     other organisations may be co-opted to the R E C as required.

                     6.14   The principal functions o f the R E C s are:

                     a. to provide an overview of the situation in their region and see that
                     comprehensive and co-ordinated inform ation passes between central govern­
                     ment and local authorities and services; and

                     b. to assist in determining priorities for scarce resources and, as far as
                     possible, resolve local problems.


Inspectorates        6.15 There exists a range of inspectorates, each with its own specific duties
                     and responsibilities during normal times—for example, Her Majesty’s
                     Inspectorates o f Constabulary and o f Fire Services and the Inspectorates of
                     the Health and Safety Executive. Many of these would have particular roles
                     to play in the event o f a disaster, often at the scene.

                                                                                                    27
6.16 Liaison with the inspectorates at central government level will be
channelled through the parent department. Officials of that department, and
often a representative of the appropriate inspectorate, are likely to be present
in the lead departm ent’s emergency room if one is set up.
                         7       The combined approach to planning,
                                 training and exercising




Introduction            7.1 The foundations o f the combined response are the preparedness and
                        expertise o f each of the local emergency services and of the appropriate
                        departments within the local authorities. The effectiveness o f the response
                        turns on these being brought together and linked with the roles which
                        industrial or commercial concerns (including utilities), voluntary organis­
                        ations and others may be called upon to play. At the core of local
                        preparedness, however, is the framework which the emergency services and
                        local authorities have evolved for planning, training for and exercising the
                        local response. This chapter offers guidance on these subjects.

The combined approach   7.2 Effective preparation of the disaster response requires co-operation
to preparedness         between chief officers and their staffs and such co-operation is itself likely to
                        be more effective if it is properly structured. Various structures are possible,
                        but one which has been adopted in a number of areas is the establishment of a
                        police-led senior co-ordinating group in which chief officers of the emergency
                        services, the local representative of N H S management and local authority
                        chief executives meet at intervals to consider such matters as plans, pro­
                        cedures, joint training and exercises. Much of the rest o f this chapter is based
                        on this arrangement but, whatever the arrangement, it is the principles which
                        are important. Structures need to be evolved to meet local circumstances; for
                        example in metropolitan areas (and in the case of some counties) arrange­
                        ments will need to recognise that local authority boundaries do not match
                        those of the emergency services.

                        7.3 The senior level co-ordination arrangements may need to be supported
                        by working level groups to carry out detailed work. These lower level
                        arrangements may involve personnel whose job is primarily concerned with
                        disaster preparedness, for example emergency planning officers and their
                        emergency services equivalents.

Planning                7.4 The senior co-ordinating group or its equivalent will want to ensure that
                        local plans are properly co-ordinated and cover all reasonably foreseeable
                        local hazards. It is good practice to involve as necessary in this work others
                        whose responsibilities are particularly relevant to local disaster preparedness,
                        including statutory bodies such as the National Rivers Authority and
                        industrial and commercial organisations. The Health and Safety Executive
                        may also have a role to play in providing hazard and risk information and
                        acting as a source of local expert knowledge. Such an input may be of value in
                        ensuring that preparedness covers industrial risks other than those for which
                        there is a statutory planning requirement.2

                        2Official guidance on statutory planning for chemical and nuclear emergencies is issued by the H S E as
                        follows:
                        - ‘The Control o f Industrial M ajor Accident H azard Regulations 1984-F u rth e r Guidance on Emergency
                          P lans’. H S (G )25. Published by H M S O , IS B N 0 11 883831 8.
                        - ‘Arrangem ents for Response to Nuclear Emergencies’ (referred to in paragraph 3.17).


                                                                                                                             29
                             7.5 In addition to identifying and planning for specific hazards, the senior
                             co-ordinating group or its equivalent may want to give thought to particular
                             issues which have caused difficulties in the past. For example:

                             a. organisations involved in the disaster response will need to have co­
                             ordinated arrangements for dealing with the media. Plans in this area might
                             be prepared and updated in conjunction with the regional C O I office and
                             local media organisations. (See Chapter 4).

                             b. communications have sometimes proved to be inadequate in previous
                             disaster responses. Attention should be given to the need for and means of
                             inter-operability.

                             c. there is a need to ensure that different statutory services and authorities are
                             not planning to use the same voluntary resources. To ensure that the
                             voluntary sector’s contribution is used to best effect, it may therefore be
                             useful to jointly review plans for the use of the voluntary sector, (see Chapter
                             5).

                             7.6 disasters may well affect more than one local authority or police force
                             area and the senior co-ordinating group or its equivalent might also include
                             cross-boundary planning in its oversight o f the combined response. Prior
                             arrangements for mutual aid and some compatibility with the plans and
                             procedures of neighbours are certain to be valuable in the event of a disaster
                             which spans boundaries.

                             7.7 another area for consideration might be the need to sustain the response
                             at an unusually intensive level, possibly over an extended period. Arrange­
                             m ents-probably involving mutual aid -sh o u ld be devised to enable the
                             response to be maintained, whilst at the same time recognising the need to
                             relieve those engaged in it. In addition, account should be taken of the extent
                             to which ‘business as usual’ must carry on in parallel with the disaster
                             response.



Joint training and           7.8 Planning should be underpinned by training and exercising and the
exercising                   senior co-ordinating group or its equivalent should oversee the multi­
                             disciplinary aspects of these activities which, although inter-related, are
                             considered in turn in the following paragraphs.


Subjects which may be        7.9 For the police and fire services, and some of the N H S emergency
included in joint training   services, responding to disaster can be considered as part o f their day-to-day
                             work. For others-local authorities and industrial or commercial concerns
                             (including the utilities) - the response may be an extension of normal roles.
                             For some groups, such as volunteers and military personnel, the response
                             may be unrelated to normal day-to-day activities. There are, however, key
                             training topics which are likely to be relevant to all who may be involved in the
                             combined response. These are:

                             a. awareness. This is a universal requirement for all who might be involved,
                             however remotely, in the disaster response. Attention should be drawn to the
                             impact of disaster, to the numbers o f victims which may result (including
                             anxious or bereaved relatives and friends and indeed some o f those respond­
                             ing) and to the potential scale and complexity o f the response. For the

30
                    emergency services, awareness training will cover in more detail aspects of
                    joint operations at and around the disaster scene. For local authorities, the
                    emphasis will be on how departments can combine to support the emergency
                    services in the initial stages of the response to care for those affected, to
                    maintain essential services and to prepare to recover from the disaster. Such
                    training might also include elected members who will need to be aware of the
                    role they may have to play in a disaster. For other services a general
                    familiarity with the combined response will suffice.

                    b. liaison and co-ordination. This should highlight the importance o f liaison
                    and co-ordination in the planning and delivery o f the combined response.
                    Good practice, conveyed through joint training, is crucial in improving the
                    efficiency and effectiveness of the combined response.

                    c. communications. The importance o f joint planning in communications
                    has already been mentioned in the section on planning. Subjects for training
                    might include:

                    -fam iliarisation with other organisations’ forms, terminology and call-out
                      arrangements where these are different; and

                    -inform ation technology and information access.

                    d. media relations. In addition to the training required for preparation of the
                    media response, practical training in interview and news conference tech­
                    niques is likely to be of considerable benefit.

                    e. recognition o f stress. Social and psychological aftercare following a
                    disaster has already been mentioned in paragraph 3.25 and should be
                    considered as part o f the disaster response and recovery process. General
                    training should be given in the recognition of stress both in the victims of
                    disaster and in those responding and in appropriate referral of those
                    suffering.

                    f. the international dimension. Included in this are:

                    -problem s arising from disasters in which casualties include a large number
                     of foreign nationals (see paragraph 3.14);

                    -E u ro p ean Community and other directives on issues such as the marking
                     and transportation o f hazardous material.

                    The need for training in this area is likely to increase as the effects of the
                    introduction o f the Single European Market are felt.

Types of training   7.10 Much training for the inter-disciplinary aspects o f the combined
                    response is likely to be carried out in-house but other sources are available.
                    Some are listed below.


                    a. H ome Office Colleges. The Emergency Planning College at Easingwold
                    provides a range of interdisciplinary training in the form of seminars,
                    workshops and courses. The Police Staff College, Bramshill provides a
                    disaster management course primarily for senior police officers. The Fire
                    Service College at M oreton-in-Marsh (which became an agency on 1 April
                    1992) currently provides some joint training courses.

                                                                                                 31
                   b. C O I Courses. As part of its regular training programme for Government
                   Information Service officers, the C O I offers one-day courses in specialist
                   media liaison techniques for public relations officers and other officials who
                   may be involved with the media at the scene of a disaster. The courses are
                   designed primarily for government officers but are also available and suitable
                   for officials from local authorities, emergency services and other organis­
                   ations likely to benefit from such training. Participants are charged on a cost
                   recovery basis.

                   c. N H S/M edical. At least one county-based ambulance service and the
                   British Association for Immediate Care run courses on the command and
                   control and the medical aspects o f the disaster response.

                   d. Academic institutions and other organisations tend to run specialised
                   courses. Information on some o f these may be obtained from the Emergency
                   Planning College, Easingwold.

Joint exercising   7.11 Joint exercising is a vital part of local disaster preparedness. Joint
                   exercises test plans and procedures, provide practical training in the com­
                   bined response to disaster and enable working relationships to be formed
                   between those likely to be involved in that response. It is good practice for a
                   combined response exercise schedule to be agreed locally.

                   7.12   Exercises may take a number of forms, including:

                   a. Table-top exercises. These can be particularly cost-effective. They can be
                   designed to exercise the command and control of the overall combined
                   response or any part of it. It is im portant in table-top exercises to be realistic
                   and not to ignore the physical difficulties which, for example, deployments
                   and communications present. These exercises are particularly useful because
                   o f the ability to ‘stop-the-clock’ and discuss points and decisions made as they
                   arise.

                   b. Computer-based simulation. As various forms o f inform ation technology
                   become established in operations rooms and emergency centres, this type of
                   exercise may be particularly helpful in enabling managers and operators to
                   practice in their operational environment. In addition, disaster response
                   computer simulation is a technique which shows considerable promise.


                   c. Live exercises. These can be resource-intensive and should therefore be
                   planned and prepared carefully. It is difficult to replicate the conditions of a
                   real disaster fully; however live exercises are the best way (short of responding
                   to a real disaster) in which to test procedures and liaison processes and to
                   incorporate lessons learnt into revised plans.

                   7.13 There are a number of m andatory exercises run throughout the year by
                   various agencies and full or partial participation in one or more of these may
                   be helpful in rehearsing some or all of the local response. Examples include
                   emergency exercises undertaken by:

                   -th o se operating nuclear installations and C I M A H sites

                   - H M Coastguard

32
- p o r t and harbour authorities

-a irp o rt authorities

-B ritish Rail.

It may also be possible to take similar advantage o f non-mandatory exercises.




                                                                            33
                          Annex A

                          Definitions o f major incident




Police/Fire Services      1. The following definition is set out in the Association o f Chief Police
                          Officers Emergency Procedures M anual and in the Fire Service M ajor
                          Incident Emergency Procedures Manual.

                            ‘A m ajor incident is any emergency that requires the implementation of
                            special arrangements by one or more of the emergency services for:

                            a. The initial treatment, rescue and transport o f a large number of
                            casualties;

                            b. The involvement either directly or indirectly o f large numbers of
                            people;

                            c. The handling of a large number o f enquiries likely to be generated both
                            from the public and the news media usually to the police;

                            d. The need for the large scale combined resources o f the 3 emergency
                            services;

                            e. The mobilisation and organisation o f the emergency services and
                            supporting organisations, eg local authority, to cater for the threat of
                            death, serious injury or homelessness to a large number o f people.’


National Health Service   2. The following is extracted from Health Circular (90)25 ‘Emergency
(including Ambulance      Planning in the NHS: Health Services Arrangements for Dealing with M ajor
Service)                  Incidents’-D epartm ent o f Health 1990:

                            ‘There is no standard definition of a “ m ajor incident” which would satisfy
                            the health service and other agencies likely to be involved, as each tends to
                            determine such incidents in the light of its own responsibilities. For the
                            purpose of this guidance however, a m ajor incident arises when any
                            occurrence presents a serious threat to the health of the community,
                            disruption to the service, or causes or is likely to cause such numbers of
                            casualties as to require special arrangements by the health service.’




34
Annex B

Guidance addressed to emergency services,
local authorities and other organisations




Service/          Title                   Issued by                Date
Department
Police            Emergency               Association o f Chief    1991
                  Procedures Manual       Police Officers

Fire              M ajor Incident         Chief and Assistant      1991
                  Emergency               Chief Fire Officers
                  Procedures Manual       Association

NHS               Emergency Planning      Department of            1989
                  in the N H S : Health   Health
                  Services
                  Arrangements for
                  Dealing with
                  Accidents Involving
                  Radioactivity
                  Emergency Planning      Department of            1990
                  in the N H S : Health   Health
                  Services
                  Arrangements for
                  Dealing with M ajor
                  Incidents

Ambulance         Ambulance Service       Regional Ambulance       1990
                  Operational             Officers Group
                  Arrangements: Civil
                  Emergencies

HM                H M Coastguard:         Department of            1988
Coastguard        Operations, Planning    Transport
                  and Procedures
                  (CG3)

Local             Emergency Planning      Home Office              Under
Authorities       Guidance to Local                                revision
                  Authorities

Local             Local Authorities       County Emergency         1990
Authorities       Civil Emergencies       Planning Officers’
Emergency         Planning Manual         Society
Planning
Officers

National Rivers   Emergency               Ministry of              1991
Authority         Procedures for          Agriculture, Fisheries
                  Flooding Incidents      and Food

                                                                          35
     Service/       Title                Issued by                Date
     Department
     Pathologists   Deaths in M ajor     Royal College of         1990
                    Disasters: The       Pathology
                    Pathologist’s Role

     Industrial     Guide to Emergency   Society o f Industrial   1989
     Emergency      Planning             Emergency Services
     Services                            Officers
     Officers




36
                         Annex C

                         The East Coast Floods-January 1953




                         1. During Saturday 31 January 1953 freak winds drove a storm tide surge
                         down the N orth Sea. By the evening this had reached the east coast of
                         England where sea defences were over-topped and damaged by huge waves.
                         Breaches occurred in 1200 places. With sea levels rising some 9 to 10 feet
                         above normal high water marks, disastrous flooding occurred. Three hun­
                         dred and seven people died and an estimated 40,000 were rescued, evacuated
                         or fled from their homes. Twenty-four thousand houses, 200 industrial
                         establishments and large tracts of land were flooded and there were severe
                         losses of livestock and poultry. Worst affected were the five counties with
                         their coastlines extending south from Lincolnshire to Kent.



                         2. The timing o f the disaster-after dark on a cold, stormy night in the
                         middle o f a winter w eekend-could hardly have been worse. Most urgent
                         among the tasks tackled were the rescue o f those stranded on roof tops and
                         elsewhere, shelter and sustenance for those made homeless, repair of the sea
                         defences to prevent further flooding at the next and subsequent high tides and
                         the maintenance o f supplies and services to communities badly affected but
                         able to stay put.


Rescue                   3. In the early evening the storm tide surge struck Lincolnshire and
                         Norfolk. It moved south to strike Essex and Kent around midnight, drowning
                         many asleep-particularly those in lightweight holiday chalets in coastal
                         resorts. There are many accounts of self-rescue or rescue by neighbours. In
                         addition, at the first signs of flooding, all available police were called out to
                         assist. Joining rescue operations were the fire brigades, military personnel
                         and the R N L I . Boats, amphibious vehicles, high chassis lorries and fire
                         service equipment were variously pressed into action. Incident posts were set
                         up at various points and were manned by the police and by liaison officers of
                         other services. The incident posts were in communication with information
                         rooms in police headquarters where rescue parties were co-ordinated.
                         Requests for medical aid, ambulances and rescue craft and reports on the
                         movement o f displaced people were sifted and actioned. Police in the affected
                         counties were able to sustain operations by means of reinforcements from the
                         British Transport Police and from forces as far afield as Northumberland.



Shelter and sustenance   4. Particularly near areas where large-scale evacuations took p la ce-fo r
                         example Thurrock and Canvey Island-local authorities took the lead in
                         setting up rest centres and in arranging temporary accommodation. They
                         were strongly supported by voluntary organisations: the British Red Cross
                         Society equipped, and helped in, many rest centres and the W om en’s
                         Voluntary Service (W VS) staffed reception and rest centres and provided

                                                                                                       .37
                          large numbers of meals in them and elsewhere. The W VS distributed clothing
                          to evacuees, many of whom were drenched in the freezing weather and unable
                          to bring their belongings with them. The police were also involved in finding
                          temporary places of refuge which were in some cases equipped by local
                          welfare officers. Schools, chapels, drill halls, army camps, holiday centres
                          and hotels were all used as reception and rest centres. Temporary accommo­
                          dation was also provided through billeting arranged by the W V S and through
                          offers of hospitality from friends and relatives as well as strangers. In
                          association with rest centres, medical aid posts and emergency surgeries were
                          arranged; food hygiene and sanitary services were maintained and temporary
                          mortuaries were set up as necessary. With the help o f voluntary organisations
                          and local authorities outside the flood areas, the affected local authorities
                          were able, with volunteer support, to carry out these emergency tasks
                          promptly, thereby alleviating distress and preventing disease.



Repair of sea defences    5. As mentioned earlier, the repair of sea defences was given high priority
and river banks           with a view to preventing yet further floods. The five river boards responsible
                          had full-time civil engineering staff with specialised knowledge o f sea defence
                          work. Supported by their associated works organisations and with help and
                          equipment provided by unaffected river boards outside the area, by fire
                          brigades, by the military, and by many other organisations including firms in
                          the Federation of Civil Engineering Contractors, the river boards set about
                          their urgent tasks. These included first aid repairs to the damaged sea
                          defences and clearing sea water as quickly as possible from certain flooded
                          areas such as power stations and factories. At one time there were as many as
                          25,000 people working on these tasks in freezing winds under conditions of
                          great difficulty and hardship. Hundreds of pumps, excavators, bulldozers
                          and lorries were used and millions o f sandbags were filled and placed in the
                          worst breaches against future high tides and flooding.



Maintenance of services   6. Very soon local authorities and water undertakings had to address the
and supplies              restoration of the water supply and sewerage systems. In many areas the
                          water supply was contaminated by salt water, which had itself been polluted
                          by contact with refuse tips and sewage works. At Sheerness the whole water
                          supply was contaminated but it was decided to bring drinking water in barges
                          from Chatham rather than evacuate yet more inhabitants. In other areas the
                          water supply was maintained by emergency connection to other sources. At
                          sewage works the flood water stopped electric pumping motors and interfered
                          with the filters and sludge beds. The speed with which both water supply and
                          sewerage systems were restored reflected great credit on the local and water
                          authorities, who once again received invaluable help from authorities outside
                          the flooded area, from fire brigades and Royal Navy divers.



                           7. The 25,000 inhabitants of the Isle of Sheppey were completely isolated
                           for a number o f days. The Royal Navy kept them supplied and arranged a
                           passenger service to and from the mainland.



National arrangements      8. Reference has already been made to reinforcements from outside the
                           flood area. In many cases these were co-ordinated from national
                           headquarters.

 38
                    9. General Flood Headquarters was in the Ministry of Agriculture and
                    Fisheries Land Drainage Division HQ in London. Linked to the river boards
                    by teleprinter, the Ministry co-ordinated the repair of sea defences and
                    directed supplies of materials to where they were most urgently needed.

                    10. To co-ordinate the work of local fire brigades and organise reinforce­
                    ments and reliefs, a temporary central fire control was set up in the Home
                    Office with regional controls at Cambridge and Nottingham. Additionally,
                    the Home Office Emergency Committee, comprising members of govern­
                    ment departments concerned with disaster relief and representatives of
                    certain voluntary organisations, met daily.

                    11. National or regional H Q s o f the British Red Cross Society, St John
                    Ambulance Brigade, the W om en’s Voluntary Service, the Salvation Army,
                    the Church Army, the Royal Society for the Prevention o f Cruelty to
                    A n im als-to name just some o f those contributing-backed and co-ordinated
                    the work of their local branches.

                    12. Military assistance was provided on a large scale. In addition to the
                    Royal Navy contributions already mentioned, some 11,000 army personnel
                    were directly employed at the peak period on a range o f tasks. These included
                    the use of 1500 trucks, 50 amphibious vehicles, 65 heavy earth-moving
                    machines, 300 boats of various sorts and material for 12,000 yards of
                    improvised roads. Principal amongst the Royal Air Force contributions was
                    the provision of air photography enabling a complete assessment of the flood
                    damage and the identification o f at least one breach in the coast defences
                    unknown to authorities on the ground. The United States Air Force brought
                    portable radios, amphibious vehicles and search lights to flooded areas and
                    contributed notably to rescue operations.




< o iH 'lu s io n   13. This brief account stops short of the massive recovery task which faced
                    local authorities and others who rehabilitated communities and the environ­
                    ment and disbursed the Lord Mayor of London’s national flood and tempest
                    distress fund. Attention is drawn, however, to certain features of the initial
                    response.

                    14. Rescue. The police provided co-ordination through incident posts and
                    force information rooms for many of the hundreds o f rescue operations
                    which took place. Fire brigades, military personnel and the R N L I were
                    amongst those who made key contributions, providing liaison officers to the
                    police incident posts as necessary.

                    15. Shelter and Sustenance. Local authorities and voluntary organisations
                    in the affected counties arranged shelter, sustenance, clothing and temporary
                    accommodation for thousands of evacuees. Local authorities provided co­
                    ordination for the alleviation of distress and prevention of disease in the
                    difficult circumstances of flood damage and large scale evacuation.

                    16. Reinforcement. The police, fire brigades, local authorities, voluntary
                    organisations, river boards and water undertakings providing the disaster
                    response were reinforced by colleagues from outside the affected area. In
                    some cases this was arranged centrally in London. Through reinforcement it
                    was possible to complete certain urgent tasks very quickly and also to sustain
                    the response under adverse conditions.

                                                                                                39
17. Military Assistance. The armed forces made a significant contribution
to the response. They provided expertise, equipment and labour to help with
rescue, evacuation, temporary accommodation, repair of sea defences,
supply to isolated communities and the rescue and feeding o f livestock.

18. National Support. The alacrity with which reinforcement and military
assistance were provided was representative of the spontaneous upsurge of
sympathy and generosity from the British public. This was one consoling
feature in a natural disaster without parallel in its effect on the country since
Tudor times.
 Annex D


 Examples o f activities which can be
 undertaken by the voluntary sector in support
 o f the statutory services



 1.    W ELFARE

       Activities:          Staffing reception and rest centres
                            Feeding
                            Provision of clothing
                            Advice on entitlements, grants, loans, claims
                            Resettlement of victims, evacuees etc
                            Support and comforting

      In support o f the    Local Authority Social Services Department
      following statu­      Local Authority Education Department
       tory services:       Local A uthority Housing Department and also
      (hereafter abbrevi­     police
      ated to ‘In
      support o f’)


2.    SOCIAL A N D PSYCHO LOG ICAL AFTE RC AR E

      Activities:           Befriending
                             Counselling
                            Providing longer-term support

      In support of:        Local Authority Social Services Department
                            Local Authority Educational Psychologists
                            National Health Service


3.    M ED ICAL SU PPO RT

      Activities:           Back-up Ambulance Service
                            Medical aid posts
                            Medical aid support in rest centres, emergency
                              feeding centres etc
                            Auxiliary roles in hospitals
                            Welfare

      In support o f:       N H S Ambulance Service
                            N H S Hospitals
                            N H S Health Emergency Planning Officers


4.    SE A R C H A N D RESCUE

      Activities:           M ountain, cave, cliff, moor, inland waterways,
                              coastal rescue

                                                                            41
                                    Supervision o f other                 searchers        (eg     youth
                                      organisations)
                                    Loan of equipment

      In support of:                Emergency Services1

5.    TRAN SPO RT

      Activities:                   Transport and escort of homeless, outpatients,
                                      next-of-kin, etc to and from airports, railway
                                      stations, hospitals, mortuaries, rest centres, hos­
                                      tels, etc

      In support of:                Local Authority Social Services Department
                                    Emergency Services
                                    NHS

6.    COMMUNICA TIONS

      Activities:                   Providing radio communications
                                    Vehicles
                                    Messengers
                                    Interpreters and translation

      In support of:                Emergency Services
                                    Local Authorities
                                    Utilities

7.    DOCU M ENT A TION

      Activities:                   Tracing-nationally and internationally
                                    Assistance at Casualty Bureau in some local areas
                                    Logging/diary procedures
                                    Computer support (where available)

      In support of:                Emergency Services (especially police)
                                    Local Authority Social Services
                                    NHS

8.    TRAIN IN G A N D EXER CISING

     Activities:                    Analysis of training needs and capabilities
                                    Devising instructional programmes
                                    Joint planning and conduct of multi-agency exer­
                                      cises including call out arrangements and debrief
                                    Formulation and dissemination of good practice

      In support of:                Emergency Services
                                    Local Authority departments
                                    National utilities
                                    NHS




^ o t e - t h e emergency services m ay call on military assistance-particularly military search and rescue
resources. Voluntary organisations m ay therefore sometimes find themselves working with military units.
Annex E

Co-ordination o f statutory and voluntary
services




1. Co-operation between the statutory services and local voluntary organis­
ations can be facilitated by setting up a Voluntary Emergency Steering
Committee which could be co-ordinated by the county or local emergency
planning officer.

2. One method o f involving voluntary organisations in the planning for
disasters is to group them where appropriate on the basis o f their functions
and linked with the statutory authority responsible for those functions. This
functional grouping can clarify the contributions which individual voluntary
organisations can make and enable statutory authorities and voluntary
organisations to m axim ise-and rationalise-the voluntary contribution. In
some cases there will be one statutory authority and one voluntary organis­
ation linked to a specific function, for example H M Coastguard and the
Royal National Lifeboat Institution. In other cases, where a voluntary
organisation performs a range o f functions, it would need to be associated
with more than one statutory authority and represented on all the relevant
functional groups. Annex D has shown functions which have been performed
in the wake o f previous disasters, together with examples o f the activities
involved and the statutory authorities normally responsible.




                                                                          43
Annex F

Lead government departments




Against the types of disaster or emergency listed in the left hand column
below are shown the lead departments as nominated in June 1992.


 1.   FLOODING (coastal or          Ministry o f Agriculture Fisheries & Food
      riverine)                     or equivalent department o f Scottish and
                                    Welsh Offices or the appropriate Govern­
                                    ment Department in Northern Ireland.

 2.   MARINE AND                    Department o f Transport (Marine Pollu­
      COASTAL POLLUTION             tion Control Unit).
      (oil, chemical or gas)

 3.   RADIATION HAZARDS             Department o f Trade and Industry for
      (arising within the United    civil nuclear installations in England and
      Kingdom)                      Wales; Scottish Office for civil nuclear
                                    installations in Scotland; Ministry o f
                                    Defence for defence nuclear installations
                                    and nuclear material in transit; or
                                    Department o f Transport for civil
                                    nuclear material in transit.

 4.   RADIATION HAZARDS             Department o f the Environment.
      (arising outside the United
      Kingdom)

 5.   NUCLEAR POW ERED              Home Office.
      SATELLITE
      ACCIDENTS

 6.   BLOW OUT ON                   Department o f Employment (Health and
      OFF-SHORE                     Safety Executive).
      INSTALLATIONS

 7.   SEARCH & RESCUE (in           Department o f Transport (H M Coast­
      U K Search and Rescue         guard) for civil shipping; Ministry o f
      Region)                       Defence for military shipping and air­
                                    craft, for civil aircraft at sea and for civil
                                    aircraft on land when the location is not
                                    known (when the location is known the
                                    emergency is treated as a'transport acci­
                                    d en t-see 11 below).

 8.   SEVERE STORMS                 Home Office (or the appropriate terri­
                                    torial department) initially, with Depart-
                                     ment o f the Environment assuming the
                                     lead role at a later stage if appropriate.

 9.   O THER GENERAL                 Department o f Transport (or the appro­
      W EATHER                       priate territorial department).
      EMERGENCIES

10.   DISASTERS OVERSEAS             Foreign & Commonwealth Office (Over­
      (in which UK assistance is     seas Development Administration).
      sought)

11.   TRANSPORT                     Department o f Transport.
      ACCIDENTS (including
      those overseas involving
      U K registered ships and
      aircraft)

12.   ACCIDENTS IN SPORTS           Home Office (or appropriate territorial
      GROUNDS                       department) in close consultation with
                                    the Department o f National Heritage
                                    (Minister o f Sport).

13.   M AJOR EXPLOSIONS
      ARISING FROM
      LANDFILL GAS

14.   DAM FAILURES

15.   M AJOR STRUCTURAL             Department o f the Environment or
      FAILURES IN                   appropriate department o f the Scottish or
      BUILDINGS (other than         Welsh Offices or the appropriate Govern­
      those caused by external      ment Department in Northern Ireland.
      impact, gas explosion, fire
      or industrial process)

(Note. If a government building
is involved the relevant
department would lead)

16.   EARTHQUAKES

17.   SERIOUS INDUSTRIAL            Depending on the nature of the accident,
      ACCIDENTS                     lead responsibility would by taken by:

                                    a. Home Office if the activities o f the
                                    emergency services are the main focus of
                                    attention.

                                    b. Department o f the Environment if
                                    rivers, inland waterways (outside Port
                                    Authority jurisdiction) or water services
                                    in England are the main cause of concern,
                                    or gas clouds of toxic or unknown com­
                                    position are threatening the environment
                                    or public safety.

                                                                           45
c. Ministry o f Agriculture, Fisheries and
Food if the main focus o f attention is
safety of food supplies.

d. Department o f Employment if the
main focus of attention is the Secretary of
State’s responsibilities for the operations
o f the Health and Safety Executive.

e. Scottish or Welsh Offices or the
appropriate Government Department in
Northern Ireland for incidents in those
parts of the U K for which their Secre­
taries of State are responsible.

Other possible, but less likely, candidates
for the lead role could be:

 f. Department o f Trade and Industry if
 the main focus is on inform ation about
 the industry involved an d /o r the econ­
 omic implications of the disaster.

 g. Department o f Health if the main
 focus is on advice to the public on haz­
 ards and their effects or on activities of
 the N H S (ambulance and hospital ser­
 vices).
 Glossary1




Ambulance Control Point                An emergency control vehicle providing an on
                                       site communication facility which may be at a
                                       distance from the incident scene and provides a
                                       focal point for N HS/m edical resources attend­
                                       ing the incident. Ideally the point should be in
                                       close proximity to the police and fire service
                                       control point vehicles (subject to radio inter­
                                       ference constraints).

Ambulance Incident                     The officer of the ambulance service with over­
Officer                                all responsibility for the work o f that service at
                                       the scene o f a m ajor incident.

Ambulance Loading                      An area, preferably hard standing, in close
Point                                  proximity to the Casualty Clearing Station,
                                       where ambulances can be manoeuvred and
                                       patients loaded.

Ambulance Parking                      Place designated at the scene o f a m ajor incident
Point                                  where arriving ambulances can park, thus
                                       avoiding congestion at the entrance to the site or
                                       at the Ambulance Loading Point. These areas
                                       are also suitable for staff briefings, procure­
                                       ment o f refreshments and restocking o f equip­
                                       ment.

Cascade System                         System whereby one organisation calls out
                                       others who in turn initiate further call outs as
                                       necessary.

Casualty Bureau                        Central contact and information point for all
                                       records and data relating to casualties.

Casualty Clearing Station              An area set up at a m ajor incident by the
                                       ambulance service in liaison with the medical
                                       incident officer, to assess, treat and triage casu­
                                       alties and direct their evacuation.

Chemet                                A scheme administered by the Meteorological
                                      Office, providing inform ation on weather con­
                                      ditions as they affect an incident involving
                                      hazardous chemicals.

■Definitions, where appropriate, are extracted from the relevant emergency procedures/planning manuals
(see Annex B). The harm onisation o f these definitions is being undertaken by a Hom e Office-led
interdisciplinary working group.


                                                                                                   47
Control Room                 Centre for the control o f the movements and
                             activities o f each emergency service’s officers
                             and equipment. Liaises with the other services’
                             control rooms.

Cordon—Inner                 Surrounds the immediate scene and provides
                             security for it.

Cordon—Outer                 Seals off the controlled area to which
                             unauthorised persons are not allowed access.

Emergency Centre             Local authority operations centre from which
                             the management and co-ordination o f local
                             authority incident support is carried out.

Evacuation Assembly          Building or area to which evacuees are directed
Point                        for transportation to a rest centre.

Forward Control Point        The control point nearest the scene of the
                             incident responsible for immediate deployment
                             and security.

Friends and Relatives        Secure area set aside for use and interview of
Reception Centre             friends and relatives arriving at the scene.

Incident Control Post        The point from which the management of the
(Police and fire services)   incident is controlled and co-ordinated. The
                             central point o f contact for all specialist and
                             emergency services engaged on the site.

Major Incident               Pre-planned and exercised procedures which are
Procedures                   activated once a m ajor incident has been
                             declared.

Maritime Rescue              H M Coastguard regional centre responsible for
Co-ordination Centre         promoting the efficient organisation of search
                             and rescue services and for co-ordinating the
                             conduct o f search and rescue operations.

Marshalling Area             Area to which resources and manpower not
                             immediately required at the scene or being held
                             for further use can be directed to standby.

Medical Incident Officer     Medical officer with overall responsibility (in
                             close liaison with the Ambulance Incident Offi­
                             cer) for the management of medical resources at
                             the scene o f a m ajor incident. H e/she should
                             not be a member o f a mobile medical team.

Mutual Aid                   Cross-boundary arrangements under which
Arrangements                 emergency services, local authorities and other
                             organisations request extra staff a n d /o r equip­
                             ment for use in a disaster.

Receiving Hospital(s)        The hospital(s) selected by the ambulance ser­
                             vice (from those listed by the Regional Health
                          Authority) to receive casualties in the event of
                          any particular m ajor incident.

Rendezvous Point          Point to which all resources arriving at the outer
                          cordon are directed for logging, briefing, equip­
                          ment issue and deployment.

Rest Centre               Building designated by local authority for the
                          temporary accommodation o f evacuees.

Statutory Services        Those services whose responsibilities are laid
                          down in law: for example, police, fire and
                          ambulance services, H M Coastguard and local
                          authorities.

Survivor Reception        Secure area to which uninjured survivors can be
Centre                    taken for shelter, first aid, interview and docu­
                          mentation.

Territorial Departments   Scottish Office, Northern Ireland Office and
                          Welsh Office.

Triage                    Process of prioritising the evacuation of the
                          injured by the medical or ambulance staff at the
                          Casualty Clearing Station.

Utilities                 Companies providing essential services eg gas,
                          water, electricity, telephones.
Bibliography




Military Aid to the Civil Community: A Pamphlet for the Guidance of Civil
Authorities and Organisations Ministry o f Defence 1989, third edition:
AC 60421.

Instructions for Establishing Emergency Flying Restrictions Within the UK
National Air Traffic Services 1989.

Arrangements for Responding to Nuclear Emergencies Health and Safety
Executive: H M S O (ISBN 0 11 885525 5).

Disasters: Planning for a Caring Response Disasters Working Party: H M S O
(ISBN 0 11 321370 0).

Survivors and the Media Ann Shearer (Broadcasting Standards Council
Monograph): John Libbey and Company Ltd.

Control of Industrial Major Accident Hazard Regulations 1984 Further
Guidance on Emergency Plans HS(G)25 Health and Safety Executive:
H M S O (ISBN 0 11 883831 8).




                        P rinted in the U nited Kingdom fo r HM SO
                             Dd295783 8/9 2 C25 G531 10170
HM SO publications are available from:
HMSO Publications Centre
(Mail, fax and telephone orders only)
P O Box 276, London, SW8 5DT
Telephone orders 071-873 9090
General enquiries 071-873 0011
(queuing system in operation for both numbers)
Fax orders 071-873 8200
HMSO Bookshops
49 High Holbom , London, W C1V 6HB
(counter service only)
071-873 0011 Fax 071-873 8200
258 Broad Street, Birmingham, B1 2H E
021-643 3740 Fax 021-643 6510
Southey House, 33 Wine Street, Bristol, BS1 2BQ
0272 264306 Fax 0272 294515
9-21 Princess Street, Manchester, M 60 8AS
061-834 7201 Fax 061-833 0634
16 A rth u r Street, Belfast, B T 14 G D
0232 238451 Fax 0232 235401
71 Lothian Road, Edinburgh, E H 3 9A Z
031-228 4181 Fax 031-229 2734
HMSO’s Accredited Agents
(see Yellow Pages)
and through good booksellers


                                                  9
£7.00 net
