Ms S Jago
F8 Division
Home Office

                                                  j^July   1990




REVISION OF GREEN GUIDE


As requested in your letter of 11 July to Tony Baden I attach a
re-draft on para 264 of the Guide. Tony has seen and agreed it.




T A ELLINGFORD
264.   The  'European Convention on Spectator Violence and
Misbehaviour at Sporting Events and in particular at Football
matches' (HMSO, Cmmd 9649), which came into force on 1 November
1985, sets out in general terms measures to be taken to prevent
and control violence by spectators.    The Standing Committee on
the Convention in April 1989 adopted a comprehensive report on
measures to counter hooliganism and guidelines on ticket sales.
In addition all clubs in the Football Leagues are required by
League regulations to have in place local plans for crowd control
and safety, drawn up in consultation with local authorities,
local police and other relevant organisations.    For matches in
European competitions UEFA has issued binding instructions in
their document 'Order and Security in the Stadia' (Third Edition,
1985). The following .......
          HOME OFFICE
          Queen Anne's Gate London SW1H 9AT                          24-7.AH
                                        Direct line 01-273
                                       Switchboard 01-273 3000


                                                              Your reference
    A Baden Esq
    Sport & Recreation Division                               Our reference
    Department of the Environment
    P3/165                                                    Date
    2, Marsham Street
    London SW1                                                       11 July 1990




    REVISION OF GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS ('GREEN GUIDE')

    As recommended by Lord Justice Taylor in his final report on
    the inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster, the safety
    division of the Home Office is in the process of revising the
    'Green Guide', the guide to safety at sports grounds. A small
    working group has already met to consider an initial redraft.
    The greater part of the guide concerns safety measures and is
    highly technical in nature. However, there are a number of
    paragraphs directly concerned with the role of the police
    which F8 have been asked to consider in conjunction with Tony
    Speed of ACPO. Included in this area is chapter 17, now
    entitled 'Crowd Behaviour', which concerns itself more with
    crowd control than crowd safety. I understand that the
    opening paragraphs of this chapter were provided by your
    department when the Guide was originally published. I attach
    the latest draft and would be grateful for any comments you
    may have, in particular on the continuing accuracy and
    relevance of paragraph 264 (unchanged from the original).

    As ever the exercise is urgent in nature in order to be able
    to publish a revised Guide as early as possible into the new
    football season. I would be grateful to receive your comments
    as soon as possible but any event before the next meeting of
    the working group on 18 July.




                                                             MS S JAGO




S 363
