FOOTBALL LEAGUE SEMINAR ON TAYLOR IMPLEMENTATION,   2 AUGUST 19 9 0

QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS



A. RELOCATION

1. Where does Government want all-seater stadia to go?

The planning system is locally-based. The Government does not
stipulate where developments should go. It is for lpas to prepare
plans and consider applications.

2. Are stadia acceptable in the countryside, outside the Green
Belt?

The Government's policy is to conserve the countryside (and
sustain the rural economy). This does not mean that all green
field sites need remain undeveloped. There may be scope for stadia
e.g. on the urban fringe. Much would depend how a proposal fitted
in with Ipas' policies in structure and (emerging) local plans.

B. REDEVELOPMENT

3. What are the rules for redeveloping existing grounds, for
all-seater stadia or for alternative uses?

Structure and (emerging) local plan policies would provide
planning framework, as well as forthcoming PPG. Lpas also required
to have regard to any other material planning consideration.
Neighbquring uses and (especially for redeveloped stadia)
transport likely to be important. An application should be
considered on its merits.

4. How can existing grounds be protected from property
speculators?

Structure and (emerging) local plan policies will indicate what
types of developments would and would not generally be acceptable.
They may for example zone land for recreational use. They cannot
however prevent a planning application being made. Worth
encouraging supporters to be vociferous.
C. CENTRIST SOLUTIONS

5. Establish UDC-type body to consider planning applications for
Taylor implementation?

No. Stadia not regarded differently from other sport and
recreation and commercial interests. Clubs can however contact
existing UDCs if interested in their areas.

6. Direct lpas to have presumption in favour of planning
permission for all-seater stadia?

There is already a presumption in favour of development, having
regard to all material considerations, unless that development
would cause demonstrable harm to interests of acknowledged
importance,

7. Direct lpa to consult major clubs in the area in preparing
local plan?

Lpas should do this anyway. Clubs should in any case contact lpa.
Local plan procedures provide opportunities for full consultation

D. UNCOOPERATIVE LPAs

8. What if the district council unsympathetic to development for
needed Taylor implementation?

PPG will ask lpas to be positive. Try approaching councillors
individually. Mobilise supporters. Speak to county council.

E."CROSS-BOUNDARY ISSUES

9. What if club needs to relocate from present district but other
lpas won't cooperate?

Approach county council. Consider setting up working party. Check
where supporters live - many may come from a neighbouring LA area

F. IMPLEMENTATION

10. Will Government put back Taylor implementation timetable in
view of planning permission difficulties?

This is a matter for the Home Office.

11. Planning restrictions make it impossible to implement Taylor.

The PPG will, strongly urge lpas to be positive. The LAA working
parties show willingness to cooperate. Clubs need to get a feel
for what is and isn't workable in planning terms.
G. INDIVIDUAL CASES

12. Views on individual case?

Cannot comment on individual cases. They may come before Secretary
of State for decision.

13. So our application on a Green Belt site was a waste of time?

Cannot comment on individual cases. Cannot add to general remarks
I have already made about Green Belt.

H. LOCAL PLANS

14. How can clubs take part in local plan preparation/review?

By discussions with lpa and submission of evidence to public
inquiry.

15. Can a local plan specifically allocate land for a stadium, and
rule out other (more lucrative) uses?

Plan can allocate land for recreation, and could indicate a
particular bite was earmarked for a stadium. Plans are not
prescriptive, however, and any applications would still have to be
considered on their merits.

I. APPEALS

16. How long does an appeal take?

Generally between six months and a year depending on the
complexity of the case [assuming public inquiry],

J. CALL-INs

17. On what basis are applications called in?

Ministers are very selective about call in. Applications not
normally called in unless of more than local importance.

K. PLANNING GAIN

18. Planning gain rules put lpa in too strong a position/too
restrictive on clubs?

Planning gain needs to be fairly and reasonably related to
development. The Government does not want lpas to be able to put
developers over   barrel. In intends to change the law to enable
developers to give unilateral undertakings in future.

L. CONSULTANTS

-19, How to find a suitable planning consultant?

Ask the RTPI and ask around.
