18 June, 1990




Mr S Bilbe
Fire & Emergency Planning Department
Home O ffice
Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON
SW1H 9AT



Dear Mr Bilbe

Thank you very much for your le tte r dated 15th June received this morning.
However, there are one or two points I would like to raise concerning your reply.
Whilst I fully appreciate that Lord Justice Taylor has made a decision th at he
believes to be a single solution, I feel very strongly that the Football Clubs
them selves, and also the fans - who after all are the ones that pay each w eek to
watch the game - were not asked to v o ic e their opinion before any such decision was
made.      If seating is so safe, could I please remind you about the fire at Bradford's
ground not so many years ago, when a number o f people w ere trapped in the seats
and died.       Since fencing has been taken down, people can leave     the terraces far
easier than people can        leave seats, making terraces a great deal safer. With the
P olice wanting to crack down on crowd violence, could I also remind you o f the
game at Luton F.C., when seating was ripped up and used as weapons against the
opposing fans and the Police, causing thousands o f pounds worth of damage.

There is one particular point that I would like to raise concerning the last paragraph
of your letter. You use Ibrox as an exam ple - with prices o f £6 for seating and £4
for standing.    Ibrox has a ground cap acity o f approximately 40,000 - and their
ground also receives a large financial contribution each year from Rangers Pools.
For the coming season, Southampton Football Club have raised their terrace tick et
prices from £5 - to - £6, for Gold M atches (at which the top team s play), and from
£4 - to - £5 for Silver Matches. Using Ibrox as an exam ple is rather stupid - last
season I paid £7 to stand at Crystal P alace, and I am sure there will be a rise in
ticket prices this year - and what will they be by 1992?

Southampton F.C. ground cap acity is currently 21,000, when all seating is brought in
this will drop to approximately 14,000. There will be a lot of disappointed fans not
being able to watch their team anymore due to the reduced capacity, and also there
will be a very large rise in ticket prices. Can you please confirm that it w ill cost
£6 to sit and watch football at the D ell - I really don't think you should use this
figure as an example at all.    Southampton F.C. and the City Council are trying to
find a suitable site to relocate the Dell, but even if a site is found this year, I
doubt the new ground will be finished by the start o f the 1992 season, what then?
Do we still have to convert the existing ground to all seating?

Sorry to sound so abrupt, but this is something that I feel very strongly about. I
would appreciate your com m ents on the above, and look forward to receiving a reply
at your earliest convenience.

Yours sincerely
                                                                               ©
        HOME OFFICE
        Queen Anne's Gate London SW1H 9AT

                                      Direct line 01-273

                                     Switchboard 01-273 3000



                                                           Your reference


                                                           Our reference

                                                           FEP/90 35/48/139
                                                           Date

                                                           15      uune 1990




Dear

Thank you for your recent letter to the Prime Minister which has
?"enc.P"Sfed   this department in view of our responsibilities for
the safety of Sports Grounds Act.  I apologise fo? the delaj in
replying to you.                                           *


lord Justice Taylor recognised, in his Final Report, that there is
no single solution to achieve crowd safety and cure all the
problems of crowd control.  However, he was satisfied that seating
does more to achieve these objectives than any other single
measure.  He also considered that moving to all seated
accommodation was consistent with the policies of both FIFA and


s t a n d ^ ^ S ^ H 0?? fef1fn5s and those of many others who wish to
his Final Report! e t c h e s .   However, Lord Justice Taylor said in

 I am not convinced that the cherished culture of the terraces is
thprpYan^Sf W^en f^ S arB seated* • • •■ The communal spirit is still
          f^ ds ready expression.  To such extent as the seating
limits togetherness or prevents movement, that price is surely
worth paying for the benefits in safety and control."

This is a view with which the Government is in agreement.

                  Taylor also commented that it should be possible for
S e 1 o c L ? s ao f \ r iCe Struc^ re Wh±Ch Suits the ^ e a p e s t seats £
rh?nv                those presently paying to stand.   He pointed to
consider to              9       ^   standin9 is £4' whi^h he did not
consider to be a prohibitive price or differential.            Therefore the
to attend
   attendm?Sot
             -S?'ftat?rH
          football matches may theY may n° lon9er be able to
                                be unnecessary.

                                                  Yours sincerely




                                                  MR S BILBE
                                                  (Fire and Emergency
                                                   Planning Department)
    22nd February 1990




    Mrs Margaret Thatcher
    Prime Minister
    10 Downing Street
    LONDON




^   PROPOSED ALTERATIONS TO FOOTBALL GROUNDS

    I hope you don't mind m e writing to you and taking up som e of your valuable time,
    but this is a m atter that concerns m e directly. I have written to our local M.P. -
    Christopher Chope on numerous occasions, but to no avail.

    I am a supporter o f Southampton Football Club, fem ale (which puts me        in the
    minority), and not too young (I will be 33 in April).         I have been watching
    Southampton play at their local ground (The Dell) in Southampton for 16 years.      I
    always have stood on the terraces, shoulder to shoulder with people from 5 to 85
    years of age. The trouble I have w itnessed in all those years has been minimal, the
    police or the stewards at the ground always having com plete control over the home
    and away supporters. The most trouble I have witnessed this season, was a t the
    recent home game with Oxford - (and all of that was outside o f the ground), when
    both sets o f fans cam e together in a local pub, with very nasty results. The game,
    as it always has, started promptly at 3.00 p.m.

    Last weekend, Southampton played Liverpool in a cup game at Anfield. All away
    supporters were seated (or at least w ere supposed to be). I don't know if you have
    ever been seated at a normal m atch (I know you have attended som e Cup Finals),
 ,— but this is what happens. You arrive     at your seat at 2.30 p.m. - people are still
/ arriving at the ground until 3.00 p.m.       The match kicks o ff.  In com e som e late
/ comers - all in your row, you stand up, everyone behind you stands up.         Someone
L, -arrives in the row in front, they stand up, you stand up, everyone behind you stands
    up. Southampton are getting near the goal, everyone stands up cheering.    Half tim e
    approaches - and the toilet rush begins, so everyone stands up again. A t half tim e
    the tea rush begins. This carrys on for the whole of the 90 minutes o f football, you
    spend more tim e standing than you do sitting, bobbing up and down like yachts on
    lakes, until in the end your legs ache so much that you have to sit down, only to be
    made to stand up again to let someone else past.

    I wasn't at Hillsborough, but I did s e e the pictures on the television. They were
    horrific and very frightening.    On that day, my boyfriend had gone to Millwall to
    watch Southampton play there (I had to work in the morning so couldn't go with
    him). I was upset, and cried    with everyone else, and I worried about him being on
    the terrace at Millwall - but    why - hundreds of football m atches are played every
    year, with thousands of fans standing at every match, w e have one major disaster
    and all of a sudden it would be safer if everyone sat down.
(2 )




I personally don't think they should unless they want to. I think before every club is
forced to put in all sea ts - always at great expense, (Southampton will be forced to
leave The Dell and relocate elsewhere in the City because of the reduced cap acity
at their ground), that the fans them selves should have their say. Would it be s o bad
if every supporter was asked to v o te for what they want (it is what happens in
normal elections), the cost of issuing forms with a plain yes/no answer would b e far
less than the millions of pounds that will have to be spent on relocation and
alterations to all grounds. The number of clubs that will be forced to close because
they cannot afford the money to renovate or relocate will be great, causing more
upset amongst the fans.

I wonder if the person who compiled the report has ever stood on the terrace and
cheered on a football team , the atmosphere is ele c tr ic (when they are winning). I
personally will be very upset if this changes, and I k n o w that there are thousands
like me that do not want to see their terraces go.

I am sorry that I have rambled on a bit, but said what I have to say in the      most
detailed way possible, (you can blame Mr Chope for not reading all his mail!).

Thank you.

Yours sincerely
