PS/Secretary of State




HILLSBOROUGH   INQUIRY:   PROGRESS   ON   IMPLEMENTATION   OF   INTERIM
REPORT

1.     The Home Office has been monitoring the implementation of
the Taylor interim recommendations (attached) through the Fire
Service, the police and the local authorities.

2.    At most grounds all the recommendations have been complied
with so far as practicable.  Where a recommendation has not been
complied with, the Home Office is taking it up with the local
authorities or the clubs concerned to discuss the reasons and to
discover whether any alternative solutions have been imposed to
secure the same degree of safety.     In no case does the Home
Office regard the deviation from the interim recommendations as
serious.

3.    There were two potential areas of difficulty at Bristol
Rovers:

(1)   The 15% reduction in standing capacity

      Home Office originally believed that standing capacity had
      been calculated at 54 persons per 10 sq metres (ie maximum
      allowed in thetGreen Guide) and that a 15% reduction had not
      been made.   In fact the standing capacity has already been
      reduced to below 15% of the maximum.     Home Office is now
      considering whether any further reduction should be sought.

(2)   Ambulance cover when both Bristol clubs      (Rovers and City)
      are at home

      Rare for both clubs to be at home on the same match day.
      Home Office now understand that the Health Authority can
      provide ambulance coyer, subject only to the overriding
      needs of an emergency.




P A LEE

4 October 1989


cc    Mr Kinghan
      Mr Baden
      Mr Smith
SEP.01 '89 11:57 GMT HO 1 QUEEN. ANNE'S GATE                       P. 02




      RESPONSE TO TAYLOR


       I believe that clubs and the public services have responded
      quickly and constructively to Taylor's recommendations.       Safety
      considerations are, rightly, seen to be paramount.

      DECAYED KICK-OFFS


      I «a told that the football authorities are enquiring why son.
      ten or eleven kick-offs have been delayed.       It may be that the
      police have, understandably, been anxious to ensure that no pen
       * °V*rfill*d " ld that 1,0 spectator is unnecessarily kept out of
      the ground.


      SO A MEMBERSHIP SCHEME WOULD LEAD TO MORE DELAYS

      [DOE]



                            [and held at oae parks/railw^ « « « « j « * « »

     After Hillsborough no one should run risks with overcrowding.
     The Taylor report, for safety reasons, recommended some reduction
      n capacity on the terraces; but grounds are rarely filled to
     capacity.     Where people have been turned away this is where the
     grounds have been known to be full already.       This is only prudent.
