Mr Vaughan


NOTE OF FOOTBALL   LEAGUE   SEMINAR   ON   TAYLOR   IMPLEMENTATION:   2
AUGUST 1990

1.   I attach at flag A a copy of the programme.

Funding the Taylor requirements - Arthur Sandford

2.   His main points were as follows:

         it was unsatisfactory that the Football        Licensing
     Authority had not yet been set up, the revised Green Guide
     not yet released, the draft Planning Policy Guidance note on
     Sport and Recreation not yet issued, and the Football Trust
     1990 guidance on grant aid not yet fully established.
     However, clubs should press on with the implementation of
     Taylor;                        ~
     - it would cost £200-250m as a minimum to implement Taylor
     (in addition to the Football Trust contribution of £100m).
     To meet the total bill of improvements would cost over
     £660m.   Clubs planned to spend £330m (for further details
     see my submission to Mr Atkins of 9 August);

     - other sources of finance apart from the Football Trust
     would be from sponsorship deals, TV income, a possible levy
     on transfer fees, EC, local authority and central government
     grants and clubs' own resources including increased seat
     prices and new marketing arrangements;

     - the Commercial Director of the- League, Trevor Phillips,
     would be turning his attention away from sponsorship deals
     now that the Rumblelows Cup had been finalised, to advising
     clubs on how they could boost income through new marketing
     concepts;
        clubs themselves could, achieve cost savings in im­
     plementing Taylor through agreeing to bulk purchasing
     arrangements and leasing deals with advice and assistance
     from the League.  The Football League was prepared to give a
     financial guarantee which, would enable cheap finance for
     such leasing to be obtained;

     - clubs were advised to take full account of Inland Revenue
     advice on capital allowances. Aston Villa were a guinea pig
     scheme vis a vis capital allowances.    Mr Sandford advised
     clubs with tax losses to maximise the use of Football Trust
     income by taking full advantage of the grants available and
     claiming the tax back, leaving the more profitable clubs to
     fund the    seating  and   other  improvements  from  other
     resources;
    - the League would approach Government to ask for an
    extension in the reduction in Pool Betting Duty from 5 to 10
    years and also request an extension in the Taylor time-table
    when a full assessment of club resources was available
    (covered in my submission of 9 August).

The Football Trust 1990 - Tom Wharton

3.    Tom Wharton, as Chairman of the Licensing Authority Liaison
Committee of the Football Trust 1990, explained the background to
the establishment of the Football. Trust 1990 and made the
following points:

    - prior to the establishment of the Football Trust 1990 some
    £9m per year was available from the Pools Betting Industry
    of which £5m from the Spotting-the-Ball went to the Football
    Grounds Improvement Trust. There had been a disagreement in
    earlier years about the use of the Trust funds, some
    Trustees believing that only the interest on accumulated
    capital should be disbursed, while others considered that
    all the money should be made available. This has now been
    resolved and, in line with the Chancellor's intention, all
    the proceeds from the reduction in the Pool Betting Duty
    would be used to fund works for the safety and comfort of
    spectators;

    - the old Football Grounds Improvement Trust would remain in
    existence during 1990 for purposes of financing works during
    the. closed season;

    - the Football Trust 1990 had produced a new Guide for Clubs
    which specified procedures on grant applications.   This set
    a maximum gross expenditure ceiling for safety work at any
    individual club of £l.25m (at July 1990 prices).       Clubs
    cannot be grant aided in respect of any amount in excess.
    Where there was a ground share arrangement then each club
    would still be entitled to be considered against this
    maximum gross expenditure ceiling.   For major redevelopment
    of relocation applications the total ceiling for any one
    club is £1.5m;

       the Licensing Authority Liaison Committee only       made
    recommendations and it was for the Trustees to          take
    decisions on the use of funds;

    - in Mr Warton's view the three national stadia (Wembley,
    Hampden Park and Windsor Park) should not be given any
    higher priority than Football League and Scottish Football
    League grounds;

    - the first priority to receive grants would be clubs in
    Divisions 1 and 2, where the time-table for all seating was
    more demanding.     All applications,   however,  would be
    considered on their own merits although Mr Wharton gave a
    warning to that the Trust was not in the business of
    providing money to fund empty seats;
     - he referred to the booklet recently produced by the Police
     Scientific Development Branch ’ at the Home       Office in
     co-operation with ACPO on the installation of CCTV. £2m had
     been allocated by the Trust for updating of CCTV systems and
     100% grant aid would be provided.     He explained that the
     ACPO view was now that new CCTV systems should be owned and
     maintained   by the clubs.    Many clubs already maintained
     this equipment;

     - there had been a 41% increase in Police charges during
     1989/90. Although the Trust had decided in May to phase out
     grants towards these charges over the next three years, this
     decision was subject, to the outcome of discussions between
     the Home Office, ACPO and the League.

DOE Speakers - Mike Ash and Des Coles                   '

4.   Copies of their two papers are attached

Home Office Speaker - Peter Bolton

5.   Mr Bolton started his paper by correcting Ian Stott's
introductory remarks that Norman Jacobs, the new Chairman of the
Football Licensing Authority, had referred to the prospect of
"bloodied noses".   Mr Bolton explained that this was based upon
a very selective press reporting of Mr Bolton's remarks when the
announcement of his appointment was' made.    Mr Jacobs had been
careful to explain that the great majority of clubs and the
football authorities had responded very positively to the Taylor
Report but for the one or two, who dragged their feet he expected
"bloodied noses".

6.   Mr Bolton then explained that in relation to sports grounds
the Government's position was much the same as it was in relation
to other places of entertainment.   He referred to the Safety of
Sports Ground Act 1975 and emphasised the importance of the
concept of "reasonable safety". Until the Hillsborough disaster,
the Home Office view was that this concept as reinforced by the
guidance contained in the Green Guide was satisfactory. However,
following this disaster and Lord Justice Taylor's final report
there were to be new mandatory conditions in safety certificates
and the Green Guide was being revised.

7.   Mr Bolton outlined the functions of the Football Licensing
Authority in relation to monitoring and supervising performance
of local authorities in issuing safety certificates . and in
advising the Home Secretary on the implementation of all-seating
which could lead to the imposition of conditions in licenses. He
explained that the delay in setting up the FLA was for practical
reasons (but he did not elaborate on thesel).       Following the
appointment of Norman Jacobs he explained that he hoped they
would be able to announce Members in the next two weeks (unlikely
now since the Home Office want to make the announcement at the
same time as the location and name of Chief Executive).       The
balance of interest on the Board and the staffing and In­
spectorate requirements were much the same as we had left them in
February.  He announced that the FLA was likely to be located in
the North West for administrative reasons although the Chief
Executive could well be located elsewhere (I understand that Mr
Jacobs would like the FLA to be in London).
8.  He emphasised that the FLA would, not superseed local
authority powers.   Furthermore, it was only intended that where
local authorities had seriously failed' to discharge their
functions properly under the Safety of Sport Grounds Act 1975
that the Home Secretary would direct an amendment to the relevant
safety certificate.

9.    He ended the talk by emphasising the co-operation which he
anticipated between football clubs and the FLA to their mutual
benefit-.

THE ADVISORY DESIGN COUNCIL - Gwvlvm Roberts

10. Mr Gwylym Roberts had recently been appointed as Chairman of
the Advisory Design Council. He made the following points:

       - he expected to announce the names of the six members of
       the ADC. in the next few days.   They would be predominantly
       architects and engineers (names to be announced today);

       - he saw the work of the ADC over the next 12 months as
       falling into three stages: examining existing research and
       ideas on stadia design; drafting a code of practice on the
       redevelopment of existing stadia and the construction of new
       stadia; desiminating this code of practice and related
       advice as soon as possible.

       - he expected members of the ADC to visit many clubs over
       the coming year and he would also take advantage of visits
       to the USA and Australia to obtain information on stadia
       design there;

       - he hoped that clubs would find the ADC a useful source of
       advice on how to develop grounds in the most cost effective
       way.




A R BADEN
SARD C
P3/165
276 0675

IjQ   August 1990

cc.    Mr   McDonald
       Mr   Coles - PDC1 (without attachments)
       Mr   Ellingford
       Mr   Bailey
       CLUB SEMINAR ON TAYLOR IMPLEMENTATION
   2ND AUGUST, 1990 THE ALBANY HOTEL BIRMINGHAM     1.00p.m.          LUNCH


Seminar Chairman: Mr. Ian Stott (Management         2.00p.m.          Session II
Committee and Chairman of Taylor Implementation
Committee)

                                                    THE FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY

PROGRAMME                                           Speaker: Peter Bolton, Home Office, Fire &
                                                    Emergency Planning Department.
10.15a.m.   OPENING ADDRESS by Mr. W. Fox,
            President of the Football League.
                                                    PLANNING ISSUES
10.20a.m.   SESSION I - FINANCE
                                                    Speaker: Des Coles, Department of the
                                                    Environment, Planning & Development Control
FUNDING THE TAYLOR REQUIREMENTS - AN OVERVIEW       Directorate.

Speaker: Arthur Sandford, Chief Executive of The
Football League.                                    THE ADVISORY DESIGN COUNCIL

THE FOOTBALL TRUST 1990                             The Chairman of the Advisory Design Council will
                                                    be introduced to clubs.
Speaker: Tom Wharton, O.B.E., F.B.I,M., Deputy
Chairman, The Football Trust 1990 and Chairman of
the Trust's Licensing Authority Liaison             4.00p.m.          Close
Committee.

GOVERNMENT GRANTS

Speaker: Mike Ash, Department of the Environment,
Inner Cities Policy Unit.
TALK TO FOOTBALL LEAGUE SEMINAR ON TAYLuK IMPLEMENTATION


Very pleased to be invited here today. Three important points ro
make at the begining:


     - First;    Programme says that talk is on 'Government Grants
     - not strictly accurate.     I am part of the Department of the
     Environment's Inner Cities Policy Unit and I propose to
     talk, in the main, about the Government's Action for Cities!
     initiative and the various grants that are available for
     inner city regeneration.
                                                                    ♦
                                                                     f



     - Second:    the grants about which I propose to speak are
     therefore only available in inner city areas (and I will
     explain how those are defined) and for projects which will
     help achieve the specific objectives of the Government (and
     I will explain what those are).      Certain grants may be able
     to provide financial assistance for capital and other
     projects undertaken by some of the clubs in the Football
     League.    Much will depend on where the proposal is located
     and what the proposal is for.     However, it would be wrong of
     me not to say at the outset that I see only limited scope
     for assistance to be given towards the costs associated with
     ground improvement, re-development or re-location;


     - Third;    I am by no means an expert on the intricacies of
     all the various programmes which go to make up AFC but I
     hope I can point you in the right direction for any follow-
     up enquiries you may have.


Before talking in more detail about the grant programmes which
may be relevant to ground redevelopment and relocation I should
like to say a little about the general aims and objectives of the
Governments policies towards the inner cities.


League Football clubs, as major businesses and employers, are
part of the economic and social fabric of the inner city areas in
which many of them are located, as well as being providers of
recreational entertainment.     They have an important part to play
in helping to achieve the regeneration of inner city areas.      A
little of the background may also help to explain why a number of
the grant programmes are as they are.


Action for Cities


The Action for Cities initiative was launched by the Prime
Minister in March 1988.    It was the bringing together of a number
of existing Government programmes in a concerted drive to achieve
the regeneration of inner city areas.
                                                                     <
However, the problems of inner city areas had been with us for a
lot longer.    During the 1960's and early 1970's there was a
growing awareness that changes in the structure of the economy
were having a disproportionate effect on inner city areas.
Unemployment rates in such areas were higher, housing conditions
were worst, there were considerable areas* of derelict land and
buildings and there were growing problems of crime and social
unrest, often related to racial tensions.    In 1969 the first
specifically inner city legislation was passed in the form of the
Local Government Grants (Social Need) Act.    This is the basis of
the Urban Programme - one of the grant programmes which continues
to this day.


By 1977 the first Government White Paper on the subject said:


     "Many of the inner areas surrounding the centres of our
     cities suffer, in a marked way and to an unacceptable
     extent, from economic decline, physical decay and adverse
    social conditions.”


Government policy would be directed to:


    - strengthening the economies of the inner areas and the
    prospects of their residents;


    - improving the physical fabric of the inner areas and
    making their environment more attractive;
     - alleviating social problems.


The approach to policy outlined in that (Labour) White Paper has
largely been continued by the present Government.   It involves
giving special recognition to the needs of inner urban areas in
the relevant main programmes operated by government - housing,
employment training etc and the development of special programmes
directed specifically at inner city areas.                           i


Where are the inner cities?


To be effective Ministers consider it important that available
resources are targeted on the worst areas.   For the purposes of
the Action for Cities initiative these were chosen using data
from the 1981 Census. For the most part inner city programmes are
currently targeted on 57 local authority areas.


Slide 1 - Map


Slide 2 - List of 57 authorities


There are one or two exceptions to this generalisation which I
will explain later.   However, by my calculations 41 of the 92
League clubs are within these 57 areas (43 if Charlton return to
the Valley and Bristol Rovers to Bristol).


What is the Government seeking to achieve?


The concerns of the 1977 White Paper are reflected in the current
objectives of Government policy.


In the latest statement of objectives it says:

     "The central thrust of the Government's AFC initiative is to
    establish a permanent climate of enterprise in the inner
    cities, led by industry and commerce.    Only these conditions
    can bring about a lasting improvement in the quality of life
    for local people."
The other key aspect of AFC is the emphasis on "partnership" -
with local government, with the voluntary sector, with the
business sector and with the people who live and work in inner
city areas.


Slides 3 and 4 - objectives


That, in broad terms is what theGovernment    isseeking   toachieves
in the older core areas of our towns and cities.


How is it doing it?


Given the range of objectives there are,    as you mightexpect,    a
variety of Government programmes which contribute to their
achievement.


Slide 5 - AFC Programmes


In 1990/91 £4 billion is being spent by Government through these
programmes in inner city areas.    Responsibility for these
programmes are split between a number of Government Departments.


DTI - enterprise and business development programmes, largely
concerned with encouraging the creation and growth of businesses.


DE    - Employment Traininbg and the Youth Training Scheme - from
which some football clubs have benefited.    Now to be delivered
through the new Training and Enterprise Councils.


Home Office - Safer Cities, crime prevention, drugs initiatives
etc


DOE - housing main programmes and specific inner city programmes
largely concerned with physical redevelopment.


Slide 6 - DOE Programmes - brief description of each


(Trafford Park UDC)
These various programmes are brought together at the regional
level by the Regional Offices of the Departments concerned.        In
the main conurbations these take the form of City Action Teams
(come back to later).



What is being achieved?


Measuring success in this game is not easy.     The 1991 Census will
provide valuable information on whether the incidence of
deprivation has improved overall, changed its location etc.        In
the meantime we know that unemployment rates in the 57 areas fell
by about a third since March 1988 (however that was only about
the same as the fall for England as a whole - so is it the macro
economic effect or the micro level action of AFC which can claim
credit?).      However, with the slow down in the economy the fall
in unemployment in those areas is being maintained at a faster
rate than in some non inner city areas.     Figures on the level of
private sector investment, new business starts etc are all
encouraging.    The specific outputs achieved by the various
programmes - in terms of jobs created, houses built etc are fully
documented.    The physical improvement in inner city areas is
there to be seen.
                                       *




One feature of AFC has been the regular publication of progress
reports.    Copies of the most recent of these "People in Cities"
has, I understand, already been circulated to clubs.


PART TWO                                                  *
                                                               \




Having provided an outline of what AFC is about I want to say a
little more about the DOE's programmes, in particular those which
support physical redevelopment,     These are


     - to a limited degree, the Urban Programme


     - City Grant


    - the Urban Development Corporations
Urban Programme


The Urban Programme is intended to help tackle the economic,
environmental and social problems of the inner cities.
                                      X.
                                                           It
provides support for a whole range of projects submitted by local
authorities for their area.   In particular it provides funding to
enable local authorities to make assistance available for private
sector projects which contribute to the economic development of
inner city areas.


That said it should be noted that UP grants are mostly small (90%
under £50,000) and it is difficult to see how UP grants could
make a significant contribution to the sort of major capital
works under consideration today.


Each of the 57 local authorities who participate submit, each
year, a programme of projects which they wish to support using UP
funds.   The programme has to be approved by DOE.   The Department
contributes a 75% grant toward the approved expenditure.    Total
expenditure this year will be about £260 million in support of
about 10.000 projects, 70% of which will be capital projects.


A very wide variety of projects are supported:


Slide - Classification of UP Expenditure


The slide mentions some of the types of project which are typical
of each category.   The balance between categories changes 6ver
time - earlier the social element predominated, then Ministers
indicated that they wanted to give higher priority to economic
projects (40%), in the most recent guidance there is an emphasis
on environmental projects.


For the most part expenditure on sport and recreation provision
is related to the social objectives of the UP :


    - to enable inner city residents, particularly the long term
     and young unemployed, ethnic minorities and other deprived
     groups to participate in sport and recreation activities.


A few examples might be useful:


     - a £60,000 grant in Rotherham for the upgrafding and
     floodlighting of an all weather pitch;


     - £151,000 in Knowsley for an all weather multi sport pitch


     but equally £916 as a contribution towards the cost of kit
     and equippment for a latin american womens football team in
     Lambeth!


Recent examples of UP projects (one accepted, one so far
rejected) involving professional clubs are:


     - tree planting and other improvements outside the
     Manchester City ground and support for sports project
     workers as part of their "Football and the Community"
     scheme;


     - a proposal involving Rochdale, the UP and the Sports
     Council in the provision of an all weather floodlit pitch
     and other facilities for joint use by the club and
     community.     I understand that for various reasons this
     particular project has not gone ahead.



Citv Grant                                                       '


City Grant is a direct capital grant made by the Department to
developers.     Its purpose is to support private sector capital
projects which benefit run down urban areas and which would not
proceed without grant.


Slide - City Grant


The grant bridges the gap between the estimated cost and the
estimated value of a project, with an allowance for reasonable
profit.     AThere are a number of requirements for a successful
City Grant application:


          Projects must have a completed value of at least
     £ 200 ,000 ;


     - they must contribute directly to the economic and physical,
     regeneration of rundown urban areas, sites at or beyond the
     urban fringe are unlikely to be supported;


     -    they must provide new jobs or private housing;


     - they must bring in substantial private investment (average
     gearing of 1:4)


     - they must create a new development or bring back into use
     a derelict site or building.


In the current year City Grant expenditure will be nearly £50
million and that will lever in about £160 million of private
sector investment.     City Grants are available within the areas of
the 57 authorities.


For the most part City Grant is used to support industrial and
commercial building projects.     However, grants have been made in
respect of indoor cricket centres, ski slopes and ice rinks.


Because of the conditions I have mentioned City Grant is- unlikely
to be available for the improvement or redevelopment of an    '
existing football ground.     It would not be a new development and
the number of new jobs created is likely to be small. As in all
cases of grant appraisal we seek to maximise the benefit from the
money put in therefire schemes which produce more jobs, at a
lower cost per job will be prefered.


It is possible that there might be a role for city Grant where
relocation of a football ground is under consideration,
particularly nwhere this is part of a commercial speculative
development with other (eg shops and offices) uses.     However,
there may well be difficulties.             '


It will be apparent from the slide that the city Grant appraisal
is easiest where the values of the property concerned can readily
be established - the end value of office floor space in any
particular locality can be reasonably assessed.     In the case of a
business development, eg undertaken by a football club for its       *
own use,   the grant appraisal would seek to determine the minimum
needed to enable the project to happen and yield a reasonable
return on equity for the business as a whole.     Once again the
mere move of a football club from one site to another would not
yield much in the way of additional jobs.


   _ 3rant may have a part to play in the redevelopment of sites
vacated by clubs.     However, the system is designed not to feed
through into enhanced site values and will only benefit clubs to
the'extent that values as a whole in the area are pushed up as
business confidence returns.



Urban Development Corporations


Finally there are the 10 UDCs in England (see map Slide).    The
key features   of UDCs are:


Slide - objectives of UDCs


The purpose of a UDC is to regenerate its designated area.    They
seek to do this by:


     - bringing land and buildings into effective use;


     - encouraging development by industry and commerce;


     - ensuring housing and social facilities are available to
    encourage people to live and work in their areas.


In 1990/91 the Government's contribution to UDC spending will be
about £550 million.      UDCs are mainly designated in areas which
contain large amounts of industrial dereliction - London
Docklands, Trafford Park.      The UDC reclaims and services land,
provides infrastructure and practical assistance to private
developers.    They are the local planning authority within their
areas.


One or two clubs are located within the areas of UDCs and a UDC
might be able to assist a club outside its area with relocation
to a site within its area.       Help might include:
                                                                     !



       - assistance in finding a site;


       - contributing to the cost of infrastructure and
       environmental works around the ground;


       - assistance with the provision of facilities which were
       available for use by the wider community.


Within their areas the UDCs are responsible for making City
Grants and that is probably the only source of direct help which
might be available for ground development costs - subject to the
reservations I have already expressed.


Other Grants


As I have already indicated there are a variety of inner city
programmes.    Where there are major construction projects"there is
scope for providing jobs for inner city residents and training, to
enable them to do those jobs.      Government assistance through
customised training schemes could well make a contribution to the
costs involved,          :


Contacts


More information on the Urban Programme can be obtained from the
local authority concerned,      information about the availability of
City Grant can be obtained from the Regional Office of the DOE
and   on UDCs from   the Corporation concerned.   Summary information
and contact telephone numbers are listed in the booklet which is
available at the back of the room.   Where there is a City Action
Team (contact addresses and telephone numbers on a separate sheet
at the back of the room) they provide a "one stop shop" for
advice on grants which may be available.    Indeed they have their
own small budgets for projects, on of which was a contribution,
alongside the Football Trust, to the costs of a new railway halt
at Derby FC.


Conclusions


As I said at the begining there is perhaps only limited scope for
the Government's inner city programmes to benefit football clubs
undertaking redevelopment work.   However, there is some scope.
To benefit it seems to me that clubs need to be thinking about
how their needs and objectives can be met by helping to meet the
wider needs and objectives of the community and the regeneration
of urban areas. You need to think about developing facilities
which are available for use by the community, by schools and
other local organisations and you need to think about multi - use
projects, offsetting the costs of ground provision through other
forms of development which present a better return or for which
Government assistance might be available.
                                                                    r
                                                                    L

                                                ^FIRST REVISE

FOOTBALL LEAGUE SEMINAR ON TAYLOR IMPLEMENTATION, 2 AUGUST 1990

SPEAKING NOTES (FINAL VERSION)

PLANNING ASPECTS OF TAYLOR IMPLEMENTATION



Introduction


Good, afternoon, [Ladies and] Gentlemen. I work in the.Planning

Policy Directorate of the Department of the Environment in London..

My responsibilities include planning policy on sport and

recreation. Since taking up my post in April, one of my main tasks

has been to work on a forthcoming guidance note' on this subject.

One of the key issues it will address is all-seater Football

League stadia.•


I work closely with colleagues in the Department's Sports and

Recreation Division, who are represented here today. At

Ministerial level, both planning policy and sports policy are part

of the same portfolio. This further guarantees that the

interactions are closely considered..'


Colin Moynihan, as Minister for Sport and Planning, took a very

close interest in Taylor implementation. We had a.most

constructive meeting with Ian Stott, Arthur Sandford and Andy

Williamson in June. Robert Atkins, his successor, will be taking

an equally close interest. He has asked me to congratulate you on

holding this seminar, and to convey his good wishes.
Government policy


As you know, the Government accepts Lord Justice Taylor's

recommendation in his final report on the Hillsborough disaster

that all-seated accommodation should'be introduced at all League

grounds for reasons of safety, public order and spectator comfort.

The Government's objective is to achieve all-seated accommodation

at all First and Second Division grounds from the start of the-

1994/95 season, and at- all Third and Fourth Division grounds from

the start of the 1999/2000 season.


The Government recognises the planning implications of achieving

all-seated accommodation..Many clubs will need to redevelop their

grounds to varying degrees. It may for example be necessary to

enlarge the stadium and/or the site. Some clubs, probably a

smaller number, will need to transfer t.o new locations. For

instance the present site may not offer scope for proper

redevelopment. For historical reasons, some grounds are unsuitably

sited, in residential areas, with poor public transport and

inadequate parking.
I indicated earlier.that- the Department is .preparing a new

Planning Policy Guidance Note on Sport and Recreation. The Note

will specifically address the implications of "Taylor", although

it will also cover a much wider field than football stadia.

It will be. addressed, like all such Policy Guidance Notes,

primarily to local planning authorities. It will ask them to give

sympathetic consideration to development proposals designed to

achieve the aim

of•all-seated accommodation. It will explicitly urge them to give

due weight to the improvement of safety, public order, and

spectator comfort, and to the implementation timetable. This in in

addition to- the normal planning considerations, such as traffic,

parking, access to public transport, and possible conflicts with

neighbouring uses. These.are of course important matters for clubs

to consider too.


Clubs


It is vital for clubs and local planning authorities to work

together. It is well worth approaching the local planning

authority at the earliest possible opportunity when considering

redevelopment or relocation, and' certainly before settling on a •

definite scheme or site. That will give you an idea how the

options look from a planning point of view, The local planning

authority may be able to assist in identifying possible sites, and

in firming.up specific proposals. If you decide on a proposed new

location without consulting the local planning authority you will

be asking for trouble. In addition, talking to them may enable you

to influence the local development plan, which will provide the

framework for controlling development in the area.
There are other bodies which need to be brought in at an early

stage:

- the police and emergency services, on crowd control and safety;

- p u blic transport operators, such as British Rail;

- the highway authority;

- a n y other local authorities whose areas may be affected;

- generally, the local authority, recreation department, who

 will have an interest in community leisure facilities;

- t h e regional coUnci^for sport and recreation, when multi-use

  facilities are under consideration;

- and of course the Advisory Design Council on design matters.


There will ba_aft extra ^imeng.icyi yherg La^ge new

stadia          planned^/for European- GoiajjuLif'ticms , are envisaged.

These may well have regional implications. It will be worth

talking to the county council, any regional planning organisation

and the DOE regional office.


All this can seem a daunting task. In some cases it may be worth

thinking about appointing knowledgeable professional planning

consultants. As proposals take shape it can be- well worth

considering setting up a project team to bring together the main

bodies concerned and help drive the project forward.
You will also want to take account of likely public reactions. Any

application is bound to be controversial, and will require a lot

of work with the local community from the beginning. I don't mind

in the least mind queueing for quarter of an hour or more to get

into the tube station after taking my young son to see his

favourite team at Highbury. But if I'heard a major club proposed

to relocate to m y 'neighborhood I might for example wonder if I ■

would be involuntarily marooned on Saturday afternoons.. The views

of residents - whether they are behind you or against you - are

bound to influence the local council. And you will of course want

to make sure that the views of committed club supporters who are

residents are heard.


District Councils


The key local planning authority to approach at the outset is the

district council, or where relevant the. city of borough council.

It is to the district council that a future planning application

will be submitted. It is the district council which prepares the

local plan. This sets out detailed policies and specific proposals

for the use of land,.and should guide most day-to-day planning

decisions.    •


The new Planning Policy Guidance Note will make clear that the

district council is expected to take the possible relocation of a

club to a new site into account in preparing and reviewing its

local plan. It should look both at whether a new site is feasible,

and at what uses should be permitted on the existing site. When a

club is not relocating, the local plan may still need to take

account of major redevelopment proposals.'
Now is a good time to influence local plans, as many are being

prepared or reviewed. Over.the next couple of years, the amount of

the country covered by local plans is expected to increase from

8ne~-qu*^rter£to thres qparteps.


If k planning application will be going forward before a new,

post-Taylor local plan is in place, this need riot be a

disadvantage. The planning authority should still'consider the.

application in the light of the safety, public order, spectator

comfort, and timing considerations I mentioned earlier. The new

■guidance note,will ask them to do so.


In looking at applications authorities will also always have

regard to the extent to which multiple-use and non-football

leisure facilities would be incorporated in a development, to the-

benefit of the local community as a whole. It can be seen as a

waste of a scarce resource for land to lie unused for long

periods, especially in the inner city. There may be scope for a .

partnership which can improve the area1s-leisure facilities.


County, councils


Outside the metropolitan areas, county councils are planning

^authorities, as well as district councils. It is often well worth

approaching the county at an. early stage. I should also mention

that counties prepare structure plans, which provide the strategic

framework for planning arid development control at local level.

Sometimes the relocation of a large stadium may be of sufficient

importance to deserve consideration in.the context of the

structure plan.y-Thb! Jlevej-^p^pnt of a superstadium       ^

hosting E-aropoan ovontc— i-s— i-irk-e-ty— bcr-be-r-
Unitary Development Plans


There are no county councils in metropolitan areas. There

districts prepare what are known as unitary development plans (or

UDP): part I equates to the structure plan and part II to the

local plan. Again, now is a very good time to discuss major

redevelopment proposals with planning authorities in the

metropolitan areas, because they are all currently preparing their

first UDPs.


Green Belts


A word about Green Belts. There is a general presumption against

inappropriate development in the Green Belts. Because of the size

of the structures involved, football stadia cannot be regarded as

appropriate development within an approved Green Belt. Very

special circumstances would be needed to justify setting- aside the

general presumption against inappropriate development-.


Detailed Green Belt boundaries are set out in local plans. The

Department's guidance to local planning authorites states that

they should be altered only in exceptional circumstances, after

consideration o f .development opportunities within urban areas. The

procedures for making and reviewing local plans provide

opportunities for. full public consultation on any proposals to

alter boundaries, before decisions are taken.
To put it another way, it would be extremely difficult to obtain

planning permission for a football stadium in the Green Belt. It

reminds me of a notice at the back of the Army and Navy stores

near my office - "Don't even think of parking here"-. Don't even,

think of developing in the Green Belt unless you - and the local

planning authority - are convinced there is no alternative.

Amending   the local plan to take a site out of the Green Belt so

that it could be made      liable for development would require very

strong justification^        is of a clear absence of any reasonable

alternative. It would be rare indeed to get an application for a

major inappropriate development on a Green Belt site' approved on

the basis of "exceptional circumstances".


Regional offices-


If there are difficulties at the pre-application stage in

identifying suitable -sites for relocation with district and county

councils - for example if cross-boundary problems arise - t’
                                                           n-e

Department of the Environment's regional offices may be able t o •

make some suggestions./They should bp told of any•Euiupedn

"-S4^ecrstadimn^— s-Lylt*"pioposal^ This may need to be considered in

the context of the regional planning guidance issued by the

Department.          •
                                            C*s

The regional offices cannot intervene in any disputes which may

arise with local planning authorities after an applicationNhas

been made. The Department can however become formally involved in

a planning application in two ways. If an application is refused,

or not determined within a set period, there is a right of appeal

to the Secretary‘of State. This should be regarded as a last

resort, not least because it can be a lengthy business. The"

Department can also become involved when an application is called

in, which means that it will be decided by the Secretary of State

rather than the local planning authority.


Local authority associations


You may like to know that the local authority associations are

setting up three working parties on Taylor implementation. They

will look at the planning, community development and safety

aspects. The.Football League will be represented, giving an

opportunity to feed in your thoughts and experience. The idea is

to spread best practice, and to define any areas where further

work needs to be done. The working parties are due to produce

reports later this year, for practical use by clubs and local

planning authorities. This shows a commendable willingness to

 cooperate.
The PPG


The Department's draft Planning Policy Guidance Note on Sport and

Recreation.will be issued for public consultation shortly - all

going well later this month. It will be sent to the League, and I

am sure you will wish to take full advantage of the opportunity'to

feed in your views on all-seater stadia. I look forward to seeing

your comments.. Meanwhile I 'd be very interested to hear anything

you have to say this afternoon.
