                                                                          23656 MEH

                                        ith a




                                   KNVB Club Card
                                   [ i1 lustration]



                              he football privilege card




                                The K N V B Club Card
                                 as a privilege card

The KNV B Club Card     is a combined initiative of the Royal Dutch Football
As so ciatio n (KNVB)   and the football clubs in the Netherlands. Anyone
who likes football      can obtain this card. Until 30 June 1989: for just
25 guilders for 12      months; after that date: for 35 guilders for 12 months.

A KNVB Club Card offers many advantages. It confers priority whe n booking
tickets. Gives you reductions on all sorts of goods. And allows you to
order tickets and goods by telephone. In short, with the KNVB Club Card
you keep on winning.

                                 KNVB Club Card Line.

Wi th the KNVB Club Car4 you have more chance of a ticket to watch the
Dutch team because holders of a KNVB Club Card always have priority for
international matches.

The avai lable tickets are allocated to them first.        Even for big tournaments
such as the 1990 World Cup in Italy!

In addition, ge tting a ticket wit h a KNV B Club Card is is far simpler.
You ring the special 0£ number of the KNVB Club Card Line, give your
KNVB Club Card number and ... your order is dealt wi th immediately.

                                  On'the front row.

As well as the Dutch team, there is also much to enjoy with other KNVB
teams.
At those games, too, holders of a KNVB Club Card sit in the front row.

At matches involving Young Holland, the Olympic team, the Women's team
etc., you can get in w i t h a KNVB Club Card. But: "Full is full!"
                                      -   2   -




                            "Voetbal" monthly magazine

"Voetbal" ["Football"] magazine provides all Club Card holders every
month with the latest news about exclusive reduct ions'a nd offers. So
it's a magazine not to be missed!

In addition, your subscription to this magazine, which is published by
the KNVB, costs 23.50 guilders instead of 47.00 guilders per year. A
reduction of no less than 50% on a magazine packed w ith photoreports,
articles about the Dutch team, interviews etc.

                           Club reductions and offers

If you have the name of your favourite professional or amateur club put
on your KNVB Club Card,, you have an opportunity to carry off all sorts
of extra offers in a town or area.

For example, a reduction on your club's season ticket. A cheap or even
free ticket for a match. Or special benefits w h i ch your club, together
wit h sponsors, business or industry, has to offer.

For details,   see "Voetbal" magazine and your c l u b ’s announcements.

                             Your own KNVB Club Card.

O b tai ning a KNVB Club Card is very simple. Details are set out in the
text on the following pages ( ’Appli cation procedure').

Follow all the instructions carefully - and after about 4 weeks you'll
be in pos se s s i o n of your KNVB Club Card.

                                     [insert]
                              Reductions and offers.

Both outside the Netherlands and away from the football field, you can
get a lot of pleasure from your KNVB Club Card. You get attractive discounts
on various football trips.

For a keen price you can receive sportswear marketed exclusively for
KNV B Club Cardholders. For example, a genuine Holland shirt!

And you'll be eligible for countless other fine offers. From fascinating
books about sport to splendid audiovisual equipment. Or dering these items
is extremely easy. Just call the KNVB Club Card Line or send in a reply
cou pon from "Voetbal" magazine.
                                  The KNVB Club Card
                                  as a payment card.

The KNVB Club Card is not only a privilege and advantage card. It also
makes paying for things much easier. A telephone call to the KNVB Club
Card Line and the taking of your Clu b Card number will, in future, be
enough to secure tickets, trips, goods and subscriptions.

To be eligible for this convenient method of payment, you must - at the
same time as you apply for the KNVB Club Card - provide the KNVB with
an authorisation. The costs of orders and of extending your KNVB Club *
Card will then be debited automatically to your bank or giro account.

N.B.: To be eligible for this payment       facility you must   be at least 18
years old.

Alternatively, you can pay for any order and/or the extension of your
KNVB C lub Car d by using^a giro credit slip.

Choose this option by simply putting a tick in the appropriate box on
the A p plicat ion Form.

As soon as your payment reaches the KNVB by the first or second method,
the tickets, trips, goods or subscriptions you have o rdered will be sent
to you; or they can be collected by you from a place to be specified.
The extension of your KNVB Club Card takes effect after the amount due
is received.



                                 Application procedure.

Please fill in the attached Application Form as completely,         legibly and
accurately as possible. Then sign it.

Tifck the type of card y o u require:

A. A card with the name of your favourite professional football club.

B. A card w i t h the name of your favourite amateur club.

C. A "Nederland       Oranje" [= "Netherlands Loves Holland"] card.

NB:   You may tick only one option.

Do you want a card with the name of your favourite professional football
club (A)? Then place a tick before the name of that club. Do you want
a card with the name of your favourite amateur club (B)? Then enter the
most usual name of that club in the space provided for that purpose.
N.B.: You may tick or enter only one name.

Sign the A p p licati on Form.   In the case of minors    (under 18), a parent/gua
dian must als o sign.
Take the completed Application Form, the Receipt, proof of identity (a
passport, driving licence or post office identity card) and a recent
true-to-life passport-size photo (colour or black-and-white) to a post
office or sub post office of your choice.  A minor (under 18) must also
be able to produce proof of identity.

Pay at the counter the amount payable for the KNV B Club Card    for the
first 12 months.
Until 30 J une 1989 this amount is 25 guilders, thereafter 35 guilders.
The counter clerk will check from your proof of identity whether the
A ppli catio n Form and Receipt have been filled in correctly. The number
of your A p p licat ion Form will be entered on the back of your passport
photo. As proof of payment, you will be given a stamped Receipt, Between
3 and 4 weeks later you will receive w ritten notice that you can collect
your Club Card.

Collect the KNVB Club Card in person from the post office or sub post
office whe r e you applied for it. Hand in the c ollection notice and sign
the receipt. After about 1 w eek the receipt will hav e been administratively
processed and you can take advantage of the many benefits the KNVB Club
Card offers you for 12 months.




                                 KNVB C lub Card
                                App lication Form

Please print,   entering one letter per box.

Applicant                           m/__ f
Initials and surname:
(Do not use more boxes. This is how your name will appear on the card.)
Date of birth:       19
Place of birth:
Address                         No;
Postcode:
Town:
Country:            '
Telephone number:

KN VB Membership.
    Yes, I am a member of the KNVB and play for:
    ................        (name of c l u b )
    No, I am not a member of the KNVB,

Type of card. (Tick only 1 of the 3 possibilities.)
A. _  S h owi ng the name of my favourite professional football club, which
      is: (tick one name)
      [For the list of clubs, please refer to the original]
B    Showing the name of my favourite amateur club, which is:

     (enter usual name)
C __ Showing "Nederland ^   Oranje" [^"Netherlands   loves Holland*'].
                                          _    5   -




Method of payment.
   I would like a card with payment           facilities and authorise the KNVB
   until further notice to debit my           account automatically at no extra
   cost with all amounts owed by me           under the terms of this agreement.
   (Only applicable to persons aged           18 and over.)

  My bank or giro account number is:
  w i t h . . . . . ....... Bank at .......

   I would like a card without payment facilities and will pay all costs
   arising from this agreement by giro credit slip.

   My bank or giro account No.      i s : . . . ........

   with        .......Bank at   ..............

Tha applicant declares that the information given by him/her is complete
and correct. The Ceneral Terms and Conditions g overning the K NVB Club
Card» which are printed on this folder, are applicable to this Applicati on
Form. These terms and conditions form part of the Ceneral Terms and C o n d i ­
tions of the KNVB, as most recently deposited at the office of the clerk
of the district court, Utrecht, on 15 August 1984, as well as the additions
thereto deposited at the clerk of the court's office by the KNVB since
that date. The Applicant declares that he/she has received and read the
General Terms and Conditions g o verni ng the K NVB Club Card, and declares
by signing this form that he/she is in agreement with the applicability
of those General Terms and Conditions and the Ceneral Terms and Conditions
of the KNVB.

Place:                      Date:
A p p l i c a n t ’s signature:
For minorsi
Signature of parent/guardian:
Name and initials of parent/guardian (please print)




Leave blank.              "          0778467



Proof of identity



Post office code                 Date stamp
                                       -   6   -




                         Period of validity and extension.

A K NVB Club Card can be used for 12 months from the date of issue. Extension
for a further 12-month period may take place each time by automatic tra n s ­
fer, or by means of a giro credit slip.

Applications for the KNVB Credit Card, payment for the first 12-month
period and collection of the card are h andled in collabo ration with the
Post Office ( P T T ) .

For purposes of production and printing, admi nistra tion of the KNVB Club
Card scheme and the collection of payments, the KNV B collaborates with
DeltaFin, a service agency for customer card applications.

                                 "I LOVE FOOTBALL"

Take this Receipt form together with the Appl ication Form to a post office
or sub post office.

Tear off here*                   0778467



Receipt                            Date stamp

for a p plica tion for a
KNVB Club Card
in the name of




Received the sum
of f 25.- / f 35,-*.



*Helet.e whic hever is
 inapplicable.
                                       -   7   -




                    General Terms and Conditions governing
                              the KNVB Club Card.

1. A p p l i ca blity of Che conditions.
By signing the A pplication Form, the pros pective cardholder certifies:
- that he/s he has taken note of these General Terms and Conditions;
- is in agreement with the applicability of these General Terms and Condi­
tions and the Ge neral Terms and Conditions of the KNVB, as deposited
at the Clerk of the Court's Office of Utrecht District Court on 15 August
1984, as well as the additions thereto deposited at the cle r k of the
court's office by the KNVB since that date, whi c h are binding on purchasers
and/or recipients or any subsequent holder(s) of the KNVB Club Card issued
by the KNVB and/or officially stamped admission tickets;
- that he/she has filled in the application form completely and truthfully.

2. Appl ication
2.1 The prospective cardholder may apply for a KNVB Club Card by means
of a form issued by the KNVB. Delivery and pa yment will take place at
a post office/sub post office on p roduction of proof of identity recognised
by the Post O f f i c e (PTT). The manufacture and p ri n t i n g of the KNVB Club
Card and the conduct of the admi nistration of the K N V B Club Card scheme
are also the responsibility of DeltaFin Card Service, Capelle a/d IJssel.
The applicant must indicate on the form whether he/she opts for a card
which does or one which does not bear the name of a professional football
club or an amateur club, by ticking the relevant possibility and, as
appropriate, ticking or filling in the name of the club concerned.
2.2 During the introductory period up to and including 30 June 1989,
the KNVB Club Card costs 25 guilders for a 12-month period. With effect
from 1 July 1989, the KNVB Club Card costs 35 guilders per 12-month period.
Price changes may be made by the KNVB with effect from 1 July of any
year.
2.3 If the a pplicant is a minor, the applica tion form must also be signed
by a parent /legal representative of full legal age. The minor must also
produce proof of identity,
2.4 No rights may be derived from the pro cessin g of the application by
or on behalf of the KNVB. Issue of the card takes place only after approval
of the a p plic ation by or on behalf of the KNVB, in which connection more
detailed conditions may be stipulated. The K N V B is entitled to reject
an applicati on for a card without giving reasons.           In this case, the card
 £ee paid will fc»e refunded into the bank/giro account indicated. The KNVB
may gather information required for a ssessing the application.
 2.5 The c ardho l d e r declares that/she is in agreement with the use by
 the KNVB of the data provided for commercial purposes other than the
a p pli catio n procedure for the KNVB Club Card, if such information is
deemed by the KNVB to be in the interests of the football consumer.

3. Issue.
3.1 The applicant will receive no tification when his/her card can be
col lected from a post office/sub post office to be specified. Collection
must take place within 1 month. „
3.2 The prosp ective cardholder must collect the card in person.
3.3 The prosp ective cardholder must sign a proof of receipt. The cardholder
must sign h is/her card on the spot.

4. Ownership.
4.1 The card remains the property of the’ K N V B at all' times. The card
is strictly personal and not transferable.
4.2 The cardholder recognises the KNVB's right not to issue the card
(or not to have it issued), to cancel its validity, (or to have it cancelled)
and to take it in (or to have it taken in) for any reasons deemed appr o p r i ­
ate by the KNVB,
4.3 The cardholder recognises the obligation, at a moment's notice from
the KNVB, no longer to use the card at the home address given and to
-~                    to DeltaF i n .
                                      -   8   -




5. Vali dity of the card.
5-1 The card is valid until a date to be fixed by the KNVB. After that
date, of which the cardholder will receive notice in good time, the card
will be invalid. In good time before the end of the card's period of
validity, the KNVB will issue the cardholder, in a ccordance with procedures
to be determined by the KNVB, with a new card for the subsequent period
of validity, provided that the relevant costs are paid.
5.2 The card is activated for a 12-month period. Unless the cardholder
makes use of the collection authorisation, he/she will always receive,
in good time, a giro credit slip for the amount pa yable for the card
for the subsequent 12-month period. If the card holder has not made his/her
payment in time for the subsequent 12-month period, the subsequent 12-month
period will not be activated until the amount pa yable for the card has
been credited, without t^is giving any entitlement to a refund.
5.3 At profe ssiona l football matches, thfe c ardholder must have the card
in his/her posse ssion throughout the whole time spent on the stadium
premises. Cardholders of clubs to be specified by the KNVB may purchase
tickets for their clubs' away matches only at their own club. When p u r c h a s ­
ing these tickets, they must surrender the card for examination. When
entering the stadium at away matches, these cardholders must, of their
own accord and without being asked, show the card to the club and/or
stadium staff responsible for checking tickets and to investigation offi ­
cers.
5.4 The c ardholder must show and/or surrender the card at any time upon
first being requested to do so by staff acting on behalf of the KNVB.,
club and/or stadium who are responsible for checking tickets or maintaining
 law and order, by investigating officers, or by other persons to be indi­
cated by the KNVB, club or stadium.
5.5 The validity and lawful possession of the card will be automatically
and irrevocably terminated if the cardholder fails to comply with the
provisions of these General Terms and Conditions, is guilty by, among
other t h i n g s , misbehav iour of infringing any of the provisions of the
KNVB's General Terms and Conditions, or by the fact that the cardholder
has been arrested on suspicion of a criminal o ffence which comes within
 the concept of football vandalism. The c ardholder recognises the obligation
 to'surrender the invalid card immediately to the law-and-order personnel
 or to the investigating officer who has arrested hfm o r her. The cardholder
 agrees in such a situation to the return of the card to the KNVB, without
 this giving rise to any entitlement to a refund of (part of) the card
 fee.
 5.6 If the cardholder fails to comply w i t h the o bligation to show and/or
 surrender the card, the KNVB may give effect to the provisions of Article
 9.2 of the General Terms and Conditions of the KNVB, whereby the passholder
 incurs a penalty of 1,000 guilders payable immediately, without any notice
 needing to be given or          any  legal  proceedings         being required
 for this purpose.

6. Wit hdraw al of the card.
6.1 The KNVB is entitled at any time to terminate the agreement with
the cardholder and to wit h d r a w the card if, in the opinion of the KNVB,
there is good reason to do so. If the cardholder has committed an infringe­
ment of the General Terms and Conditions, the KNVB ceases to be under
any obligati on to the cardholder.
6.2 T e rmin ation by the cardholder is possible at any time provided such
termination is notified in writing by registered post to DeltaFin Card
Service, Postbus 350, 2900 AJ Capelle a/d IJssel. The cardholder must
render the card unusable - by cutting it into two pieces - and return
it enclosed with the notice of termination, to DeltaFin. In case of termin­
ation by the cardholder, the KNVB ceases, to be under any obligation to
the cardholder.
                                     -   9   -




6.3 If the KNVB has given the cardholder notice, sent to the home address
given, of withdrawal of the card, or the provisions of Article 5.5 have
become applicable, the cardholder, in addition to the obligation to return
or surrender the card immediately, will no longer be permitted to use
the card for any purpose. Any contravention of this provision shall c o n s t i ­
tute illegal misuse, without any further cla i m by or on behalf of the
KNV B being required.
6.4 For the duration of any refusal or withdrawal of the card by the
KNVB, the (prospective) cardholder will not be allowed into a stadium
or equivalent ground where a professional football match or a match involv­
ing a KNVB representative team is due to take place, is taking place
or has taken place, regardless of whether he/she is in possession of
a valid admission ticket. By special announcement, this provision may
also be declared applicable to amateur football matches. This provision
also constitutes a requirement not to stay in the places specified for
this purpose and to keep away from such places.
6.5 The cardholder is aware that failure to surrender or return the card
wh en first asked to do so, or use of the card for any p urpose after its
withdrawal or expiry of its validity, m a y result in prosecution for the
criminal offences of misa ppropriation or, where applicable, fraud (Articles
321 and 326 of the Penal Code).

7. Amendments.
The KNV B is entitled to amend the content of these General Terms and
Conditions with effect from a date to be fixed by it and notified in
w r i t i n g to the home address given by the cardholder. The cardholder will
be deemed to ap prove of such amendment if he/she continues using the
card after receiving the said notice of amendment. If the cardholder
does not a p prove of the amendment, the agreement expires and the card
becomes invalid, as soon as the cardholder notifies this in writing by
registered post to DeltaFin Card Service, Postbus 350, 2900 AJ Capelle
a/d IJssel. The Cardholder must render the card unusable - by cutting
it into two pieces - and return it with the noti ce of termination to
DeitaFin. In case of termination by the cardholder, the KNVB ceases to
be under any obligation to the cardholder,

8. U s e of the card without payment facility.
8.1 Cardhold ers may apply to reserve admission tickets for football matches.
Anyt reservation will be confirmed by a w r itten notification to the card­
holder, enclosing a giro credit slip with w hich the invoice must be paid
as promptly as possible. On receipt of the payment within the time stipu­
lated, the a dmission tickets will be sent to the cardholder or may be
collected from a place to be specified. If the time for payment is exceeded,
the alloc ation of reserved tickets will be cancelled.
8.2 Cardholders m a y order exclusive goods and services or take advanLage
of special offers. Any ordarr will be confirmed by notification in writing
to the cardholder, enclosing a giro credit slip with which the invoice
must be paid as promptly as possible. On receipt of the payment, the
ordered goods or the reservation for services will be sent to the cardholder
or the admi ssion tickets may be collected from a place to be specified.

9. Use of the card with payment facility,
9.1 The m i n imum age for holding a card with payment facility is 18 years.
9.2 Where applic ation is made for a card with payment facility, the app l i ­
cant authorises the KNVB to unde rtake,automatic collection under the
Bank Giro Centre [ = clearing house] or Post Of fice Bank [+/- = Girobank]
collection procedure of all money owed by him/her under this agreement.
If the cardh older withdraws the authorisation, the payment facility of
the card lapses.
                                   -   lo   -




9.3 Cardholders may apply to reserve admission tickets for football matches.
Any reservation will be confirmed by notification in writing to the c a r d ­
holder.   Once the amount payable has been (automatically) collected, the
tickets   will be sent as promptly as possible to the cardholder or may
be collected from a place to be specified,
9.4 Cardholders may order goods and services or take advantage of special
offers.   Any order will be confirmed by notification in wr iting to the
cardholder. Once the amount payable has been (automatically) collected,
the goods ordered or the reservation for services will be sent to the
cardholder or may be collected from a place to be specified,

10. Liability, loss and theft.
The KNVB, PTT Post BV and DeltaFin are not liable in any way for the
quality and reliability of goods or services supplied by third parties
on the basis of reservations, orders or other use of the card.
10.2 The cardholder is liable without limit for all reservations or orders
placed with the use of his/her card, including reservations or orders
placed by an unauthorised third party.
10.3 In case of loss or theft of the card, this must be reported by the
cardholder, immediately and by registered letter, to DeltaFin Card Service,
Postbus 350, 2900 AJ Capelle a/d IJssel, As soon as the report is received
by DeltaFin, the relevant card number will be blocked and the risk for
the cardholder ceases from that moment.
10.4 In case of loss or theft, the KNVB, under procedures to be determined
by it, may, after forwarding a copy of the written report of loss or
theft to the police, grant the cardholder a new card, for which a charge
may be made. The KNVB may also refuse to issue a new card. If, after
receipt of the n e w card, the old card is recovered, the latter must be
rendered unusab le - by cu tting it into two pieces ~ and immediately sent
by registered post to DeltaFin Card Service.

11. Change of address.
The cardholder must inform DeitaFin Card Service without delay of any
change of address ,

12. Disputes.
So far as the card, the Ceneral Terms and Conditions and the legal relati on­
ship with the cardholder are concerned, Dutch law is exclusively applicable.




                                                                                i
                                                                                i
