KH.1.6/FSA89LIC.DP

                                   cc    Mr    d e Q u i d t , FLA
                                         Mr    C l a y j b d n , LAB
                                         Mr   /Bapren, SARD
                                         Mr   (jsfebb




Mr M i l e s



FOOTBALL SPECTATORS ACT 1989: LICENCES UNDER SECTION 10

The purpose of this note is to record the outcome of the meeting
held on Friday 20 December in your office to discuss the broad
policy issues of the contents of the licences the FLA will be
required to issue and the form and content applications for such
licences should take.    The basis for discussion was to be a
general policy paper drawn up by the FLA and endorsed earlier by
their Board.    Those attending the meeting were yourself, Mr
Jacobs, Mr de Quidt, Mr Clayton and me.

It became apparent at a very early stage and before detailed
discussion of either intended issue (licences and application)
could take place, that there is a legal impediment to the FLA's
intention to issue licences in time for the opening of the
1992/93 football season.     This centred on the intention to
maintain pressure on League clubs, especially those in Divisions
1 and 2, to adhere the Government deadline(s) for all-seater
stadia by requiring such documents as Business Plans to accompany
applications. Legal opinion was that without the legal force of
an Order under s11 of the 89 Act (directing the FLA to include
conditions imposing requirements as respects seating at specified
premises) the FLA would be acting ultra vires.    The FLA had no
wish either to act ultra vires or to be without statutory
authority to require clubs to meet the deadlines should they need
to exercise it.

Following considerable debate it was agreed that a policy
decision was required urgently.      That which would be most
acceptable in the circumstances was to hold back from issuing
licences until 1993/94 but to introduce an Order under s11 at an
early date specifying the premises at which all First and Second
Division clubs play. This is to be accompanied by a Ministerial
announcement that the reason for this change of policy was to
withhold the added burden from clubs of a not insubstantial
licence fee at a time when they are facing the heavy financial
burden of converting their grounds to all seater.    This is not
to be taken as lessening the Governments resolve to adhere to the
timetable for all-seater stadia in accordance with Taylor's
recommendations, but as financial encouragement to assist clubs
meet the requirements.
Submissions and a draft Order would be prepared urgently with a
view to passing them to Ministers by Thursday 9 January (when
Earl Ferrers returns from Hong Kong) . It was accepted that this
is a very tight - almost impossible - timescale. I undertook to
prepare the draft submission (consulting LAB, FLA, DES and SHHD).
Mr Clayton undertook to draw up a draft Order on which I would
again consult the other bodies.




                                         D A PETERS
                                         G2 Division

                                         ^.January 1992
