                                        From: T A Ellingford
                                        Date:   25 November 1991

Mr Baden                                   cc:Mr Vaughan



NATIONAL PLAN FOR STADIA
PRESENTATION BY KPMG:26 NOVEMBER 1991

1.   I attach at Flag A copies of Charles Hughes' letters of 18
October and 20 November which give details of the timings of the
presentation. Please note from the latest letter that the
presentation will now be finished by lunchtime and the post
presentation discussion by 3.00 pm.
2.   At Flag B is a copy of your letter of 20 November to David
Peters at the Home Office which enclosed a list of issues to be
raised at the presentation. David's reply at Flag C indicates
that he is content with our list. He does however raise several
points about the position of Premier League clubs under the
Football Spectators Act and its subordinate legislation. You were
going to speak to him about this.
3.   At Fag D is a copy of the presentation package produced by
KPMG. The document considers two options for the future
development of stadia. These are the 'Blueprint' option,which
appears to be Scenario 2 of the FA's published Blueprint, and a
'Spirit of Taylor' option which does not appear in the
Blueprint. You will recall that the Blueprint considers Scenarios
1 and 2 the essential difference between the two being that
Scenario 2 includes a significant element of ground sharing
resulting in 75 grounds while Scenario 1 maintained the current
level of grounds. The total development costs of this new Taylor
option are at £310 significantly less than those of £625 for
Scenario 1 and £650 for Scenario 2. The Taylor option relies
heavily on 'upgrades'(S)(67 of these) with 21 major stadium
refurbishments(D),2 relocations(R) and 1 ground share ie Crystal
Palace and Wimbledon sharing Selhurst Park. The respective
figures for Scenario 1 are 54,15,23 and 0. The presentation
package also includes details of Premier Stadia under the Taylor
option.




                                                                   1
4.   You also asked me to identify any information included in
the presentation package but not in the Blueprint. In addition to
all the new information on the Taylor option there is:-

(a) Slides 6-9 which provide current stadia profiles eg
capacities,seating and attendances.
(b) A number of slides(34-40) on mechanisms and control for
distribution etc of funds although these are little more than a
skeleton and do not add too much to the Blueprint. Hopefully a
lot more flesh will be added during the presentation.




T A ELLINGFORD
