                                       jtj~          J titfaX    'u ('i

        u^* A«*x> \
PS/Mr Moynihan   0^   ‘>A*’A"‘                       cc    Mr   McDonald
                          fs^ f               ^*7*         Mr
                                                           Mr
                                                                Kinghan
                                                                Newsom
                          files*                           Mr   Smith
                          xTM ^
LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INTERIM REPORT

1.    We have taken up with the Home Office the matter of
football clubs taking on board the recommendations of the interim
report.

2.     I enclose a copy of the Home Office circular of 4 August
which of course, at paragraph 5, urges recipients to take action
on both the short term and the longer term recommendations so as
to put as many of them as possible into effect before the start
of the season.     Home Office feedback suggests that all the
parties concerned are trying to comply with the recommendations.
But it is difficult to apply the letter of some of them in
particular circumstances. The application of recommendation 8 on
perimeter fences, for example, is not straightforward where clubs
have fences of a completely different kind from those at
Hillsborough.   The line which the Home Office is taking is that
Taylor should be complied with unless there are compelling
reasons of public safety against.

3.    Authority and discretion in connection with the safety
certificate rests with the local authority and if,          having
considered   all   the   circumstances   and  consulted  with  the
interested parties, they conclude that a Taylor recommendation is
inappropriate or should not be complied with they are free to
make that judgement.    In correspondence with the local authority
in Sunderland the Home Office have indicated that they would not
expect them to depart from Taylor recommendations unless they
were satisfied that their alternative solution would provide at
least the same or preferably a higher degree of public safety.
There are no sanctions which can be imposed against the local
authorities, but the Home Office do not think that any are
necessary.    If the local authority want to breach a Taylor
recommendation against police advice, the police may appeal
against any proposed change in the safety certificate or decline
to take part in the policing or stewarding of the match inside
the ground until more appropriate arrangements can be agreed
between   the   club   and   the  force.     And   the  number  of
recommendations which fall to the clubs over which the police or
the local authority have little control are very few— no.25 and
possibly, nos 22 and 23.

4.    The Home Office make the point that, in the last resort,
what Taylor has to say are only recommendations of an independent
inquiry and we cannot insist that they should be complied with.
                                                                           I
This may be unpalatable but with the law as it stands there is no
more in practice we can do.




P A LEE
18 August 1989
                                                 HOME OFFICE
                                          Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                 Direct line: 01-273
                                                Switchboard: 01-273 3000



Our reference:
                  FEP/89 3 5 /4 8 /8 8

Your reference:


       The Chief Executive
       County Councils
       Metropolitan District Councils
       London Borough Councils
       Common Council of the City of London
       Fire and Civil Defence Authorities

       Chief Officers of Police

        Chief Fire Officers

        Chief Ambulance Officers


                                                       4 August 1989




        Dear Sir/Madam

        HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR 68/1989

        INTERIM REPORT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY
        Introduction
        The Interim Report of the Inquiry set up by the Home Secretary
        into the tragic events at Hillsborough football ground Sheffield
        on 15 April has now been published.  A copy of the Report is
        attached.  Further copies are available from HMSO bookshops.

        2.   The purpose of this circular is to inform recipients of the
        contents of the Report and to urge them to take required action
        without delay in order to implement, as necessary, the Inquiry's
        recommendations to improve safety arrangements at sports grounds.

        Government response

        3.   The Home Secretary has welcomed the thoroughness of the
        Report and its recommendations which he believes should be dealt
        with without delay pending the longer term findings of the
        Inquiry which will be published in its Final Report.
t




    E.R.



           Scope of the recommendations

           4.   Although the scope of recommendations is wide they are aimed
           primarily at football league grounds and the international
           stadiums used for soccer and rugby where there are liable to be
           large, densely packed crowds on terraces.  Recipients should
           nonetheless consider their application to other designated sports
           grounds and sports grounds at which large crowds are in
           attendance.

           5.   The 43 recommendations are in paragraph 316.  They are in
           two categories:  the 28 asterisked are those requiring
           implementation before the start of the new football season or
           immediately thereafter;  the remaining 15 are those which,
           although requiring immediate action are likely to take longer to
           put into effect.  The Home Secretary nevertheless urges
           recipients to take urgent action on both categories so as to put
           into effect as many of the recommendations as possible before the
           start of the season.

           The guide to safety at sports grounds

           6.   It is anticipated that the Guide will be amended to reflect
           the Inquiry's findings in due course after consultation with
           appropriate bodies.  Any changes will take account of the Final
           Report's recommendations.  If there is any doubt as to the
           nature of crush barrier testing described in Annex C of the Guide
           advice can be obtained from the Home Office 01-217 5352.

           The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975

           7.   Consideration is also being given to any necessary
           enforcement of the Report's recommendations by means of a
           Statutory Instrument under section 15A of the Safety of Sports
           Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) requiring safety certificates to
           include mandatory terms and conditions.  Consultation as required
           under section 18 of the 1975 Act will first be carried out before
           any such Order is made.

           Football clubs

           8.   A copy of this circular together with the Report has been
           sent to all 92 football league clubs and the international
           stadiums in the expectation that they will co-operate fully.
           Should co-operation not be forthcoming local authorities are
           reminded of their powers under s.10 of the 1975 Act for use if
           there is judged to be a serious risk to spectators in any part of
           the ground.

           Resource implications

           9.   Whilst acknowledging that local authorities will need to
           examine current priorities in order to action the Inquiry's
E.R.



       recommendations, it is not envisaged that there should be
       significant long-term resource implications for them.  The cost
       of any additional policing and/or provision of ambulance
       services at football grounds is expected to be met by the clubs
       or ground operators themselves.

       Other

       10. Any enquiries about this circular except barrier testing
       (see paragraph 6 above) should be addressed to Mr A Brown
       (01-273 2765).

       11.     Copies also go to those bodies on the attached list.

                                   Yours faithfully




                                   A H TURNEY
                                   Fire and Emergency Planning Department
E.R.



       Association of County Councils

       Association of Metropolitan Authorities

       London Boroughs Association

       Association of London Authorities

       Association of District Councils

       Welsh Counties Association

       Association of Chief Police Officers

       Clerks to Police Authorities

       Regional Managers, Health Authorities

       Chief and Assistant Chief Fire Officers' Association

       National Association of Fire Officers

       Fire Brigades Union

       Police Federation

       Police Superintendents' Association

       Association of Chief Ambulance Officers

       Football Association

       Football Association of Wales

       Football League

       Football Trust

       Football Grounds Improvement Trust

       Rugby Football Union

       Welsh Rugby Football Union

       Rugby Football League

       Speedway Control Board

       Cricket Council

       Jockey Club

       National Greyhound Racing Club
E.R.



       Lawn Tennis Association

       All England Tennis and Croquet Club

       Royal and Ancient Golf Club

       RAC Motor Sports Association

       British Board of Amateur Athletics

       Hockey Association

       British Show Jumping Association

       National Federation of Football Supporters Clubs

       Football Supporters Association

       St Johns Ambulance

       Sports Councils for England and Wales

       Central Council for Physical Recreation
LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INTERIM REPORT AND THE START OF THE
1989/90 FOOTBALL SEASON




Mr Moynihan has asked what the position of this Department
and the Home Office will be if it appears that football clubs
are opening their doors to spectators without having taken on
board the recommendations of Taylor's interim report.   I
would be grateful for your advice.




PHILIP STAMP
PS/Mr Moynihan
9 August 1989

cc   Mr Newsom
