                                                     SCOTTISH OFFICE
                                              W H I T E H A L L , LONDON   S W i A 2 AU


      8CQTU
The Rt Hon David Mellor QC MP
Secretary of State for National Heritage
Government Offices
Horseguards Road
LONDON
SWIP 3AL
                                     f ij




ALL SEATED REQUIREMENT AT FOOTBALL LEAGUE GROUNDS

I refer to your letter of 29 May to Kenneth Clarke,
At the time of the Adjournment Debate on the Future of Footbsfll on
8 May, Sir Hector Monro and I felt that before taking a deciSioH on
whether to extend a review of ail-seated requirements to Scotland* we
should consult the Scottish Stadia Committee out of courtesy jglvefi the
comparative lack of criticism of our all-seated policy in Scotland ,r On
reflection, such preliminary consultation might simply delay rc&ttgfs 'dlncfe,
irrespective of the views of the Committee, the announcement Y/hich you
propose to make on 4 June might lead to pressures from sbdie Scottish
clubs for a comparable review in Scotland.
Accordingly, I propose to announce by means of a separate Parliamentary
Answer on 4 June, subject to the agreement of colleague^, that this
review will be extended to Scotland, in order to consider the c&ge for
retaining standing accommodation at the 18 designated grounds lit the
Scottish First and Second Divisions presently inquired to go &ll-seated, I
attach the Answer which I would propose to make on 4 June to coincide
with your announcement, which might be revised to end as follows -
     ”My Right Honourable Friend the Secretary of State fot1 Scotland is
     making a separate statement about the position in Scotland
I;jl;e you, I feel that there might be scope to allow our smaller chibs to
retain the use of terracing in certain circumstances. However I am
particularly concerned that clubs which attract small crowds should not
automatically come under this relaxation. We will have to consider the
size of the crowd in relation to actual grcnmd capacity and whethfer for
example it would be proper to allow terracing to be retained, subject to
its good condition and perhaps a lower maximum standing derfsity.




 SMAOU303.062
For my p art, I would propose to consult widely in Scotland given the
many interested parties involved. However, I am conscious that our
football authorities will be preoccupied with matters in Sweden in the next
few weeks and for most clubs I imagine that Directors may be unavailable
due to holidays etc over the close season. Accordingly, I would suggest
that our officials should agree common terms of reference tot the review
and that consultation should be undertaken as appropriate to ' end August
and thereafter that we work towards a joint announcement as sotfn as
possible thereafter.                                           j
I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister, KenriWh Clarke,
Norman Lament, David Hunt, Tony Newton and Sir Robin Butler.
                                                              i    '




                                            IAN LANG




                                                              !*       '   $S




                                                              *            $




 SMAO0303.062
4




                                                                  i     ’■ jF->' '   '■

DRAFT   ANNOUNCEMENT    ON  POLICY                  TOWARDS       ALL-SEATED
REQUIREMENT AT FOOTBALL GROUNDS

Q      To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland, if there !is to be a
       reconsideration of the present policy towards all-seated requirement
       at Scottish Football League grounds.

A      The Government keeps under continual scrutiny the safety of sports
       grounds. In recent months, we have been examining thfe eill-sfeated
       requirement for those Scottish Football League Clubs \&th grounds
       designated in terms of the Safety of Sports Grounds ’Act 19^5 as
       being capable of holding more than 1.0,000 spectators.
                                                                  {       \
        We have decided that it would be wrong to revieW eithetf the
        principle or the timetable for all-seated grounds in the Scbttish
        Premier League or at Hampden Park and Murrayfield. Ii is essential
        that those major Scottish grounds should be all-seated, bearing in
        mind the large attendances frequently attracted to th ^ e grounds.
        It is also essential that our top football clubs meet the all-6eated
        standards necessary to compete in Europe and make full use of the
        resources available to them to provide grounds to a 1 standard of
        which we can all be proud.

         However, there may be circumstances in which standing
         accommodation can be retained at those First and Second Division
         grounds presently required to become all-seated, whet*fe a'fr&’r&ge
         attendances are very low in relation to actual ground          capacity,
                                                                  j, . . i
         Representations will be invited shortly from a number’of interested
         organisations in a review of all-seated policy for those grounds. No
         changes in policy will be made unless the Government are satisfied
         about the safety implications of allowing limited stkttding
         accommodation to remain at those smaller grounds.

          I will make a further announcement as soon as possible.




                                                                  1
                                                                  i


    SMA0 0 2 0 3 .0 6 2
