                                               ^Uo<_               p^v.
  £ t TARY
                                CONFIDENTIAL
                                                  2 MARSHAM STREET
                                                  L O N D O N SW1P 3EB
     f N V lR O ^ ^
                                                  01-276 3 0 0 0

                                                  My r e f :
Colin Waters Esq                                  Your ref :
Private Secretary to
The Rt Hon David Waddington QC MP
Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON
SWlH 9AT
                                                  ‘23 January       1990




                          c4\
LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S REPORT


You said it might be helpful if the Home Secretary were to have a
note from DOE offering factual comment on that part of Lord Justice
Taylor's report which deals with the Football Spectators Act and the
National Membership scheme.  This is attached.



   O n /< y S
                      >




A D RING
Private Secretary
                          CONFIDENTIAL




PART IV - THE FOOTBALL SPECTATORS ACT 1989


1.   CONTENTS OF INVITATION TO TENDER (ITT) (CH.13)
                                1

The judge recognises that the scheme does not exist even in draft
form but goes on to criticise the concept of the scheme on the
basis of the contents of the ITT. He says that the ITT        was
prepared by Ernst and Young "in conjunction with DOE'. Comment.
It was not. It was prepared on the instructions of the football
authorities' working party. It was not agreed with us. It is not,
a secure basis on which to judge the national membership scheme
that could be achieved.


2.   DANGER OF CONGESTION AND DISORDER (CH.15)

a)   Present risk of congestion (paragraphs 38Q-381). The judge
implies that congestion is a common problem now, as a result of
inadequate turnstiles and late arrivals. Comment. In fact
congestion occurs only at a small proportion of matches.

b)   Additional time to check cards (382-396). The judge regards
the target set in the ITT of an additional second to check each
card as crucial but he is sceptical that it can be achieved,
given the procedures needed at the turnstiles and the fact that
there is no comparable scheme in existence, subject to large
crowds, bad weather etc. He was impressed by GEC's demonstration
but appears to discount it on the grounds that it was carried out
in perfect conditions.  ,
Comment. This is a serious pre-judgement. TA e suppliers may be
able to achieve the target. They may produce a scheme which
allows the spectator to "swipe" his own card (the GEC approach).
The fact that a scheme succeeds in good conditions is not
evidence that it will fail in bad. More turnstiles can also help.

c)   Computer reliability (397). The judge quotes ACPO's anxiety
about this and endorses it. Comment. This again is pre-judgement,
ACPO's evidence was given before the ITT was even issued.

d)   Emergencies (400). The judge criticises the Act for not
spelling out how computer failures or other emergencies are to he
dealt with. Comment. As he also says, this can be spelt out in
the scheme and, in our view, should be.

e)   Testing (401-9).,. The judge is doubtful that testing at two
clubs, as envisaged, will be adequate because it may not test
fully (1) potential problems with the technology; or (2) the
determination of hooligans to bust the system. Comment. He does
not understand how technology is tested (nor does he seem to have



                          CONFIDENTIAL
                          CONFIDENTIAL


listened to much expert advice). The consultants are confident
that technological problems can be simulated. The extent to which
hooligan behaviour can be tested is a matter of judgement. Ours
is that a test is likely to be subject to the most determined
attempts to disrupt it. More generally, if the first tests were
not convincing, we would have some more.

3.   WILL THE SCHEME WEED OUT HOOLIGANS? (CH.16)

a)   Inside grounds (411-414). The judge's view is that the
prospects of the scheme's success in eliminating hooliganism
inside grounds are seriously flawed by our recognition that the
photograph on a spectator's card will not be checked, on entry'
(because of delays). Hooligans could therefore gain entry by
using stolen or borrowed cards. He quotes ACPO in support of his
view. Comment. We have never claimed that the scheme will end
hooliganism in one fell swoop. It will take time but, as the ACPO
quote implies, the photograph on the card will be a major factor
in the deterrent process.

b)   Outside grounds 415-419. The judge rejects our argument that
hooligans banned from attending matches will give up going to
them. He says that the Luton precedent is ’not relevant because it
bans away supporters and we do not. Comment. This is a matter of
judgement; it seems to us that if football hooligans aredenied
football matches as the focus of their hooliganism, they will
lose interest, if not at once, then before long.

4.   POLICE RESOURCES (CH.17)

The judge argues that the scheme will add significantly to the
numbers of police needed,at football grounds, at least initially,
to deal with "problem cards". He quotes A£PO comments about
problems with computers at Manchester United .as evidence of the
potential increased demand. Comment. The argument is confused.
The ITT proposes that only cards which register invalid should
lead to apprehension of the card-holder and these should be very
few in number, especially initially; malfunctioning cards would
be confiscated at the turnstile. Stewards could be used to take
the holders of invalid cards to an interrogation centre, where
the police would consider whether an arrest should be made. ACPO
had not seem the ITT.

5.   THE JUDGE'S SOLUTION (CH.18)

He proposes:

     (i)   Developing the detection and evidential potential of
           CCTV and the new National Football Intelligence Unit;




                          CONFIDENTIAL
                            CONFIDENTIAL


      (ii)   Prohibiting, by creating criminal       offences,       three
             specific activities in the ground:
             (a) throwing a missile;

             (b) chanting obscene or racialist abuse;

             (c) going on the pitch without reasonable excuse;

      (iii) Extending, the courts' power to make attendance centre
            orders, in conjunction with exclusion orders, for
             football related offences on occasions of specified
            matches so as to keep hooligans away from football
            grounds;

      (iv)   Using electronic   monitoring   (tagging)   for   the    same
             purpose.


Comment.

(i)     is already happening.

(ii)   would   mean the creationof new offences specific to sports
grounds but     each of these forms of behaviour can lead to
prosecutions   now. The problem lies in establishing evidence and
the attitude   of magistrates' courts.

(iii) would be new; attendance orders are only used in respect
of under^21 year olds at the moment. But, in the body of the
report   (paragraphs    326-334)   the   judge  recognises  the
administrative complex!-fcy of handling all convicted offenders
whenever a relevant match is being played.    ^

(iv)    would also be new andcould   be a helpful way of checking
thatconvicted offenders do      not breach exclusion orders. At
present, the Home Office is still experimenting with tagging on a
limited scale.




                            CONFIDENTIAL
