                                                         (^lM^sor FOsSi..



    Football Licensing Authority
?
    Chairman: Mr Norman Jacobs
    27 Harcourt House
    19 Cavendish Square
    London W1M 9AD
    Tel: 071-491 7191
    Fax: 071-491 1882

      Ms G HpitJsworth
      Sporte^and Recreation Division
      Department of Education and Science
      Sanctuary Buildings
      Great Smith Street
      LONDON       SW1P 3BT                         18 February 1992



               t/L   \rijsJL cJU ^ —




      I attach brief background notes on each of the seven London First
      Division   clubs   in  connection    with   the  oral   PQ   from
      Dr Goodson-Wicks.
                                       f

      In briefing your Minister you will wish to bear in mind both that
      there should be no suggestion that the 1994 deadline for going
      all seater will be relaxed and that seating was only one element
      of the Taylor package of proposals and should be seen in context.




                                              I T " "           (k^JU


                                                    J R K DE QUIDT
                                                    Chief Executive
      TAYLOR IMPLEMENTATION - LONDON FIRST DIVISION CLUBS


Arsenal

Has plans in place for conversion of ground to 37,000 all seater
by 1994 deadline at total cost of £22.5 million.         Planning
permission secured at end of January for revised design of new
North Bank stand.   Arsenal Bond intended to raise £16 million
encountering resistance from fans because bond holders must still
purchase season tickets.


Chelsea

Has plans for phased three stage project involving three new
stands plus housing, hotel, leisure centre and offices.      Cost
variously estimated at £20-25 million.      Club must also find
£22.85 million to buy stadium from Cabra Estates.        Planning
permission for stadium of 41,000 but granted subject to no ground
sharing.  Fulham with dowry of £5 million have agreed to share
ground. Club in danger of over-reaching itself. May be seeking
to install more seats than the site will bear.


Crystal Palace

Club Chairman has argued publicly against all seater requirement
but well on the way to meeting 1994 deadline for 27,000 all
seater at cost of £8 million.   Attempt to relocate to National
Recreation Centre rebuffed by local authority.     Club Chairman
recently criticised fans for low attendance.    Ground shared by
Wimbledon (see below).


Queens Park Rangers

Club reaping benefit of past ground improvements.    Only three
standing areas remain to convert to seating.    Main problem is
need to extend rooflines.  Planned all seater capacity by 1994
of 20,000 at cost of £2.5-3.5 million.   Small club with fairly
low attendances, very dependent on Football Trust grant.


Tottenham Hotspur

Club remains opposed to all seater requirement largely on
financial grounds. Only recently emerged from severe financial
troubles. No plans yet announced for conversion to all seater.
Club safety management generally leaves much to be desired.
Safety at matches largely left to the local authority.   One of
three First Division clubs causing serious concern to the FLA.
West Ham
Has plans and planning permission for conversion to 25,000 all
seater by 1994 at cost of £15 million. Needs to build new two-
tier stands at each end.     Proposed "Hammers Bond" debenture
scheme designed to raise £15 million encountering major
resistance from fans and looks unlikely to raise anything like
the amount required.    Club unsettled and in real danger of
relegation to Second Division.


Wimbledon

Currently ground sharing with Crystal Palace on 7 year agreement
with option for further seven years. Moved from previous ground
because not capable of redevelopment to Taylor standards.
Seeking to build new stadium near Croydon but local authority
opposed.    Now exploring possibility of sharing Wimbledon
Greyhound Stadium. Lowest attendances in the First Division and
limited resources.
