     K H
       H ..   3 . 6 / F E BB MM EE EE TT. .DDMM

\
                     HOME OFFICE

                                                   Direct line 0 1 - 2 7 3    3C
                                                  Switchboard 0 1 - 2 7 3    300c




    Mr A R Baden                                                                    Your reference
    Department of Environment
    Sport and Recreation Division                                                   Our reference
    2 Marsham Street
    LONDON
                                                                                         FEP/90 35/48/89
                                                                                    Date FEP/89 35/48/127
                                                                                         6 March 1990
                                                                                                            in

    Dear Tony


    MEETING 14 FEBRUARY 1990 RE ISSUES ARISING FROM THE
    HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY FINAL REPORT

    I mentioned to Tom Ellingford that I felt one or two points
    contained in your note dated 26 February of the meeting of 14
    February did not reflect accurately our position.  I thought I
    should therefore set out that position as we see it. I have
    done so below cross-referencing the comments to the relevant
    paragraphs of your note.

    Paragraph 3(1)

    2.   We recognise that it is for us to take the lead on
    implementing the recommendations' of the Final Report of the
    Inquiry.  In so doing we are content to answer enquiries about
    financing some of the recommendations (particularly all seated
    accommodation) along the common line which our two departments
    have agreed. We look to DOE (SARD) to take the lead in
    determining the policy for funding of sport, including
    football and including the safety issues which affect football
    and/or other sports. This simply follows the existing
    practice.

    Paragraph 3(2)

    3.   Our position here remains more open than is suggested in
    your note. At present we intend first to consult the
    representative sporting bodies before considering introduction
    of primary legislation. Their willingness to move voluntarily
    to all/more seated accommodation is something which might
    influence our approach. The schedule to the Home Secretary's
    statement on 29 January has not changed.

    Paragraph 3(3)

    4.   Similarly, extending the role of the FLA is also more
    open than is suggested in your note and remains as set out in
    the schedule to the Home Secretary's statement.
Paragraph 4

5.   The lead department on hooliganism is a matter between
you and F8 Division.  I would have thought it would be more
accurate to say that DOE continues to be the lead department
on any work associated with the need for and introduction of
any football membership scheme in order to help combat soccer
hooliganism.

6.   I hope this clarifies the situation as we see it and I am
sorry if there has been any misunderstanding.

                                        Yours sincerely




                                        D J MOULD

                                        (Fire and Emergency
                                        Planning Department)
