                                                        GJW
                                           GJW GOVERNMENT RELATIONS LTD
                                               64 Clapham Road London SW9 OJJ
                                          Telephone 01-582 3119 Facsimile 01-735 9561




       y4                                    4             c o /y .                                                                       rtcm
cmrf-Vi&w         '<??0                                                                                                  /
crAJ                ‘fjfzrrJff')            ■^ /fen€£r               LiTgiter                                CcrmPt^yc              ’JZtpfe&iJl
                7/Af iU?£*J &&/yvi7Lf) ~t>or                                                                           facrr
            ^                                     WITH COMPLIMENTS                                           y fo            frs)
                                                                                                                   /h J & i^ r Y
                Brussels O ffice: A venue de T ervuren 402, B-1150 Brussels Telephone (02) 771 0120. Facsimile (02),762 8689- —
                                                                                                                                      2. fJ^>
                                                                                                                                     __
                                                                                                                                     3a&ot&
                           THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE

                   PLANNING TO RELOCATE FOOTBALL STADIA



1. Introduction
The recommendations of the Lord Justice Taylor Report have raised
the prospect of relocation for a number of League clubs. Certain
clubs will be unable to accommodate their average and above
average gate due to the reduced capacity in their existing
stadium and others will simply be unable to afford to implement
the changes without the financial benefits of selling their
existing site. In both of these situations, the clubs may have
no option but to relocate to a new ground.



2. The Difficulties Faced
Those clubs that wish to relocate so far have mostly met with
difficulties. The League has details of those clubs involved and
their individual problems, but the history of Bristol Rovers and
Luton Town (enclosed) serve to illustrate the difficulties faced.
In brief, they are :

       a.     Football stadia are seen as bad neighbours and local
              authorities have difficulties in agreeing to give
              permission for sites, many of which seem sensitive.

              Luton Town FC have had their proposals on a site at
              Butterfield Green rejected following strong public
              opposition.

       b.      In a number of cases the club may wish to relocate to
               a site which does not lie within the same planning
               authority as their existing stadium and may not even
             I carry the same name as the club. There is no incentive
            /I for a neighbouring authority to offer assistance to a
               football club.

              Thus we have seen Kingswood DC being unhelpful to
              Bristol Rovers, LB Bromley refusing to allow Crystal
              Palace and Wimbledon to build a new stadium in the
              borough, and South Bedfordshire DC refusing permission
              for Luton Town to relocate to a site within its
              district.

       c.     Clubs need to be particularly careful about sensitive
               sites. They cannot select Green Belt sites and expect
               the planning authority and the DoE to waive planning
  \/          restrictions on these areas.
                 Ministers and senior officials at the DoE have made it
                 clear that stadia are inappropriate developments in the
                 Green Belt. Bristol Rovers have selected a Green Belt
                 site as did Luton Town on an early application at
                 Sundon Springs.
        d.       Clubs must accept that residents and councillors may
                 not necessarily place as great an importance on the
                 well-being of the club as they do. They must not
                 expect decision makers to be as enthusiastic about
                 granting planning permission as they themselves would
                 be.
               In other words, they must be aware that their's is
             : bound to be a sensitive issue and that they must handle
             I the public and government relations with great care
               from an early stage. There is a feeling that Bristol
               Rovers were far too cavalier in their attitude when
               submitting their proposal.

3. What Should The Industry Be Aiming For ?
Before looking at the practical ways to achieve planning
permission for a stadium, there are two issues which should be
raised.

        a.       Ground Sharing

        There are a number of obvious cases where two clubs could
        share the same ground (Bristol City / Bristol Rovers,
        Sheffield Wednesday / Sheffield United, Manchester City /
        Manchester United, Arsenal / Tottenham Hotspurs, etc). We
        accept that there are a number of problems in this, not
        least the historic rivalry between neighbouring clubs.
        However, we feel that clubs should not dismiss this idea
    '   since it has both financial benefits and potential gains for
        a local authority in terms of concentrating sporting
        activity in one site.
^       b.       National Stadia

       Relocation and ground sharing raises the possibility of the
       construction of a number of National Stadia. If Britain
       were ever to host an international event, there would need
       to be a network of 8 - 10 stadia sufficiently large to hold
     v crowds of 50,000 plus. Such Stadia, if combined with ground
    \ sharing, could be built, for example, in London, Liverpool,
       Manchester, Bristol,Sheffield and Nottingham and provide
       facilities of international standard.
4. The Way Forward For Clubs
We are aware that not all clubs will see the need to relocate.
However, for those that wish to build new stadia, we feel that it
is important that they approach the process in the right manner.

Clubs must recognise that development control which concerns
sensitive proposals is largely a political, rather than an
administrative process. The work to achieve a successful result
should start well before the submission of a planning
application.

It seems clear that the best means of implementing the Taylor
recommendations is for clubs and local authorities to work
together. Meetings between the football authorities and the
local authority associations have already demonstrated that there
is a mutual willingness to co-operate on this issue. We know
that there will be a draft PPG produced on the subject of sport
and recreation facilities and understand that it is likely to
follow lines similar to those outlined below. The aim is to
identify the criteria for sites at a strategic level and then
work with the local authorities to identify sites that meet those
criteria.

We feel strongly that any club wishing to relocate should
approach matters in this way :

     a.   Rather than identifying a site and submitting a
 I        planning application, clubs should aim to put the onus
          on the local authorities to find suitable areas for
          future stadia development.

     b.   Clubs should approach the strategic planning authority
          to ask for assistance in establishing the relevant
          criteria for sites and, ultimately, in identifying
          potential sites. This will be the county council, the
          London Borough or the metropolitan authority depending
          on the area in which the club is currently situated.

     c.   In the first case, the county council should be asked
           to call together all of the district councils within
           their area in order to discuss the club's relocation
           problems.

 ;   d.   In the metropolitan and London boroughs it will be more
 !        difficult to achieve co-operation between neighbouring
          boroughs since there is no effective strategic body to
          co-ordinate a cross-boundary search. However, the
          principle remains the same - an approach should be made
          to the borough and they should be asked to help involve
          the neighbouring boroughs.

     e.   It is important that    the strategic planning authority
           is made aware of the   urgency of the matter and is not
          permitted to defer any consideration until the review
          of the structure plan/unitary development plan. If the
          subject of stadia location is tied in with the
          structure plan process, it is likely to take many years
          until a decision is made.
     f.   Any development should be seen as a partnership between
           the club and a local authority in order to improve the
           leisure facilities in the borough. Clubs should not
           simply be looking for a stadium site, but an integrated
           sporting complex which includes a football stadium.
 |        The clubs should be aware that the local authority will
           probably be looking for some gain out of the
           partnership and should seek to satisfy them.
 i


     g.   The PR and government relations aspects should be
           handled very carefully at an early stage. Clubs must
 i        realise that any application is bound to be
           controversial and will require a great deal of work
           with residents and the local Member of Parliament
           before vocal opposition has been expressed.
4. Conclusion

We realise that this is an ideal and may not always be possible.
A particular local authority may not be willing to co-operate or
they may feel that they have no need for an integrated sports
development.

However, we are convinced that by approaching the issue in this
manner clubs have a greater probability of success than they will
have by simply submitting a planning application.
