                                                                     /:2l o jxj^

            28-7.JS         RESTRICTED          HOME OFFICE
                                         Queen Anne's Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                 Direct line: 071-273- 33 1 4
                                               Switchboard: 071-273-3000

Our reference:
Your reference:

                                          23 July 1
 J Vaughajaf Esq
 Department of Education and Science
 Sports & Recreation Division
 Room 1/67
 Elizabeth House                    (I   jy
 York Road                    r-> .
 LONDON SE1 7PH               \UJ *




 PREPARATIONS FOR THE EUROPEAN CHAMPIONSHIP FINALS

Thank you for your letter of 16 July in which you proposed
that the Home Office should chair the main Working Group
preparing for the European Championship Finals.


I am quite content for us to take this on and I am asking Keir
Hopley to take on the chairmanship.


I very much agree that we should keep subsidiary issues away
from the main Working Group. We shall need to think carefully
with you, FCO and D.Tp about the structure of sub-groups
before setting up the first meeting of the main group. I
think Keir can best pursue this by informal contacts in
advance of the first formal meeting.


You also asked about the current position on implementing the
proposed Taylor offence of ticket touting. We did wish to
introduce this into Sir John Wheeler's Football (Offences)
Bill but the House authorities ruled it out of order. We
therefore retain a commitment to introduce the offence as soon
as Parliamentary time allows. However, the Government, as you
may know, has decided not to introduce a Criminal Law Bill in
the next session, preferring to concentrate instead on
specific-purpose bills so as not to open the possibility of
unwelcome debate on wider issues. There is no vehicle in the
programme to introduce a touting offence. What might happen
in subsequent sessions is very speculative, but I think it
unlikely that Ministers collectively would take the view that
this proposed offence should have a high priority. In
reality, therefore, a new touting offence may not reach the
                          RESTRICTED


Statute Book quickly - unless, of course, a back-bencher well
placed in the Private Members' ballot decided to take on the
matter.




                         J L GODDARD
                         F8 Division
