                                                                      I   TOnrv.
                                                                      1 ■ *=; t e

                 THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION & SCIENCE
     SANCTUARY BUILDINGS GREAT SMITH STREET WESTMINSTER LONDON SWIP 3BT
           SWITCHBOARD 071-925 5000 CENTRAL FAX 071-925 6000 GTN 3060




                                                           Direct Line
                                                           071-925 6371
D Peters Esq
G2 Division
The Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON SW1                                                     February 1991




REVIEW OF THE FOOTBALL SPECTATOR (DESIGNATION OF FOOTBALL MATCHES
IN ENGLAND AND WALES) ORDER 1990
Following my recent telephone conversation with David Webb in
response to your minutes of 14 and 28 January I am writing to
you to confirm my remarks.
I am grateful to you for keeping us so well informed of
developments on matters on which you are clearly in the lead. We
appreciate the strength of the arguments set out in the paper
which accompanied your minute of 14 January and our only concern
is that if the Home Office is to take this line whether the
safety certification powers of the LFA are also to be removed
for these grounds? Given the importance of ensuring safety at
the smaller designated grounds, I take it that the FLA's
responsibilities under section 13 of the Football Spectators Act
1989 would still apply to the Telford's of this world? In other
words although the licencing powers of the FLA are to be
restricted as proposed, its ability to review the discharge by
local authorities of their functions under the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975 is not to be similarly restricted? To achieve
this distinction there would need to be two classes of designated
matches for these purposes in addition to a further category of
designated matches for purposes of the football-related public
order legislation as referred to in paragraph 2 of the draft
submission o f *14 January. I would be grateful if you could
confirm whether or not this is the intention?
If you do decide not to designate Berwick Rangers matches we
would be interested in knowing how this is to be presented
publically? My own view is that there are dangers in pursuing
publically the argument that there is little difference between
Berwick and England non-FL clubs who play at designated spoxts
grounds since I am sure there are a number of examples in the
third and fourth divisions of the Football League who have
similar low average gates. It might be better to present this
>;




     decision as bringing Berwick in line with the other Scottish
     clubs as part of a general re-examination to ensure a smooth and
     consistent working of the licencing scheme. The point made above
     in relation to the draft submission of 14 January applies to
     Berwick as well, ie are the safety certification powers of the
     FLA still to apply in relation to Berwick or not?
     Yours sincerely




     A R BADEN
     SPORT AND RECREATION DIVISION




                                                                    2
