                                                          75WviC           1

1.   Mr Vaughan
2.   PS/Mr Moynihan


TAYLOR REPORT: HOME OFFICE CONSIDERATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS FOR
NEW OFFENCES AND PENALTIES

1.   The Minister will wish to know that Home, Of f ice _Ministers
are likely to agree next Tuesday to take the following action in
relation to   Lord   Justice Taylor1s recommendations     for new
offences and penalties concerning football hooliganism.

2.   The Minister will recall that Lord Justice Taylor in
addition to recommending that the provisions of the Football
Spectators Act, 1989, concerning a national membership scheme
should not be implemented,     also recommended as part of an
alternative package the following measures:        >

     (i)       prohibiting,  by creating criminal offences,    three
               specific activities in the ground concerning throwing
               a missile, chanting obscene or racialist abuse and
               going on the pitch without reasonable excuse;

     (ii)      extending the court's power to make attendance centre
               orders;

     (iii) using electronic         monitoring   (tagging)   for   the   same
           purpose,
                                1                     .


3.   Lord Justice Taylor also recommended creating a new offence
of ticket touting.

4.    Following  a recent    submission  by  officials  the  Home
Secretary has provisionally indicated that he is in favour of the
follov/ing action in relation to each of the above:

     (i)       all of these three activities should be made an
               offence.  The' Home Office are concerned at the problem
               of effective enforcement of the offence of chanting
               obscene or racialist abuse, but consider that it would
               be presentationally difficult to proceed with the
               other two offences and not with this one;

     (i i )    not to extend the scope of attendance centre orders
               given that many new centres would be needed,        at
               considerable cost, simply to provide the nationwide
               service  that    Lord  Justice  Taylor   envisages  on
               Saturdays.    There would be even greater practical
              ■problems andcost to make provision for mid-week
               matches.   However, the Home Office are considering
               issuing a circular reminding courts of the power they
               already have and to encourage them to consider linking
               attendance centre orders with exclusion orders for
               offenders aged under 21;
     (iii) subject to the evaluation of the cost effectiveness of
           electronic monitoring, courts will be able to support
           curfew orders with electronic monitoring.      It will
           then be    for  the courts   to   decide  whether  the
           imposition of a curfew order as a penalty' for a
           football-related offence would be justified by the
           seriousness of the offence.  If it is, the Home Office
           suggest the times of the curfew could be fixed to keep
           the offender away from football matches.

5.   The Home Office are also minded to create an offence of
selling tickets for and on the day of a football match without
authority from the Home Club to do so.    They would provide for
clubs to give refunds to the genuine ticket holder who through
illness, for example, found himself unable to attend on the day
of the match and who would otherwise commit an offence if he sold
his ticket to a friend that day.

6.   The Minister may agree that all of the above proposals are
to be welcomed.




A R BADEN
SARD C
P3/165
276 0675,

20 July 1990

cc. Mr   McDonald
    Mr   Lee *
    Mr   Ellingford
    Mr   Newsom
