                THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION & SCIENCE
               ELIZABETH HOUSE YORK ROAD L O N D O N SEI 7PH
           SWITCHBOARD 071-934 9000 FAX 071-934 9082 G TN No. 3914




The Rt Hon Peter Morrison MP                                 Direct Line
House of Commons                                              071-934
London SW1A OAA
                                                              Your Reference

                                                              Our Reference
                                                             AT/PSO/41923/90

                                                             7 December 1990




 Q&aS feteS,
Thank you for your letter of 16 November enclosing this letter
from Mr Chris Ledger, the Chief Executive of the Phoenix
Initiative about their possible involvement in implementing the
recommendations of the Taylor report.

I was most interested to learn about the work of Phoenix and I
note that they specialise in promoting community partnerships
capable of taking forward urban renewal proposals. Quite apart
from the possible scope for Phoenix to assist inner urban based
clubs through the mechanisms that Phoenix employ in setting up
Community Development Corporations there is the more general
question of whether Phoenix might have a role to play to assist
in drawing up guidelines to show clubs how to maximise possible
private sector support.

I am encouraged by the interest shown by Phoenix since, as I have
made quite clear publicly, in my view football clubs should look
very carefully at the possibilities of entering into partnerships
with local authorities, the private sector and others in
providing new and redeveloped football stadia which might also
include commercial and community facilities.

I understand that Mr Ledger intends to get in touch with the head
of my Sport and Recreation Division to suggest a meeting on how
Phoenix might be of assistance to football,   I think such a
meeting would be useful and I have ^asked to be kept in touch with
developments.
                                                 AT/PS0/41923/9C)
           /0&
1.   Mr B^jfen
2.   Mr Vaughan
3.   PS/Mr Atkins
       THE PHOENIX INITIATIVE: SPORTS STADIA AND THE TAYLOR
                          RECOMMENDATIONS

1.  The letter of 16 November from the Rt Hon Peter Morrison MP
encloses one from an organisation called the Phoenix Initiative
about implementation of Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations for
the improvement of football grounds.
2.   The Phoenix Initiative is a non profit making organisation
set up by the building and finance industries. Its purpose is to
advise the private and public sector on practical issues
affecting urban renewal and act as a catalyst in bringing
together   interested  bodies  from   those  sectors  eg.  local
authorities, developers, commercial and industrial concerns to
form urban renewal partnerships      through the mechanism of
Community Development Corporations (CDCs).
3.   The DOE has contributed towards the organisation's running
costs at £40k per annum for the last 4 years (1990-91 is the last
year of funding) and an official from Inner Cities Directorate of
the DOE is an observer on their Board.

4.   As a separate issue from support to Phoenix to assist in
urban renewal,   ICGD are considering whether there are any
circumstances in which football stadia improvement projects might
be considered eligible for City Grant. These circumstances could,
of course, only arise where the normal regeneration outputs, ie.
jobs, housing and environmental improvements resulted from the
project. A submission from ICGD on this issue, will be with DOE
Ministers shortly which the Minister will also be copied. (The
issue has arisen because of a recent approach to ICGD from
Millwall Football Club. Phoenix are not, to our knowledge,
connected with this approach).

5.   It is understood that the Chief Executive of the Phoenix
Initiative is to approach Mr Vaughan about the possibility of a
meeting at official level to discuss how they might be able to
assist football. Such a meeting in which we would want to involve
ICGD will be useful in clarifying what Phoenix can do for
football but it is possible that in addition to advice on the
relevance of the CDC type mechanism to particular projects,
Phoenix may also have a role in advising on the drawing up of
guidelines to assist clubs in attracting private sector support.

6.   The Football League say that they have been approached by
Phoenix. Several inconclusive meetings have been held with the
League who are apparently not clear on precisely what Phoenix can
offer football. They have asked them to put their ideas in
writing.

7. So far as the Football Trust is concerned, of which Mr Ledger
is critical, they are under an obligation to take into account
the needs and resources of clubs in considering applications
from them for funding from the money made available through the
cut in Pool Betting Duty* In doing so they will have available to
them advice from independent accountants and surveyors to help
ensure that projects are feasible and that value for money is
obtained. In addition the Trust normally only pay grant on
satisfactory completion of approved works. Interim payments are
only made in exceptional circumstances and then only with the
specific authorisation of the Trustees. While guidelines of the
type advocated by Phoenix would clearly help in ensuring maximum
benefit is obtained by clubs from Trust grants, there should be
no question therefore in the absence of those guidelines of funds
being squandered as suggested by Mr Ledger. Furthermore the
Minister may agree that such guidelines are more for the League
than the Trust.
8.   A draft reply to the Rt Hon Peter Morrison is attached.




T A ELLINGFORD
SARD
P3/163
Ext 0605

5    December 1990

cc   Ms E Sealey ICGD
                                                                 AT/PSO/41923/90


DRAFT REPLY FOR MR ATKINS TO SEND TO THE RT HON PETERMORRISON MP


Thank you for your letter of 16 November enclosing this letter
from   Mr     Chris    Ledger,     the    Chief   Executive      of     the   Phoenix
Initiative about their possible involvement in implementing the
recommendations of the Taylor report.


I was most interested to learn about the work of Phoenix and I
note   that    they    specialise    in promoting         community     partnerships
capable of taking forward urban renewal proposals.                      Quite apart
from the possible scope for Phoenix to assist inner urban based
clubs through the mechanisms that Phoenix employ in setting up
Community     Development       Corporations      there    is   the   more    general
question of whether Phoenix might have a role to play to assist
in drawing up guidelines to show clubs how to maximise possible
private sector support.


I am encouraged by the interest shown by Phoenix since, as I have
made quite clear publicly, in my view football clubs should look
very carefully at the possibilities of entering into partnerships
with   local     authorities,       the    private    sector      and    others      in
providing new and redeveloped football stadia which might also
include commercial and community facilities.


I understand that Mr Ledger intends to get in touch with the head
of my Sport and Recreation Division to suggest"^ meeting on how
Phoenix     might     be   of   assistance   to    football.     I    think   such   a
meeting would be useful and I have asked to be kept in touch with
developments.
