. From:     E Soden                               cc   Ms   Adams
            F2 Division                                Mr   Yates
            Ext 3141
            19 May 1989           S /                  Mr
                                                       Mr
                                                            Moriarty
                                                            Chilcot
                                    H -r               Mr
                                                       Mr
                                                            Turney
                                                            Boys Smith
                                                       Mr   Watts ^
                                                       Mr   Goddard, F8
                                                       Mr   Mower
                                                       Mr   Lidington
    Mr Storr

    COMMENTS BY SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE OFFICERS ON HILLSBOROUGH:
    CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN DAVID ALTON MP AND THE POLICE COMPLAINTS
    AUTHORITY

    David Alton MP sent to the Home Secretary a copy of his letter to
    the Chairman of the Police Complaints Authority asking the
    Authority to initiate an enquiry into the propriety of remarks
    passed by police officers of the South Yorkshire Branch of the
    Police Federation about the conduct of Liverpool fans at
    Hillsborough. This note records the outcome.


    2.   Sir Cecil Clothier wrote to Mr Alton to say that the
    Authority has no statutory power to initiate investigations and
    questioned whether Mr Alton was making a formal complaint as a
    member of the public or as a Member of Parliament. He suggested
    that in the latter case Parliament was the proper place for Mr
    Alton to raise his concerns.


    3. Mr Alton has subsequently replied to the effect that his
    initial letter was written as a citizen of Liverpool and
    repeating his request for an investigation. In reply, the
    Chairman has explained the complaints procedures to Mr Alton but
    has strongly urged him to await the findings of Lord Justice
    Taylor's enquiry. That is how matters now stand.


 4. There is one loose end. At the end of his first letter to
 the PCA Mr Alton asked what guidelines exist for the publication
 of statements once a judicial enquiry has been announced. The
 Chairman has referred this point to the Home Office. I
 understand from Legal Adviser's Branch that no such guidelines
 exist and I attach a short draft to Mr Alton which I suggest
 might be signed by Lord Ferrers.




0                                      E SODEN
                              DRAFT


David Alton Esq MP
House of Commons
London
SW1



                                      FOR SIGNATURE BY LORD FERRERS



          You sent the Home Secretary a copy of your letter of 19
          April to the Chairman of the Police Complaints Authority
          asking the Authority to institute an immediate enquiry
          into the propriety of remarks passed by South Yorkshire
          police officers about the conduct of fans at
          Hillsborough. You also asked whether guidelines exist
          for the publication of statements once the judicial
          enquiry has been announced. In his reply, Sir Cecil
          referred this latter point to the Home Office.


         We are not aware of any guidelines which might bear upon
         a non-statutory enquiry of this kind. But we are
         entirely confident that the enquiry now being carried out
         by Lord Justice Taylor will establish the facts of what
         happened at Hillsborough, regardless of whatever
         controversial remarks might have been made at the time.
Wj.



      )
                                                              YcaJ-co
                                                        ^ /U i /l^ovnCipTy
                              H OUS E OF C O M M O N S
                                 L O N D O N SW1A OAA     AJ.'Ch'Jrd'y
                     THUuU                                 M' 7<*
                              David Alton's Office
                                                          (j); fx       uu/T'v
                                                                                 19/4/89
                                                         ^Mr~ictofe*
                                                           /Vk CjC^oic^
          Sir Cecil Clothier,
                                                           f\Af
          10 Great George Street,
          London SWl




          I am writing to request that you institute an immediate enquiry
          into the propriety of the remarks passed yesterday by Police
          Officers of the South Yorkshire Police Force about the conduct of
          fans at the FA Cup Semi-Final at Hillsborough on Saturday last.

          Given that the Home Secretary had announced the judicial enquiry
          into the disaster the day before, and the solicitor for 30 of the
          victims' families had begun proceedings against the Chief
          Constable and his Force these remarks should never have been
          ma d e .

          By what right did Police Officers make statements calculated to
          be prejudicial to the reputation of Liverpool football club and
          its supporters, and which seem to be part of a smokescreen of
          propaganda aimed at diverting attention from the truth.

          Lord Denning once said that "be they ever so mighty they are not
          mightier than the law".    I trust that you will use your good
          offices to examine how s u c h statements came to be, and on whose
          authority they were issued. Perhaps you would let me know what
           guidlines exist.

           What guidelines exist for the publication of statements once a
           judicial enquiry has been announced.  I am copying this letter t
           the Rt Hon Douglas Hurd MP .
