V




    FILE NOTE:COMMENTS ON DRAFT FOOTBALL LEAGUE RESOLUTIONS
    I made two comments to Mr Mortimer on the attached:

         - if the earmarked monies are to offset against overdrafts
         will the monies actually be available for Taylor ground
         improvements if the use of these funds for that purpose
         would mean that the club ran up and over its overdraft
         limit?

           it is important to know where the Trustees are to come
         from since they are to have discretion in the use of these
         funds and decide whether the proposals are in accordance
         with Taylor.  We do not want the major League clubs to be
         both judge and jury.  I suggested that there should be at
         least one independent Trustee, perhaps from the FLA.

    I also questioned whether the money from the League from the 5 *
    levy on transfer fees and the 10% levy on broadcasting income
    amounting to some £5m pa was sufficient.                      '


    Mr Mortimer said he would pass these comments on to Sir Terence
    Burns and would continue to keep me informed.
    A.R.Baden
    Rm 1/65
    Extn 0666

    8/3/91




                                                                       1
                                              °<WDEt>^
                       THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED
                                     Chief Executive- A Sandford

   City House, Maid Marian Way. Nottingham, N C ! 6BH. Telephone 0602 “508720. Facsimile 0602 508621


AS/76 0                                                                     2 6th February 1991


Sir Terence Burns
Chief Economic Adviser
H.M. Treasury
Parliament Street
London
SWIP 3AG


                                                                             1

                                    /

The President and I are most grateful to you for giving us the
opportunity on 19th February for consulting you on our latest
proposal s.

I will now see whether it is viable to have an arrangement
whereby those clubs with overdrafts can have a N o . 2 account
at the same bank and in that way, offset the ’earmarked'
monies against their overdraft.   In order to protect the
’earmarking' we would of course, propose that the No. 2
account be kept in the joint names of the Football League and
the Club.

As promised I am enclosing herewith a copy of our draft
Resolution on earmarking together with a copy of the draft
Trust Deed.       I shall be most pleased to have any comments you
have to m a k e .

With    all   best w ishes



                                                                                         1/iTWv


                                                     fL     ’      M ~ ~ r        f

A RT HU R SANDFORD
Chief     Executive
                             31/01/10 iSfjJfl) %-f                         W71 2714 57.

               rCPECfi'T Si'llTh



                             TEE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED


                    Alterations to Regulations 46 and 67 in
            relation to creation of Ground Improvement Trust Fund



                                        SESOLOTlCWS



1.   TBSVT the following new sub-paragraph 46(4) be inserted In Regulation 46;-


     ”46(4) (a)    During the Trust Period as defined in a Trust Deed made
                   between (                  ] and dated [                     ] and known as
                   ["              "] ("the Trust") and provided that all monies held
                   by the Trust on behalf o£ the relevant Club have not been
                   returned to such Club in accordance with the terms of the
                   Trust, each Club shall pay to The League by way of deduction
                   oi. uUi-ci-wlee os act ^ut in 4${4)(b) wwJ (c) bclovi


                   (i)     ten per cent of monies to be distributed to it by The
                           League in accordance with 46(1) and (2); and


                   (ii)    the surplus of the proceeds of the levy to be
                           distributed to it referred to in Regulation 67(6)
                           after deduction of the premium payable to the benefit
                           plan for the Players in any year also referred to in
                           Regulation 67 (6);


                   and The League shall transfer the same to the Trustees of
                   the Trust to be held upon the trusts thereof for the benefit
                   o£ the relevant Club.


            (b )   i n th e c e i ic o £ a n y payrr.ent due to 'The L,c»g\io u n d e r
                   46(4)(a)(i) The League shall deduct amounts due prior to
                   distributing monies due to the Club under 46(1} and (2);


            (c)    in the case of any payment due to The League under
                   46(4)(a)(ii) The League shall retain amounts due from the
                   levy paid to it in accordance with Regulation 67(6)."
                       ----------   CERi Li. J l JiJ 10;,,     tw 1 ,*•;«        i;?r ^ p   , o
W JWN '9i iSi52 HEPBEPT SMITH                —       --------------                         4     S
                                                                                 P .4           ^




       THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE: GROUNDS IMPROVEMENTS r TRUST

               OUTLINE OF PROPOSED TRUST ARRANGEMENT

Each Club will be required, by virtue of the proposed amended
              Vo. oonWtkt.fo      n lllflf»i^ S tlO S T tU g t .

The monies contributed by each Club will be held on the
following trusts for a period of twenty years from the date of
establishment of the Trust.

1.    The income arising on the monies paid to the Trustees
      will be paid to the Club which contributed it.

2.   The monies contributed by each Club, apart from the
      income arising on them, will be distributed back to that
      Club, at the absolute and uncontrolled discretion of the
      Trustees, to fund ground improvements made as a result of
      the recommendations of the Taylor Report.

3.   if the Club

      (a)     leaves the League for any reason whatsoever;                  or

      (b)     completes the improvements necessary to comply with,
              the recommendations of the Taylor Report to the
              satisfaction of the Trustees, at their absolute and
              uncontrolled discretion, and undertakes that it
              will not apply, at any time in the future, to the
              trustees of The Football Trust 1990 for grant aid
              out of the funds derived from the reduction in pool
              betting duty

      the balance of the monies will be returned to the Club.

4.   If at the end of the twenty year period the Club remains
      in the league and has not completed the improvements
      necessary to comply with the Taylor Report to the
      satisfaction of the Trustees and given the necessary
      undertaking, the Trustees will have a discretion as to
      what will become of the money contributed by the Club.
      They may choose to return the money to the Club or,
      alternatively, to apply it for other purposes,

Herbert Smith
68/T4 2/
10.1.91




                                        ?
                                                                            DRAFT/IQ.1.91
            I H E J ^ Q T S A L L LEAGPE : GROUND IMPROVEMENTS                  TRUST


                             heads       of   t erms   for   proposed   trust


         Trustee(a }

a)       A new trustee company specially formed for the purpose?
Or

!■>)     HumiimLcJ individuals?

Or

c)       The members of the Management Committee from time to time*
         and for the time being?

[Power to appoint new trustees could in any event be vested in
th tf   Ma imyssiiitri'iL    C om m it        ]

2.       The Trust Fund

This will be identified as all sums becoming payable to the
Trustee from the League by virtue of specified Regulations, i e
^  _^CW Regulation entitling the T.eaguft ho withhold 10% of the
broadcasting monies and pass it over to the Trustee and the new
Regulation requiring the 5% levy on transfer fees net of
Players' Benevolent fund contributions to be paid over to the
Trustee.

           SU? f u n d ^ created for each Club representing
that Club's share of the overall fund.
3.       The Trust Period

The Trust^will be expressed to last for a period of 20 years
from the date of the Trust Deed.

4•       Ground Improvements

It
be
   i L i v t!n?Qd thf t th? definition of ground improvements should
   dra.ted to apply only to those improvements to comply with
the recommendations of the Taylor Report (and not to those
improvements which clubs may make for their own particular
purposes and advantage).

5.       The Trusts


^ £ j-o q oti t h e         f o l i o wincf SUb
                                             t r u sfUnd
                                                     t s i ^ Vil1 be held        the Trust

(a)      uport trust to pay the income to the relevant Club;
(b)     upon trust to distribute capital to that Club at the
        absolute and uncontrolled discretion of the Trustees for
        the purpose of ground improvement, as defined by the Trust
        Deed*

        [Consideration -will be required as to the extent to which
        the Trustees should review the detail of any proposals
        submitted to then. Will it be acceptable for the Trustees
        ♦“ s \ K f t   r a s e / % n iK 1 y   <• a f   ^ i a/1   V a ^
        within those required by the Taylor Keport? Will the
        League wish to be involved in approval of any such
        improvements?]

(c)     The sub fund will vest absolutely in the relevant Club if:-

          (i)          the Club leaves the League for whatever reason? or

        (ii)           the Club completes the improvements necessary to
                       comply With the Taylor Report to the satisfaction of
                       the Trustees at their absolute and uncontrolled
                       discretion and undertakes 'hat it will not apply at
                       any time in the future to the Trustees of the
                       Football Trust 1990 for grant aid from the funds
                       derived from the reduction in pool Betting Duty.

(d)     Subject,thereto the Trust Fund vill be held at the end of
         the twenty year Tru$t Period to be distributed by the
        Trustees at their discretion amongst a class w h i c h will
         include the Clubs.

6.      Separate Accounting

As there will need to be as many sub funds as there are
contributing clubs, there will have to be separate accounts for
each club showing payments in, payments out and interest
earned on the balance, etc.

7.      Investment

The Trt ;tee(s) should be required to place the funds on deposit
with a first class bank.   Should there be power to combine all
the individual amounts owing to all the clubs and to allocate
the interest earned in appropriate proportions?   (This might
enable ?. better overall return than depositing a large number of
smaller s u m s .)-

 .
8 ___Standard Provisions

There will be all the usual provisions as regards the powers of
the Trustee(s) and the protection cf the Trustee(s).



H. S.
10.1.91.




                                                                 5
