"TAfUi Izp iA .'T :
iM fii'Z 'Z ‘4    jS W "7~/4 '7 7 a '\J

Ac   C 0 / 4 /p f v   j) /}   ’" i'/ O A f
                           CONFIDENTIAL
                                                     2 M A RSH AM -ST REET
                                                     L O N D O N SW1P 3EB
3.                                                   01-276 3 0 0 0

                                                     M y ref:

The Rt Hon Malcolm Rifkind QC MP                     Your re f :
Secretary of State
Scottish Office
Dover House
Whi tehall
LONDON
SWlA 2AU                                                  i^       A p r i l 1990




TAYLOR REPORT

Thank you for sending-me copies of your   letters of 8 and 26 March.
I have seen David Waddington's reply of   30 March, Richard Ryder's
reply of 29 March and Michael Forsyth's   announcement of 5 April
following his meeting with the Scottish   football authorities.

I was delighted to see from Michael's announcement that Premier
Division clubs will be expected to meet the Taylor deadline of
August 1994 for all-seating and that all other football grounds
designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 will be
expected to be all-seated by the Taylor deadline of August 1999.  I
fully endorse the difficulties, as set out in David's letter, which •
would have been created if a different timetable had been announced
in Scotland.  I am sure it is right to proceed both north and south
of the border on the same overall timetable while allowing scope for
individual clubs to depart from the proposed timetable in the
circumstances outlined in David's letter.
I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister, David Waddington,
Peter Walker and Richard Ryder.
                                                                        OF THE




                           CHRIS PATTEN



                                                 §
                           CONFIDENTIAL
                                                    2 MA RSH AM S T R E E T
                                                    L O N D O N SW1P 3EB

                                                    01-276 3 0 0 0

                                                    My ref:

The Rt Hon Malcolm Rifkind QC MP                    Your r e f :
Secretary of State
Scottish Office
Dover House
Whitehall
LONDON
SWlA 2AU                                                  /7 April 1990




TAYLOR REPORT

Thank you for sending-me copies of your   letters of 8 and 26 March.
I have seen David Waddington's reply of   30 March, Richard Ryder's
reply of 29 March and Michael Forsyth's   announcement of 5 April
following his meeting with the Scottish   football authorities.

I was delighted to see from Michael's announcement that Premier
Division clubs will be expected to meet the Taylor deadline of
August 1994 for all-seating and that all other football grounds
designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 will be
expected to be all-seated by the Taylor deadline of August 1999.  I
fully endorse the difficulties, as set out in David's letter, which
would have been created if a different timetable had been announced
in Scotland.  I am sure it is right to proceed both north and south
of the border on the same overall timetable while allowing scope for
individual clubs to depart from the proposed timetable in the
circumstances outlined in David's letter.

I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister, David Waddington,
Peter walker and Richard Ryder.




                           CHRIS PATTEN
                        COVERING CONFIDENTIAL


1.   Mr
2.   PS/                      v-U.H^vkxV.o^v \l t      LeO>K^-ui
                                                           K ^ i P/PSO/14009/90
3.   PS/                       .kcO u  <\A «
                               us\Bv 4iNa dures^f- cto           P/PSO/15015/90
                               CVVMVfc..3jvqHjlcS' .
                                             Iftrc^a V ^ t j ‘
                                                   Co/^
TAYLOR REPORT:     IMPLEMENTATION   OF   ALL-SEATED     ACCOMMODATION       IN
SCOTLAND

1.    Mr Moynihan has commented that he would have serious
reservations about allowing the timetable for implementation of
all-seated accommodation in Scotland to slip, as proposed in the
Secretary of State for Scotland's letter to the Home Secretary of
8 March (Flag A).     We made known the Minister's concerns to
officials in the Home Office and commented on a draft reply they
had prepared for the Home Secretary to send to Malcolm Rifkind.
The draft was then revised to take account of our comments and Mr
Rifl^ind's further letter of 26 March (Flag B).       The Minister
agreed that the way forward was for the ^Secretary of State to
write in support of the Home Secretary's letter once we had it.
We now have the Home Secretary's reply of 30 March (Flag C) which
explains the difficulties which would be created if there were to
be a different timetable in Scotland (jpages 4 and 5).

2. . Unknown to ourselves and it would seem to the Home Office,
the Economic Secretary to tihe Treasury also decided to reply.  Mr
Ryder's letter of 29 March (Flag D) emphasises the assistance
provided by the Chancellor's proposed concession on pool betting
duty and the presentational advantages of a consistent strategy
north and south of the border.                                 /

3.    A draft reply is attache




/m   J L
                             /<!

A R BADEN
SARD C
Rm P3/165
Extn 0675

4 April 1990



cc   M r Owen
     Mr McDonald
     Mr Newsom                                                          f/U ,
                                         CONFIDENTIAL


                                                                               P/PSO/10349/90
                                                  ^                            P/PSO/14009/90
                                                                               P/PSO/15015/90


DRAFT LETTER FOR THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO SEND TO THE SECRETARY
OF STATE FOR SCOTLAND                             ^

  \                       -                  -
TAYLOR REPORT                            ,                                                           '
                                                                       '             1
                                                      \



Thank    you   for       sending    me   copies   of      your       letters    of       8 and           26
March.    I have seen David Waddington's reply of 3 0 xMarch, Richard
Ryder's reply of 29 March and Michael Forsyth's announcement of 5
April     following           his   meeting       with      the        Scottish          football
authorities.                             y


I was delighted to see from, Michael's announcement that Premier
Division clubs will be expected to meet the Taylor deadline of
August 1994 for all-seating and that all other football grounds
designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act                               1975 will be
expected to be all-seated by the Taylor deadline of August 1999.
I fully endorse the difficulties,                 as set out in David's letter,
which would have been created if a different timetable had been
announced      in Scotland.          I am sure it is right to proceed both
north and south of the border on the same overall timetable while
allowing scope for individual clubs to depart from the proposed
timetable in the circumstances outlined in David's letter.


I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister, David Waddington,
Peter Walker and Richard Ryder.
\
                     \                                           .                               /




                           V"
                                                       CONFIDENTIAL


                                                                                            P/PSO/10349/90                        \
                                                                                                                    (   •

                                                                                            P/PSO/14009/90
                                                                                            P/PS0/15015/90


        DRAFT LETTER FOR THE SECRETARY OF STATE TO SEND TO THE SECRETARY
        OF STATE FOR SCOTLAND


        TAYLOR REPORT


        Thank      you    for    sending          me     copies   of   your   letters           of   8      and          26
        Mar hh.      I have       seen       David        Waddirigton's reply          of    30 March                   and
        Richard Ryder's reply of 29 March.


        I ghare David's hope that the financial difficulties which you
        referred to\in your letter to David of 8 March,                                          applying
                           \                                                                             S c ^ H c u v ja )   -
        Seetland Lorck Justice Taylor's -timetable for all-seating^ woult3-w<M.
^       have      been     considerably                alleviated      by   John      Major's            proposed
                          AQl Pool Betting Duty.                  I was disappointed therefore to
        see      from your      letter of 26 March\ that you                      still     feel a 5-year
    v extension of the t i m e ^ b l e to Scotland is necessary.
        1 4ilU | i n d o r s e                                              oiV                           leM-ej) »i\
^       T-               +
                         ->->       naui h \anfi           Ri r-Jaaisd—say- about —tho          d i f fio u jrt i o s
        tfcra-%-— woul-d— be-— creatred— in\ England                   by   announcing          a    different
        timetable for implementing alSl-seated accommodation iri Scotland.
        I hope that you might feel able\to reconsider this and agree that
        the scope to allow individual football clubs to depart from the
        proposed         timetable,          in    the     circumstances       outlined             in     David's
        letter,      provides       you           with     the    flexibility         you    need          without
        prejudicing the general timetable.                              \


        I am copying this letter to the P r i m e Minister, David Waddington,
        Peter Walker and Richard Ryder.                                           ^


    '        y                           .




                                                                                            (
6
                                  CONFIDENTIAL

                                                      SCOTTISH OFFICE
                                               W H I T E H A L L . LONDON      SW1A 2AU


          JCOTl>^                                                                         -)
                                                         ,'l                 44
                                                               C-P, ps | | 4v # \ WvIVXxWv^
                                                                      Ps|S w 7 . M a m -
    Rt Hon David Waddington QC MP
    Secretary of State for Home Affairs                              |4.v
    Home Office                                                       y i
    Queen Anne's Gate
                                                                      14m    V>X^- VV\
    LONDON
    SW1H 9AT                                                           8    March 1990




    TAYLOR REPORT

    Last month, Michael Forsyth had meetings with the Scottish Rugby Union
    and the Scottish football authorities to hear their reactions to
    Lord Justice Taylor's Final Report.         Whilst the rugby and football
    authorities have agreed that a move towards all-seated accommodation is
    very sensible on grounds of public safety and order and do not query
    that objective, they feel that the target date of August 1994 is completely
    impractical for clubs in the Premier Division and for Murrayfield, the
    national stadium of the Scottish Rugby Union.         I am anxious to make
    progress in co-operation with the authorities and the purpose of this
    letter is to seek agreement to an approach which will differ from your
    own but will secure our objectives at a pace which is in accordance with
    the realities of the situation in Scotland.

    Michael Forsyth’s meeting with the football authorities brought out clearly
    their worry over the timetable proposed b y Lord Justice Taylor. There
    are 10 clubs in the Scottish Premier D ivision.        Of th ese, Aberdeen
    already have an all-seated stadium and Rangers expect to have completed
    the conversion of Ibrox to an all-seated ground b y end 1992. The Taylor
    Report may encourage a stu d y of the potential for ground sharing b y the
    2 Dundee clu b s, Dundee and Dundee United. Hibernian have announced
    plans for an all-seated stadium and Heart of Midlothian may decide to
    move to a new ground in view of the restricted site of their present
    stadium.   The future for the other clubs - Motherwell, Dunfermline,
    St Mirren and Celtic and any other club likely to be promoted from the
    First Division - is less clear.    The estimated cost for making Celtic's
    ground, Parkhead, all-seated is £25-£30m.        In the light of all this
    information, the football authorities said that either financial assistance
    from the Government would be needed or the timetable for implementing
    Recommendation 3 should be altered .




                                  CONFIDENTIAL

    MWE067P2
                              CONFIDENTIAL


The football authorities went on to argue that Premier Division clubs
already had a target of 1999 for all-seated stadia. All of these clubs had
aspirations to take part in the European competitions run b y the Union
des Associations Europeenes de Football (UEFA) and UEFA had set their
own target of 1999 for all-seated stadia.

The     football authorities were aware of the absence of a legislative
provision applying to Scotland which could be used to impose the
requirement for all-seated stadia. They did, however, propose a firm
back-up power of their own to enforce any agreed timetable since they
said that the rules for participation in   Scottish   League competitions could
be altered to exclude from the Premier League from 1999-2000 any clubs
without all-seated stadia.

There are also 12 designated grounds under the Safety of Sports Grounds
Act     1975 of clubs in the First and Second Divisions of the Scottish
League. The authorities regard them as having even greater problems in
meeting the Taylor timetable in view of their slim financial resources and
su ggest an extension of 5 years to the Taylor timetable for these clu b s.

Michael Forsyth ruled out very firmly any idea of Government assistance
for individual football clu b s. He did, however, undertake to consider the
timing for Recommendations 3 and 4 in Scotland. It seems to me that, in
view of the generally co-operative attitude of the Scottish football
authorities, we would be justified in extending the timescale to bring
about a voluntary move towards the implementation of Taylor. I am not
in favour of seeking legislative powers which would be the only way of
implementing Taylor in Scotland b y 1994-95.        Even with a statutory
power, the problem of finance over a short timescale would remain for the
clu b s.

If, as I hope, you can agree to a different timetable for Scotland, I
would propose to monitor closely the progress being made b y Scottish
clu b s.

The Scottish Rugby Union own Murrayfield, Scotland's national rugby
stadium. At the SRU's meeting with Michael Forsyth, they said that to
comply with Recommendation 3, they would have to find £10-£llm which
their financial advisers su ggest is not possible b y 1994-95. They already
have plans for converting Murrayfield to an all-seated stadium b y
1999-2000 and, given the excellent safety and public order record at
Murrayfield over the y e a r s, I would be included to sa y that we should
expect them to work at that pace. I do not have any powers to force a
1994 date on the SRU and I gather that you and Peter Walker are in the
same position in England and Wales as regards non-football grounds
designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975. I would also
propose to look sympathetically on the SRU's view that reductions in
terracing standing capacity should not be made until after the 1991 Rugby
World Cup. This is likely to be a major sporting occasion and it would
be unreasonably hard on the SRU and rugby supporters alike to have to
face ground capacity reductions for the 5 Cup matches due to be played
at Murrayfield in October 1991.

I fully accept that any relaxation of the timetable for Recommendations 3
and 4 in Scotland could cause you and Peter Walker difficulties in England
and Wales and that we would be operating different safety standards as a


                              CONFIDENTIAL

MWE067P2
                              CONFIDENTIAL


result. But ray assessm ent is that the authorities are genuinely anxious
to implement the recommendations on an adjusted timescale and that we
would face major problems in seeking to impose the Taylor timetable. The
question of financial assistance from the Government for football clubs and
the Scottish Rugby Union would become a subject of political controversy
in Scotland if we adhered to the 1994-95 ta rg et.

I would be grateful for your views as soon as possible as Michael Forsyth
has agreed to meet the rugby and football authorities again in a few
weeks' time.

I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister, John Major, Chris Patten
and Peter Walker.




                                     MALCOLM RIFKIND




                               CONFIDENTIAL

MWE067P2
                                                                                I




                                                                                           /V (joJ
                                    nONFTDENTTAL
                                    \ r/-■ 'av|
                                       1        t'K'zx.S S
                                                             SCOTTISH   OFFICE
                                                       HITE HALL,   LONDON   SW 1A   2AU
                            L   v     ( S

  C SCOTLf^J-       c_O,                    ■A
                           H- 0 \ ^ .
                                    He. Z)ov\«vl^

Rt H o b David Waddington QC MP
Secretary of State for Home Affairs
Home Office
Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON
SW1H 9AT                                                                     March 1990




                 \
FOOTBALL POOLS BETTING LEVY

I was delighted that John Major felt able to help football clubs eope with
the costs of implementing the Taylor Report b y reducing the football pools
b ettin g le v y in the B udget. The expected £100 million will c e rta in ly help
the clubs considerably over the next fiv e y e a r s.

I do not think, however, that the scale of added resources which this
change rep resen ts will be enough to enable Scottish League clubs to cope
with the timetable for implementation of all-seated accommodation
recommended in the Taylor Report. In my letter to you of 8 March, I
said that a 5-year extension would be required if Scottish clubs were to
survive the transition required to meet the Taylor recommendations. I
still hold to the view that extension of the timetable will be required for
Scotland and I would welcome your agreement to such an extension.

I am copying this letter to the Prime M inister, John Major, Chris Patten
and Peter Walker.




                                                         MALCOLM RIFKIND




                                     CONFIDENTIAL


MW1081P1
                                                                   V\f ,
                                          QUEEN ANNE’S GATE LONE    ^    n ^ « v J j\

                                                                   ~ T s F ■ PtR

                                                 30   March 1990




               L^W^mhmb

                          TAYLOR REPORT           f7l.:Viu .
                                                           ,


    You wrote to me on 8 March and on 26 March about the timing
of the Taylor Report recommendations on all-seated accommodation
at Scottish football grounds and at Murrayfield.       I delayed
responding to you at Treasury request, until after the budget.

    In a sense this is still an interim response. We are waiting
for a meeting with the Football Association and Football League
in England and Wales.   Their initial reaction to the report has
so far been supportive.   They are hurt by some of the criticism
but appear to accept its recommendations, at least in principle.
We have not yet had discussions with representatives of the other
sports.    Nevertheless, I think that I can respond to your
proposals fairly conclusively.

    I had hoped that you would have changed your view given the
prospect of additional funds for football clubs for ground
improvements if, as seems likely, an agreement can be reached
between the pools promoters and the Football Trust to give effect
to John Major's proposal on pools betting tax.     In my view the
economic arguments for treating Scottish fqotball differently are
now considerably diminished.     I would like in this letter,
however, to restrict myself to safety issues.

    I must say at the outset that I would be most unhappy if any
general dispensation were given to Scottish football clubs to
depart from the timetable proposed by Lord Justice Taylor for
the introduction of all-seated accommodation at football grounds.
The Taylor recommendations are made on grounds of safety.    They
will undoubtedly cause difficulties in some cases and those
difficulties are likely to be as great for particular clubs south
of the border as in Scotland.   If we are to depart from the


                                              /Taylor recommendations


The Rt Hon Malcolm Rifkind, QC, MP
Secretary of State
Scottish Office
Whitehall
LONDON SW1
Taylor recommendations it will, in my view, need to be a very
considered decision either applied to all of Great Britain, if
we are proposing a general move away from the timetable, or
applied on a consistent basis to all clubs if what we are
considering is a departure from the recommendations in special
ca s e s . I do not think that we can argue that safety
considerations vary significantly from one part of the country
to another.

    Can I explain first how we are thinking of proceeding south
of the border.    You know that we intend to use the Football
Licensing Authority to bring about all-seated accommodation
through the proposed Football Licensing scheme at grounds at
which matches are held which are designated matches under the
Football Spectators Act 1989.      Our present intention is to
designate any match in a UEFA competition or involving a team
representing a club which is a member of the Football League or
an overseas club held (in each case) at a ground designated under
the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 or a ground which is
normally used by a Football League club (there is in fact only
one league club, Torquay, using a ground which is not so
designated). We do not propose at present to require licences
for matches held at designated grounds where neither team is a
member of the Football League or a foreign club, nor to impose
the all-seated accommodation criteria to those matches.

    Can I now comment on the Taylor recommendations themselves.
Taylor's Recommendation 2 is based on paragraph 82 of the final
report which refers to the FIFA resolution passed in July 1989
that from 1993 all high risk matches, as defined by UEFA, should
be held only in all-seater stadia.   The football authorities in
England and Wales appear to have accepted this position.       We
propose to require all-seated accommodation at grounds which seek
a licence to hold UEFA matches from 1993, because in practice
this should already be required by the football authorities
themselves. Though this is one of the issues for discussion with
the football authorities, their interpretation of the FIFA/UEFA
requirements will presumably apply to Scotland as elsewhere.

    For matches involving first and second division clubs in
England and Wales, we see at present no reason to depart from
the recommendations in Taylor's Recommendation 3 of all-seated
accommodation to be achieved by August 1994.     I do not think
that we would wish to concede any departure from the proposed
timetable and I would hope that you would feel able to hold your
hand in respect of the premier division of the Football League
in Scotland.

    You mention the first and second divisions of the Scottish
League. As I read Recommendations 3 and 4 of the Taylor report,



                                         /no specific
no specific mention is made of these two divisions and our own
thoughts were that these should be regarded in the same category
as the third and fourth divisions of the Football League in
England and Wales. If this is the case, Recommendation 4 applies
which means that these clubs would not be required to achieve
all-seated accommodation before August 1999.    There might even
be a case for arguing that Scottish second division clubs should,
be regarded as akin to English and Welsh non-league clubs, to
whom we do not propose at present to apply by law the Taylor
recommendations on all-seating.    But even if they are not, the
Taylor recommendation is not that the whole of the stadium should
be converted to all-seated accommodation, but only that standing
accommodation should be progressively removed.     In other words
it will never be necessary for a club to provide more seats than
the number of people that it expects to attend its matches.      I
imagine that many of these smaller Scottish clubs are already in
the position where the small numbers of spectators which they
attract could be accommodated in the seats which are currently
available.

    I do believe however that if our decisions are not to be
challenged on grounds of reasonableness, we shall need to have
some flexibility on both the 1994 and 1999 timetables by which
individual clubs are required to move towards all-seated
accommodation.    Clearly some will have an easier task than
others.   Some will have features which make them fairly safe
grounds by any standards; others will not.     One advantage that
we shall have in England and Wales is that we shall be able to
rely on the Football Licensing Authority to make recommendations
in respect of the use of section 11 of the Football Spectators
Act which provides the power to direct that conditions relating
to seated accommodation should be included in the licences for
particular football grounds. Although we are still considering
precisely what range of matters the licensing authority will be
able to take into account in deciding whether a licence should
be granted to permit the holding of the particular classes of
designated football match and on what terms and conditions, we
hope that it will be possible to permit the Authority to exercise
a fairly wide judgement on these matters. Thus if a ground were
in all other respects safe, with adequate arrangements for the
control of spectators and for the prevention of offences, the
Authority might feel able to recommend that there should be some
relaxation of the Taylor timetable for one year or perhaps two
if there were firm plans in the longer term to meet the overall
objectives. We envisage close liaison here between the Licensing
Authority and the Football Trust.

    The licensing authority will of course also have power
under section 13 of the Football Licensing Act to review the
way in which individual local authorities carry out their



                                         /responsibilities under
responsibilities under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.
Some local authorities have undoubtedly been better at this
than others. What all this means is that if we permit individual
clubs to depart from the proposed timetable, it will only be in
circumstances where we can be assured that the grounds are
reasonably safe.   Since Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations
are made on grounds of safety, I think it would be less than
prudent to grant a relaxation from the timetable without such
an assurance.

    You raise also the question of Murrayfield.   Officials here
will be inviting the Rugby Union authorities to meet us to
discuss the Taylor recommendations very soon.    We have already
made it clear that we have no statutory authority at the moment
to require the provision of all-seated accommodation at rugby
matches.   It is also the case that rugby matches have been
mercifully free of crowd accidents and crowd disorder.   I think
it sensible that the national rugby stadia should be encouraged
to move towards all-seated accommodation but my first thoughts
are that we do not need to force the same pace as in the case
of association football.    We shall be looking to the rugby
authorities to come forward with definite proposals for movement
towards all-seated accommodation at Twickenham and at the Welsh
National Stadium but it may not be practicable to insist on all­
seated accommodation at other locations where rugby is played.
Rugby Union is an amateur game which does not have available to
it the monies which are available to association football and we
shall, I am sure, need to adopt a pragmatic approach.

    Nevertheless there is a difference between telling the
rugby authorities that we shall not be legislating to enforce
the introduction of all-seated rugby grounds and telling them
specifically that they need not comply with the timetable.    It
is they, in the absence of statutory requirements, who must make
the judgement on the extent to which they should heed the Taylor
recommendations.

    I would counsel against any across the board relaxations of
the Taylor timetable for association football grounds in Scotland
primarily for two reasons.       The first is that the Taylor
recommendations are essentially a package which the Government
has accepted as an alternative to the football membership scheme
to secure improved public order and safety at football matches.
I do not believe that a case can be made either on cultural,
economic or safety grounds for taking a less rigorous line in
Scotland than in England and Wales.

    The second point, which follows,     is that any general
relaxation of the Taylor timetable in Scotland will be taken
as an indication that the Government considers that a lesser



                                         /standard of
                            5.



standard of safety than that which Taylor is recommending is
acceptable.   Where that leaves the Government if there is an
accident due to overcrowding is something which you will
doubtless need to consider.

    I would be prepared to agree however that you should tell
Scottish clubs, and the rugby authorities, that in the absence
of legislation it is they who must decide on the relevance of
the Taylor recommendations and determine their own timetable;
and that there will only be Government intervention if it is
clear that adequate progress is not being achieved or there is
an increase in disorder.

    I can also see no reason why football clubs should not be
told that the Government view is that some departure from the
interim timetable may be justifiable in particular cases where
grounds already provide a high degree of safety and amenity and
there are firm longer term proposals to bring about increased
seated accommodation within the Taylor targets.

    I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister, John Major,
Chris Patten and Peter Walker.
est.to/RRyder/6.2 9,3



 ; \ M * L*** —W\.
c<.
      tAsf 0^^^'   I



              1 n v i s u r v Chamber.'--. r b r n a m o e i   Su'eef, S W 1 P 3 A G


The Rt Hon Malcom Ri.fkind QC MP
Secretary of State for Scotland
Whitehall
LONDON
SW1A 2AO
                                                                 ■2°l   March 1990




TAYLOR REPORT: FOOTBALL

Thank you forsending copies of your letters of 8 and 26 March to
John Major.   I have been   asked to deal with them since I have
taken the lead in the Treasury on football issues arising in
connection with the Budget.

I do accept that the situation in Scotland, so far as the
implementation of the Taylor report is concerned, is a little
different from that in England and Wales. The Scottish clubs do
not have the same recent history of hooliganism as the English
ones, and they have not been banned from European competitions.
Moreover, I accept that you do not have the legislative means to
require the Scottish clubs to implement all-seater stadia by any
specific deadline.

Nevertheless, there are clearly strong arguments for adopting the
same approach to safety matters in Scotland as in England and
Wales, which would mean, in line with the Taylor recommendations,
requiring the premier division clubs to become all-seater by 1994-
95, and first and second division clubs by 1999-2000.  I am sure
you will agree that the need for improved comfort and safety at
sports grounds applies just as much north of the border as it does
south of it. Moreover, football has hit the headlines recently,
and I think there are strong presentational arguments for having a
coherent and consistent strategy in both Scotland and England and
Wales. Last, but by no means least, the £100 million made
available to football over the next five years by the budget
should make it easier for Scottish clubs to accept an accelerated
timetable for imp1ementing ground improvements.

You mentioned in your first letter that the Scottish football
authorities   would   either   need   financial  help,   or   the
implementation timetable should be altered. Now that we have been
able to give some help - which we will review after 5 years -
would it not be sensible      to approach the Scottish football
authorities again to see if it would in fact be possible for
Scottish league clubs to conform to the timetable suggested in the
Taylor report? I have to say I would find it surprising if the
generous assistance offered b y the Chancellor had no effect at all
on the time required by Scottish clubs to become all-seater.     If
the clubs could meet the accelerated timetable, I am sure it would
be right for us to encourage them to do so.

I am copying this letter to the recipients of yours.




                                            RICHARD RYDER
           Scottish Information Office
               Dover House,
                 W hitehall,
                                                   SCOT IISH OFFICE
                                                    News Release
             London SW1A 2AU
           Tel: 01-270 6760/6745
           Fax;



                                                                               5 A p ril/0800/90


                 ME FORSYTH MEETS FOOTBALL AUTHORITIES
                                    ON TAYLOR REPORT



     Mr Michael Forsyth MP, Minister with resp on sib ility fo r Sport at the
Scottish    O ffice,   told   the    football au th o rities    today,    at     a meeting      in
Glasgow that 'the Government was prepared to accept                       their proposal        to
ensure that all 23 -designated grounds in the S cottish Football League are
all-seated. by 1099.


     Premier Division clubs will be expected to meet the Taylor deadline
of A ugust 1934 for conversion to              all seated accommodation, b u t, in             an
individual case where         genuine problems in achieving                   that date   ex ist,
Mr Forsyth agreed that the deadline could be extended providing the local
authority considers the ground fully meets safety stan d ard s.


     Mr Forsyth added that the Government's provision of £100 million,
via the Football T rust, announced in the Budget, will be an important
contribution to the sport.


   " Mr Forsyth said;


     "The      Football ' Authorities         are     anxious      to    ensure      that     the
     23 designated       grounds       will   be    all   seated   and    I     welcome      their
     intention to incorporate within their rules a requirement that this be
     accomplished b y 1999.


     fl Safety at football grounds is paramount and the football authorities
     have agreed to report to the Secretary of State annually on the
     p rogress towards all seated stadia.
FROM   S 0 00UER HUUbt




           "Scottish football has an excellent record on taking a lead on matters
           concerned with safety and the good conduct of the game.        1 very
           much welcome the responsible,     progressive and positive   approach
           which they are taking on tills important issu e.   They have assured
           me that they can deliver all seated stadia themselves and I have
           accepted those assurances” .

                 Mr Forsyth added that detailed guidance on the implementation
       of Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations will be Issued to clubs and local
       authorities next month.


       NOTE TO NEWS EDITORS

       Tw enty-three Scottish Football League grounds are designated in terms of
       the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975, on the basis that their ground
       capacity currently exceeds 10,000.   It is only those grounds which the
       Government wishes to see converted to all seated accommodation in the
       Ught of the Taylor Report.




       Pat Connor; 031-244 4951
       April 5, 1990
