                             \/\M ^6^M )                       v       ^   ,
                                                [ - 5 OCT 1989 1 ' ^

                                     cc:   Miss Edwards o.r.
                                           Mr Bol/ton G2

Mr Goddard
F8 Division

TAYLOR:   RECOMMENDATION 4


     We spoke on the telephone about the five agreements with
football clubs made by the South Yorkshire police, copies of
which were sent to you under cover of a letter of
29 September. The agreements follow a standard form with
minor variations.

     2.   Fortunately that standard form does not contain some
of the objectionable features in the draft agreement between
West Yorkshire police and Leeds United on which I commented in
my note of 13 September to Mr Brown. That draft agreement
purported to cover policing outside the ground and would also
have made the police potentially liable for stewarding. By
contrast, these agreements are somewhat vague as to some of
the duties which fall on the police. Indeed, as you pointed
out, they may fall short of what is required in that they do
not sufficiently identify who does what. Nevertheless the
last paragraph in each agreement (which reflects the final
sentence in Taylor Recommendation 4) is Undesirable.
     3.   The question of the effect of the agreements (that
is whether they can be enforced and whether, and how, they can
be rescinded) seems to fall within the topic "police" rather
than "safety of sports grounds". As such it may be something
on which you will need to seek Miss Edwards' views in due
course. However, since you are due to meet Lord Justice
Taylor in the near future, it might be helpful if I set out
some of the objections to agreements concerning safety of
sports grounds.

     4.   The starting point is the principle that the chief
officer of police must be free to deploy members of his force
as he sees fit and that he should not be restricted in so
doing by contractual restraints. The police are under a
common law duty to maintain law and order in public places and
this differentiates them from firms who might hire out
stewards. However, it might well be argued that agreements
such as those made by South Yorkshire do not create
contractual obligations because they were not made under seal
and they do not provide "consideration". Payment for the
police services can be claimed under the power imposed by
statute (section 15(1) of the Police Act 1964) and not by
virtue of any term or condition in the agreements themselves.
     5.   If the agreements were ever the subject of
litigation, the argument set out at the end of paragraph 4
above might succeed. However, I think there are some
difficulties and objections. The most obvious of these is
that, if the "agreement" does not establish legally binding or
enforceable obligations, it seems wholly inappropriate for
language to be used that implies the creation of such
obligations. At the very best, the effect of the use of such
language will be to impose a varnish on the operation of
section 15(1) which obscures the effect of that provision
until it is removed and the true legal position recognised.
     6.   But I am not wholly confident that the agreements
might not have some effect on the operation of section 15(1).
I could not wholly rule out the possibility that the courts
might either treat the payment to the police authority under
section 15(1) as the "consideration" for the agreements or
regard the agreements as governing what the police duties are.
The former might make the chief officer of police liable for
breach of contract. It might also make it easier for the club
to sue the police in the event of persons being injured at the
ground; a claim in negligence would be more difficult to
pursue successfully. The latter is liable to complicate a
police authority's claim under section 15(1) if it is alleged
that the police did not do all they were required to do.

     7.   Even if these fears do not materialise, it seems
undesirable to use language which is more appropriate for
contracts or the creation of legal obligations, when all that
is required is a clear understanding as to the areas in
respect of which the police will assume responsibility,
subject to variation if other policing duties so require.




                                                   R J CLAYTON
                                        Legal Adviser's Branch

4 October 1989
