                                                      .1 4 DEC 1989 |05>ao ©

i j23-12.AH




  Mr Mould


   PROVISION OF AMBULANCE SERVICES AT FOOTBALL MATCHES
  We spoke about the attached letter from the Leader of
   Sheffield City Council earlier today.    You recalled that a
   similar point had been raised before, which G1 had dealt with,
   about the provision of adequate ambulance cover at football
   grounds during an ambulance dispute.


) Looking at the letter from Sheffield I have to say that I
   think it very unlikely that the police or the army could
   provide the facilities which an NHS ambulance could, although
   you gave me to understand that some voluntary ambulances (eg
   Red Cross or St John) came pretty close to providing similar
   facilities.   I should be grateful for any advice which you are
   able to give, which I could use in drafting a reply, about the
   supply of ambulances to football grounds.    It may be useful to
  make the point (which I presume to be correct) that ambulances
  posted at football grounds are not intended to be able to cope
  with disasters but with the sort of injuries which might
   reasonably be expected.   Dealing with the unforeseen requires
   back-up which I think is what Sheffield's last paragraph is
   aiming at.


  The final paragraph of the letter seems to me to be more
  concerned with the overall provision of ambulance services in
  Sheffield and I shall be looking to the Department of Health
  to provide a contribution for that.




                                        R P RHODES
                                        13 December 1989
  F8 Division
                                                                    Councillor C. J. C. Betts
                                                                      BA(Cantab.)
                                                                    Leader
                                                                    S heffield City .Council
                                      :s
                                                                    Leader's Office
                                                                    T o w n Hall
SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL                                              SHEFFIELD
                                                                    SI 2HK Tel. 734101



        C JCB/ DCS 12




        6 December,      1989




        The Rt. Hon. David Waddington, Q .C., M.P. ,
        Secretary of State for the Home Department,
        Home Office,
        50 Queen A n n e ’s Gate,
;       LONDON.
        SW1H 9AT                  -



        Dear Home Secretary,

        PROVISION OF AMBULANCE SERVICES AT FOOTBAT.T. MATP.HFS

        The interim report of Lord Justice Taylor indicated a number of steps            which
        had to be taken at football matches held at designated sports grounds.

        One  of these steps was to ensure that an "authorised" ambulance was on duty
        at all such events.   In the light of the ambulance dispute and the possible
        substitution for the regular ambulance service of a makeshift service staffed
        by either the Police or the A r m y , would the provision of such; an ambulance
        comply with Lord Justice T’aylor’s requirements?         ■

        As you will appreciate, as a Licensing Authority for sports grounds,-the City
        Council is very anxious indeed to make   sure it fully complies with Lord
        Justice Taylor’s recommendations.   We would therefore request, most strongly,
        that you advise us immediately whether the temporary arrangements which are
        apparently ^ now being proposed in Sheffield (or anything of a similar nature)
        are sufficient and satisfactory to cope with a potential disaster at a Sports
        Ground.   If not, perhaps you could advise us what arrangements you believe
        the Local Authority should make to deal with this situation.

        Yours sincerely,




        C. '■5 j/p . BETTS .
        Lea/far of the Council




                                                                                             R3474
