       NOTE OF THE FIRST MEETING OF THE LIAISON GROUP
    2pm 30 August 1990 Room 1104 Home Office Queen Anne's Gate

Present

Mr Sandford                        Mr Bolton (Chair) Home Offi ce oj ^
   Football League   (FL)           Mr Haugh
Mr Lee                              Ms Sharp
   Football Trust    (FT)           Mr Brown
                                    Ms Jago
Mr Baden DoE                        Ms Esplin


Introduction

Apologies were received from Mr Kelly, Football Association (FA) .
Mr Bolton said that although the group had been convened as a
means by which the FA and the FL could discuss matters of common
interest with Government officials, he welcomed Mr Lee from the
Football Trust and thought that an invitation m ight be extended
in the future also to the Chief Executive of the Football
Licensing Authority (FLA).

Item 1 - DoE Planning Policy Guidance

Interdepartmental clearance on the guidance is being finalised
with  a   view  to    issue in September    1990   if  possible!
Representations from clubs have been received on the need to
implement Taylor recommendations as soon as possible. The League
will talk further with clubs to resolve confusion about how
planning permission should be sought.

Item 2 - Green Guide

The current revision of the Guide       is   now in draft with
representative organisations for consultation. Replies have been
requested by 25 September; no replies have yet been received The
Home Office agreed to produce a list of the main changes between
this and earlier editions of the Guide.

Item 3 - Timetable for Implementation of Taylor Recommendations

The Government has made it clear that Recommendations 2-4 form
the basis of its policy. Nevertheless, it was agreed that all
relevant bodies need to work to the same priorities and criteria
in order to maximise available resources. The Home Office will
draw this to the attention of the FLA, and pass on the request
that it give an indication of its intentions at an early stage.

^                    that a recent seminar for ground commanders
at the Police Staff College had revealed two main concerns; that
it can be more difficult to reach troublemakers in seated areas,
and that considerable attention must be paid to the rake to
ensure that the view of those who are seated is not obstructed
by those in front of them.

The meeting also noted the difference in views on the safety of
tip up seats. The Home Office will advise Mr Jacobs that the
Trust would find it helpful if the FLA was able to produce a list
of general principles on these issues, as soon as it is able.

The recommendations produced by ACPO and the Home Office Police
Scientific Development Branch on closed circuit television have
been put to clubs, and the Home Office had c ir culated them to
local authorities. The Home Office had not sought to collate
information   on    other   Taylor    recommendations.   However
Parliamentary interest can be expected, and the Home Office will
give advance notice to the League, so that the information can
be collated on the way in which individual clubs have responded
to those recommendations directed to them.

It was agreed that there is a need for clubs to establish an
early dialogue with the FLA. The League will wish to discuss the
timetable framework; the inspection strategy; and the mechanism
to resolve any differences in interpretation that may arise. The
FLA hoped to decide the location of its headquarters at its next
          ^  •'■s hoped that the post of Chief E xecutive can be
filled at least on a temporary basis by the end of September, and
on a permanent basis in the new year. Although the licensing
scheme is not yet in force, the FLA is planning fairly frequent
meetings in the next few months and is available to be approached
now, via the Home Office.

I tem 4 - Perimeter Fences

Clubs are looking for a consistent view throughout the football
i nd us t ry , on the conflict between the need to provide a means of
escape in emergency, and the wish to avoid pitch invasion. A
national set of principles would be difficult to apply which
allow for appropriate local flexibility. A C P O ’s v i e w is that the
issues are for local decision. The reluctance of clubs to use the
ex^®ting appeals procedures to resolve differences with local
authorities was discussed. In the longer term, if pitch invasion
becomes a criminal offence the problem may be resolved.

A n y Other Business

The League will make clear to clubs that its involvement in the
Stadia 90 exhibition this November is not an indication that the
League endorses any of the products on display. On the wider
issue of product endorsement, the Advisory Design Council has
bee^     a sk f;d      if  would consider some kind of  informal
certification system. However, it was agreed that there was a
need to be wary of any involvement with marketeers being claimed
as e n d o r s e m e n t .

The League reported that it is in correspondence with the Home
Office about policing charges.

Date of Next Meeting

The next meeting will be at 2pm on Tuesday 6 November 1990* venue
to be notified.
