»




    Dr C E Nicholson PhD CEng MIM
    Deputy Director
    Research & Laboratory Services
    Health & Safety Executive
    Broad Lane
    SHEFFIELD S3 7HQ

•   )                              20 February 1990




    Dear Dr Nicholson

    HILLSBOROUGH   STADIUM    DISASTER    INQUIRY
    TECHNICAL WORKING PARTY


    Many thanks for your letter of 16 February
    enclosing the promised translation of QTIS which
    I have circulated to Working Party members.

                                  Yours sincerely




                                  JO N A TH A N SWEET
                           Health &      Research and Laboratory
                                         Services Division
                           Safety        Broad Lane
                                         Sheffield S3 7HQ
o                          Executive     Telephone 0742 768141
                                         Telex 54556 H S E R L S G
                                         Facsimile 0742 755792




Mr J Sweet                               Your reference
Heme Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate                     0ur reference
                                         5t$/956/°2
    3 9AT
                                         16 February 1990



Dear Mr Sji<^et

HUISBCBOOGH INQUIRY - TECHNICAL WORKING PAKTOo

Please find enclosed the premised translation of selected
parts of the Italian publication 'Quademi Tecnici Per
L'iapiantistica Sportiva' (Qns). I also attach the page
of introduction to the document.

Yours sincerely




C E NICHOLSON
Deputy Director - Safety Engineering Laboratory 1
              r^rnii2A>              TuP
                                      (H r
Professor L Maunder OBE FEng
University of Newcastle upon Tyne
                                       rtf Sosk.     .
Head of Department                     ri
Dept of Mechanical Materials
 & Manufacturing Engineering           H/    (h& i
%^tephenson Building
 ewcastle upon Tyne
NE1 7RU                       20 February 1990




Dear Professor Maunder

HILLSBOROUGH   STADIUM    DISASTER   INQUIRY
TECHNICAL WORKING PARTY
You will recall that Dr Nicholson kindly
undertook to provide a translation of selected
parts of the Italian publication 'Quaderni
Tecnici Per L 1impiantistica Sportiva1 (QTIS).

This has now been done and I enclose for your
information one copy together with the relevant
introductory page.

                              Yours sincerely




                              JONATHAN SWEET
                                                                6.   ProM&ssck, oty




                            INVESTIGATION ON SAFETY




1. PREMISE


In order to prepare a draft regulations on safety sufficient for the actual
situation in facilities, the Italian National Olympics Committee Research
Centre carried out an investigation in 8 Italian stadiums and 10 sports halls.

I
Later, at the express request of UEFA, it extended the initiative to three
European stadiums on the occasion of the finals of the Cupwinners' Cup and the
Champions' Cup in 1987*


In the following paragraphs a summary of the results obtained is given;
together with some experimental checks, these were taken into account in the
preparation of the proposed amendment to the Ministry of the Interior's Decree
of 10 September 1986.
Health and Safety Executive
Directorate of Information and
Advisory Services

Translations
                                 Not for publication

             HEALTH AND SAFETY EXECUTIVE
               Translation Services



                                 February 1990




Foreign Standards
French Standards
Quaderni Tec nici per 1 1impiantistica Sportiva (QTIS).
Apr i 1-May 1988, no.18/19, vol.Ill, pp.103-107.

Translator: External        HSE Transl. No.90/22C
                         Foreign standards


                          French standards


The recent incidents in Zurich in Switzerland and in Bradford
in England have highlighted the safety problems.


The purpose of the present note is to review the principal
measures which exist in France.


MEANING AND PURPOSE OF THE REGULATIONS


The regulations concern all Establishments which Admit the
Public (or EAP) and consider safety against fire, and the
structural problems which are not governed by the building
regulations.


Everyone who is admitted to an establishment, for whatever
reason, is considered to be a member of the public.


This means that all sports and social and educational
buildings are EAP:     both private clubs and hotel swimming
pools and certain business committees' facilities.      Only
facilities for family use (home swimming-pools, etc.) or
shared facilities are excluded (however, shared swimming-
pools are the subject of the Decree of 7 April 1981, Health
and Safety).


Its purpose is to ensure the safety of persons:
- with rapid and orderly evacuation of all the occupants (time
the alarm sounded + evacuation time < the safety margins);
- thanks to structures appropriate to the risks.


The spirit of the safety regulations does not therefore
concern how long the structures last, which comes within the
sphere of responsibility of the Insurance Companies (rules of
the A.P.S.A.I.R.D.).
THE OLD REGULATIONS


Essentially defined by the Decree of 23 March 1965, which
still applies to existing establishments.


It was for the purpose of simplifying and clarifying the
situation that covered sports facilities were combined into a
single type, X, and that different types relating to sports
facilities appeared.


THE NEW REGULATIONS


Since the summer of 1980, new safety regulations have begun to
see the light with:
the decree of 25 June 1980 and its amendments, concerning
"general provisions for all types of facilities" and those
which have the approval of particular provisions, the most
important of which for the Ministry of Youth and Sport are:


- type X, "covered sports facilities",
- type R, "educational facilities, summer camps";
- type PA, "open-air facilities";
- type SG, "inflatable structures";
- type L, "lecture theatres, conference rooms, meeting rooms,
rooms for performances or for multiple uses";
- type CTS, "tents and wooden structures",
- type P, "dance and games halls".


In an appendix, a brief note indicates the procedures
required, with the aim of ensuring the safety of the users and
in particular the areas reserved for the spectators.


IMPROVEMENTS AND DESIRABLE ACTION


1. In the matter of fire:
It would appear that practically every fire in sports


                               2
facilities is due either to malevolence or occurs at a time of
when work is being done which employs blow-lamps (in parti­
cular during roofing work).


These fires often occur far from the presence of the public,
or when the public has had time to evacuate the facilities.


Owners and managers could be reminded here of some measures of
simple prudence, in particular:
- never to padlock, block or obstruct the exits;
- not to create dangerous structures, or increase the heating
potential;
- not to convert technical plant without an expert opinion;
- to provide for ease of maintenance of the facilities, both
where the materials themselves are concerned, and through
frequent cleaning (and especially in the areas of the stands
and the parts underneath them), to avoid the accumulation of
paper or various kinds of rubbish which can easily catch fire;
- to carry out dangerous work (e.g.work with blow-lamps on the
roofs or hydraulic work) with the greatest possible care and
when the public is not present.


In open-air stadiums, the metal netting barrier which
separates the players and the referees from the spectators can
be an obstacle to the safety of the public.


This separation, which effectively protects the players and
the referees from the enthusiasm or malevolence of the
supporters, no longer, in certain cases, makes it possible to
use the play area as a free space where people can assemble in
the event of panic.


Thought could also be given to these provisions (gates
normally locked, but under supervision of an attendant during
matches, for example).




                                  3
2) In the matter of durability of the structures:
Unlike the safety controls, concerning the specific technical
parts (electricity, heating, etc.) given in the appendix,
there are no compulsory technical controls on the. structural
materials.


One might consider a study to establish whether they are
appropriate, in particular for swimming-pools, in view of the '
considerable humidity, which accelerates the deterioration of
some materials.


APPENDIX

CONDITIONS FOR THE APPLICATION OF THE NEW REGULATIONS


The provisions of the new regulations apply three months after
they have appeared in the Official Gazette.


They concern:
- facilities which are to be built, for which the date that
the building permit was lodged is later than the date of the
implementing measures;
- the installation of new facilities in existing premises or
buildings;
- existing facilities, if work is undertaken, but then only
for the modified parts of the buildings or structures and, in
the case of provisions of an administrative nature, for the
controls, the technical inspections, and the maintenance.


MONITORING OF CONFORMITY TO THE SAFETY RULES
This control is carried out by the "Safety Committees".


The safety committees are the consultative bodies which have
the task of offering an opinion to the administrative
authorities responsible for monitoring the implementation of
the safety regulations.   There are three levels:


                               4
a) At local level, the arrondissement committee and the inter-
commune or commune committee, which are appointed by a decree
from the Prefect.


They give their opinions on questions submitted to them by
delegation from the Departement committee.   Most of their
activity consists in acceptance and control inspections.


In any case, the administrative authority (Mayor or Prefect)
is not bound by any opinion and remains the principal
authority responsible for the safety control of facilities
which admit the public.


b) At Departement level, it is the civil protection
consultative committee in the Departement which is the Prefect
and Mayor’s technical body for investigation, control, and
information.


They intervene by providing their opinion:
- before construction, at the time when the application for a
building permit is made;
- during construction, at the time of the inspection for
verification, acceptance, and opinion on the issue of the
conformity certificate and the authorization for the opening;
- during operation, at the time of the periodic controls.


In addition, it is the only one which is competent to give an
opinion on Category 1 facilities (more than 1,500 persons);
it examines the questions and requests for an opinion
presented by the Mayors or by the previous committee and can
propose to the Prefect that certain files should be sent to
the Central Safety Committee.


For these two committee levels, the Head of the Youth and
Sport Service in the Departement can involve them whenever the
facilities involved concern mainly physical, sports, or social
and educational activities.
c) At national level, there is the Central Safety Committee
(CSC).   It is consulted, or it examines the plans for changes
in safety regulations, answers questions or examines files
presented by the Departement committees and the basic plans
for repetitive constructions, as in the case of the standard
plans of various ministries, including the Ministry for Youth
and Sport.


A Ministry representative is one of the permanent members of
this committee.


Periodic control inspections and unexpected inspections have
to be carried out by the competent safety committees.


The main purpose of these inspections is:


- to verify whether the provisions of the present chapter or
the decrees of the Prefect or Mayor issued for their
implementation have been complied with and in particular
whether all the fire-fighting equipment and the safety
lighting equipment is functioning normally;


- to ensure that the technical controls have been effected;


- to suggest improvements or amendments to be made to the
provisions and to the classification of the facilities within
the framework of the present regulations;


- to examine in individual cases what adjustments might be
made in existing facilities.


Each facility has to have a "Safety Register", in which the
information essential to the proper running of the safety
service is entered and in particular:


- the conditions for the staff entrusted with the fire


                               6
service;
- the various general and particular orders given in the event
of fire;
- the dates of the various controls and verifications, and the
observations to which these have given rise;
- the dates of painting and conversion work, its nature, the
names of the builders, and, where appropriate, the name of the
architect or technical specialist responsible for supervision
of the work.


For sports facilities and summer camps, these periodic
inspections should be carried out every two years in the case
of Category 1 facilities (capacity of more than 1,500) and
every 3 years for Category 2, 3, and 4 facilities.


The frequencies may be altered, if considered necessary, by a
decree from the Mayor or Prefect, after he has obtained the
opinion of the Safety Committee.


In addition, technical controls are imposed:


- annually, for smoke-elimination, heating and gas
installations, lifts, cooking facilities in large kitchens,
and rescue and alarm equipment;


- every three years, for electrical installations.


However, no particular technical controls are stipulated in
regard to the foundations of the structures.


SAFETY RULES FOR STANDS AND TIERS


In enclosed facilities:
the maximum number of spectators permitted is established by
adding:
- the number of persons sitting on seats or tip-up seats;
- the number of persons sitting on benches, with 1 person


                                  7
every 0.50 metres;
- the number of persons who can stand on balconies, 5 persons
per linear metre.


For spectators situated on galleries and balconies, account is
no longer taken of the capacity of the latter, as was done
with the old general provisions, but the possibility of
visibility is considered, which corresponds to an arrangement
in alternate rows.


This calculation is more exacting than the old calculation
provided for galleries for swimming-pools.


The arrangement of the tiers must meet the following general
requirements:


Art. AM 17. ARRANGEMENT OF LIGHT PLATFORMS IN SUPERSTRUCTURES



1. The arrangement of light platforms in superstructures which
can hold people, such as stands, ramps, pavilions, podiums,
daises, tiers, rostrums, and all raised platforms in general
arranged inside buildings, must have a framework made of
Category M3 materials and in good condition.


The arrangement of light platforms in superstructures must not
produce an additional risk of collapse through the overload
produced by the public or by the objects intended to be
supported by them.   The stability of both framework and
platform must therefore be sufficient.


2. None of these platforms should have openings through which
people might fall.


The risers of the tiers can have a plinth at least 0.10 m.
high at the bottom, and must not have a gap of* dimensions
greater than those laid down in Standard NF P 01-012 which


                               8
concerns parapets.


3. The parts underneath them must be free of deposits of
combustible materials.      They must be made unusable and
inaccessible to the public by an external partition made of
Category M3 materials and have only control openings.


If the area of these parts is more than 100 m2, they must be
divided into cells with a maximum area of 100 m2, with
partitions made of Category M1 materials.


The volume under the platform may be enclosed externally, with
a continuous partition.


4. These structures must be sufficiently stable for the
persons and objects which they are intended to support.      They
must, in any event, withstand an overload of at least 5,000
N/m2.


The overload is calculated under static conditions.


5. These structures and their access stairs must be provided
with parapets to prevent falls and to resist pushing by the
crowd.


Art. AM 18.   ROWS OF SEATS


Whenever the provisions specific to certain types of
facilities require rows of seats fixed to the ground, the
latter must meet the following requirements:


1 . The structure of the seats fixed to the ground must be made
of Category M3 materials.


The stuffing must be covered with a firmly closed cover made
of Category M2 materials, which also satisfies the test of
perforation with a hot electric finger, and any other test
recognized as equivalent, after the Combustible Materials
Research Centre has given its opinion.      This cover must
always be kept in good condition.


By seating structure is meant the cross-pieces of.the seats,
the base, the beams, the framework of the backs, and the bases
of the seats fixed to the ground.


The stuffing of the fixed seats constitutes a certain danger        -
where fire risks are concerned, and it is important to protect
them with an external cover which should not melt under the
pressure of an incorrectly extinguished cigarette which may
come into contact with the stuffing itself.


(This cover and its stuffing must also comply with the
provisions of Article 6-2 of the amended decree of 4 November
1975 on the toxicity of combustion gases of materials).


Seats with monobloc frames, classified as M3, are considered
to satisfy the requirements of paragraph 1 of Article AM 18.


Each row must have its ends firmly fixed to the ground and to
the walls.


If this is not the case, each row must be joined to one or
more other rows, so as to constitute a block which is
difficult to tip up or to move.      In this case the fixing
rods, perpendicular to the rows must be applied at ground
level and must not be more than     0.02 m. thick, with a rounded
profile to prevent anyone falling.


2. In the event of panic, the rows of seats present less of a
risk of being obstacles to the evacuation of the public than
the same number of seats simply resting on the ground.


The number of seats per row is limited in order to ensure
rapid evacuation of the spectators.
The seats can be made of wood or have synthetic sponge
stuffing.


The weight of the block of seats keeps them in position, even
in the event of panic, and also makes evacuation of the public
possible.


In certain cases, the means of fixing stipulated in Point 2
can, on the opinion of the Safety Committee, be replaced by
any other arrangement which offers the same guarantees.


Some particular provisions for sports facilities complete or
modify these requirements.


Tiers
1. The provisions of Article AM17 (Point 2 and 3) do not apply
to movable or dismountable tiers.


The lights on the tiers, or along the passages, must comply
with the dimensions stipulated by the rules relating to
parapets.


The parts underneath must be rendered inaccessible to the
public;     they must not serve for the collection of materials,
or as a store or warehouse, etc.      They must always be kept in
a perfect state of cleanliness.


The frame of the tiers can be Category MO (metal, cement), M 1 ,
M2 or M3 (solid wood), and must withstand an overload of 5,000
N/m2.


The ends of the tiers and the accesses to them (stairs) must
be provided with parapets which comply with Standard NF P 01
012 so as to avoid falls (the distance between two bars must
be about 11 c m .).
The parts beneath the tiers   must be rendered inaccessible to
the public and not serve as a store for materials.    In
addition, tiers which cannot be dismantled must be isolated
from the public by a category M3 partition, with only the
openings necessary for inspections for maintenance and
repairs.


If the parts underneath are larger than 100 m2, they should
also be divided into cells of 100 m2, with category M1
separating elements.


This article considers:


- in Point 1, mitigation of Article AM 17 (Point 2), which
requires a platform with additional steps.


Movable tiers must in fact have a minimum aperture to allow
the operation of the system of sliding, folding and embedding,
and dismountable tiers are generally brightly lit.


It is these lights which must comply with the dimensions
established by the standard for parapets, in Article 2.3.2.
Pierced parapets, following extracts;


2.3.2.1. Parapets with gaps between the vertical elements:
partitions, panels, etc.
Gap between partitions or vertical elements and between
partition and panel or front:   11 cm.


2.3.2.2. Parapets with gaps between horizontal elements:
rails, panels, etc.


1. Gaps in the bottom part between the normal or temporary
standing area and the lower element of the parapet:      11 cm.


2. Gaps between horizontal elements, situated at a height of
45 cm. or more in relation to the normal standing area:      18


                                12
cm.


3. The part of the parapet situated at a height of less than
45 cm. must not include elements which enable people to stand
there in assisted equilibrium, unless the parapet-is designed
to satisfy the reduced height, H, provisions established by
Article 2.2.2.


2.3.2.3. Parapets with elements other than vertical or
horizontal ones or with limited gaps between vertical and
horizontal ones.


The gaps between the elements should not allow a hexagonal
shape to get through, whatever its orientation in the plane of
the parapet.


However, in the case of oblique bars, the shape used will be a
rectangle 25 cm x 11 cm.


It should be noted that in Article 1.2., "Sphere of
application", the standard on parapets does not cover:


- galleries in theatres, cinemas and other places where
performances are held;


- the stands of stadiums, except across the stairs which serve
the tiers or stands, and at the end of the tiers which come
out to the void;


- parapets of a monumental or period character, such as those
of listed buildings or historical monuments.


However, whenever the activity pursued in a multipurpose hall
devoted mainly to sport requires the constitution of tip-up
seats (films, plays, etc.), the seats must be joined together,
and installed in accordance with the provisions of Article AM
18 (Point 2) previously described.


                              13
Stairs
1. Stairs which force the public to go out and descend (or
vice versa) to reach the exits from the tiers, are permitted.


In the case of tiers above the annexes or in a gallery, for
example.    This provision is necessary for circular tracks
with the public in the centre, such as cycle-tracks, skating
tracks, etc.     In this case, evacuation is effected either
across bridge passages, or underground.


2. As a supplement to the provisions of Article CO 51 (Point
1), the gap in the riser cannot exceed 0,18 m;       in this case,
the steps must have:
- either a plinth of at least 0.03 m.;
- or a covering of at least 0.05 m.


If there are no risers, the gap cannot exceed that imposed for
parapets (18 cm) and the plinth solution is permitted.


3. By derogation from the provisions of Article CO 55 (Point
3), the height of the steps serving the places on the tiers is
increased to 0.25 m., with the reservation that there should
not be more than 5 rows of spectators.


Article CO 55, Point 3 authorizes steps 0.20 m. high under
certain conditions;    this paragraph eases the use of small
tiers.     However, the slope must not exceed 45°.


For open-air stands, the general measures concerning tiers and
seats remain, and the following particular provisions are
stipulated, in view of the risks and the operational
requirements.


Stands and tiers


1. No fire resistance is required for the bearing structures,


                                14
if there are no premises with particular risks underneath the
stands.


If premises where there are particular risks are established
under the stands:


- no fire resistance is demanded in cases where the bearing
structures do not cross these premises;


- fire resistance for one hour is required if this is not the
case.


In any case, the collapse of one bearing element should not
result in other structures giving way.


2. The tiers, the platforms and the stairs must be calculated
for an overload of 500 daN/m2.


They must have the foundations and bracing required for their
stability.


3. The tiers must be reached by stairs every 20 m. at most.


The service stairs for the places in the tiers must have a
minimum height of 0.10 m., a maximum height of 0.20 m., and a
tread of 0.20 m. or more.


However, the maximum height of the steps is increased to 0.25
m, with the reservation that the stand should not contain more
than 10 tiers.      In any case, the alignment of the front parts
of the steps must not exceed 45°.


4. Parapets (or support bars) must be installed:


- in the parts of the stands where the difference in level
between two successive tiers (or between one tier and the
ground) is 1 metre or more;
- in the parts of the stands where the public always stands,
with one line of parapets every 5 tiers.


In addition, these parapets must be able to withstand a
horizontal pressure of 170 daN/linear metre.




                               16
