   HOME OFFICE
   Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                              Direct line 01-273 i y s l
                             Switchboard 01-273 3000



                                                     Your reference


                                                     O ur reference
                                                             FEP/90 35/48/139
                                                      Date
                                                             26 October 1990

Dear


I refer to your    recent  letter to David Hunt MP which as you
know has been      passed   to this Department in   view of our
responsibilities   for safety of sports grounds.    I apologise
for the delay in   replying.

As you are probably aware Lord Justice Taylor held an Inquiry
into the Hillsborough Stadium   disaster.    His Interim Report
was published in August 1989 and outlines the causes of the
disaster.   The Inquiry did not set out to apportion blame for
what happened but  to find out the   causes of the disaster and
make reccomendations   to prevent such an accident happening
again.    Although the police   were   criticised   the Interim
Report highlights several other contributory factors       which
lead to   the accident    , for example     the absence   of an
authorised maximum  capacity for the pens   , the layout of the
crush barriers and inadequate signs and ticketing.     Criticism
was not therefore confined solely to the police.

                                                 Yours sincerely


                                                 Steve Bilbe
                                                             ■S- 6tMs~
                                                 ( Fire and Emergency
                                                 Planning Department )
                        With compliments


         Thrs &6«as \a bfc motfc qppfuepm'olt
              to^oo — y(- u^ooU o/Bfeoe. Vkof
F8 Division                     ~        *               I
Home Office        I____________IS K\a£-»rtC| a   pO lfY T
LONDON SWm 9AT g JDQO V                      Oil- SpOfcRftO)
Tel. 01 273                    .    .
               Y Swyddfa Gymreig
                  Welsh Office

              Gyda Chyfarchion y'Swyddfa
                      Gymreig ‘
              With the Compliments o f the
                      Welsh O ffice


                                     Gwydyr House
Telephone:                            Whitehall,
01-270-3000                           London, S.W.1A 2ER
    Y SWYDDFA GYMREIG                                WELSH OFFICE
        GWYDYR HOUSE                  W P f          GWYDYR HOUSE
WHITEHALL LONDON SWIA 2ER                     WHITEHALL LONDON SW1A 2ER
Tel. 01-270 3 0 0 0 (Switsfwrdd)              Tel. 01-270 3 0 0 0 (Switchboard)
     01-270         (Llinell Union)                01-270         (Direct Line)




  The Secretary of State has asked me to thank you for
  your letter dated 10 July about Football Violence.

  However, the points raised in your letter are the
  responsibility of the Home Office and I have, therefore,
  transferred your correspondence to that Department for
  direct reply.

                                              Yours sincerely



                                                             >zL_
                                                  BIRCH (MRS)
                                              CORRESPONDENCE CLERK
                                                         XpQr HQTHJ2        CJt.

                                     /iW                           jQ ^




Tel:-


                                                   July 10 1990.
David Hunt Esq M. P.
House of Commons,
London SV1A OAA.


Dear Mr Hunt,              11Foot toll Violence”

            It seems to me tliat your strident comments on BBC re our
Football and Europe, requires comment, even above the ’’Fair Play” Award
given to England, which clearly sticks in your throat..

            As I have written before, I see this violence in the manner
of apparent Miner violence during the strike, which was designed for
Legislative purposes,  to manipulate public opinion.   Indeed few
independent minds could doubt that the ’’Hillsboro disaster” was the sick
result of withdrawing the Police outer cordon - on whose orders - to
produce a hiatus at the gates.  Few would disagree that in a less
dreadful form:- This would have been a real event to present to the
Commons debate some days later?

            What is sure with this disaster as with all others which
have occured from the ’’Free Market” ethos of "Profit Before Health
Safety and People” is that the Political inspiration will remain under
cover at any subsequent Enquiry.

Yours sincerely,
