                        CONFIDENTIAL
                                             Q_   f=>^3eS (/\x<
PS/Mr. Moynihan



LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S FINAL REPORT - STATEMENT ON MONDAY



1.   Mr. Kinghan submitted last night briefing on a series of
questions that might come up following the Home Secretary's
statement on Monday.


2.   All of them are pertinent, but I think the three main
questions that we shall have to answer are:

     ♦    if you accept Taylor, why not repeal?    If you don't
          accept Taylor, why not press on?

     ♦   didn’t Taylor show that the scheme was inoperable?

     ♦   didn’t Taylor say that even if the technology worked,
          the scheme would not deter hooligans?


3.   Itwill be particularly important for us to have a concerted
Government line on these.     A first draft of the answers is
attached.




 o

P F OWEN
25 January 1990

cc   APS/Secretary of State
     PS/Permanent Secretary
     M r . McDonald
     Mr. Kinghan
     M r . Lee
     M r . Rock
     M r . Newsom




                        CONFIDENTIAL
                         CONFIDENTIAL




     If you accept Taylor, why not repeal? If you don't accept
Taylor, why not press on?


Taylor has put forward an extensive package of measures which
could have the effect of reducing hooliganism: all-seater stadia;
better facilities; a better example set by players; restrictions
on ticket touts; three new criminal offences; an extension of
attendance orders; and tagging. They should be given a fair
trail. But experience shows that hooliganism is not easily
defeated. The national membership scheme is a further potentially
powerful weapon against the hooligans and it would be
irresponsible to abandon it before experience of the effect of
the Taylor proposals has shown that it is not needed.



     Didn't Taylor show that the scheme was inoperable?


All he had to go on was an invitation to tender issued by the
consultants employed by the football authorities. We shall need
to discuss his technical worries with specialist companies who
submitted tenders in response to the invitation, but - although
"this is to some extent breaking new ground - our own computer
experts saw no reason to believe that a workable system could not
be devised.



     Didn't Taylor say that even if the technology worked,the
     le would not deter hooligans?


The arguments in the report on this point were all put forward -
 and answered - in the course of the Parliamentary debates. The
Government does not accept that a national membership scheme
would not deter hooligans. However, Taylor has put forward an
alternative approach, and it must be given a fair trial.




                        CONFIDENTIAL
