                                                                                                    fe fik.
Department for Culture, Media and Sport                            Ground                tel 01?1 211 6 0 8 l
Sport and Recreation                                               2*4 Cockspur Street   Fax 0171 211 6149
                                                                   London SW 1Y5DH




To         PHILIP CHAMBERLAIN               cc     Chris Carr
                                                   Keith Cibbins
From     - Paul McCormack                          Simon Broadtey
                                                   Cotin Jones
Date       12 A pril 1999                          Philip Townsend
                                                   Lionel Pim tott

                                                   Andy Burnham




TENTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER




1. I understand that Tony Banks has agreed to undertake a number of media interviews
tom orrow on the above, including one w ith Granada TV.

2. Please find attached at flag A briefing on developments in sports grounds safety since
Hillsborough. The lines to take have been discussed w ith Press Office here.

3. You w ill recall that Granada TV broadcast a drama documentary on the disaster on
5 December which made allegations o fte n unresolved questions. Briefing, provided by
the Home Office, principally explaining why the Government w ill not order a new inquiry
into Hillsborough, is at flag B.




Paul McCormack
TENTH ANNIVERSARY OF THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER



Lines to take

Introduction

- Welcome the decision by The Football Association to mark the tragic events which occurred at
  Hillsborough Stadium ten years ago by observing a one minute silence before last weekend's FA Cup
  Semi-Finats.

- Also welcome the decision by the Football League and the FA Premier League to encourage their
  member clubs to observe a one minute silence before league matches this coming Saturday (17 April).

All-seater policy

-   Dramatic change in safety standards at football grounds in this country since 1989 both in terms of
    infrastructure and crowd management. English football grounds now recognised as amongst the
    safest and finest in the world. For example, Euro ‘96, held here in modern all-seater stadia with
    unrestricted views and the fans close to the action, was the most successful European Championships
    ever. The atmosphere generated at these matches was remarked upon throughout the world.

- This improvement bears testim ony to the work of the Football Licensing Authority, established in the
  wake of the Hillsborough disaster to oversee the implementation of the Government's all-seater
  policy.

-   Clubs in this country have spent £565m to date on redeveloping their stadia following the Taylor
    Report, helped by £160m from the Football Trust as a result o f a reduction in Pool Betting Duty
    concession granted in 1990 to fund Taylor-related work. This is a magnificent achievement.

- The £55m funding package announced in 1997, and the extension o f the reduction in Pool Betting
  Duty concession until March 2002 announced in this year's budget, are both designed to assist the
  Football Trust and demonstrate this Government's com m itm ent to implement Taylor.

Safe Terracing Policy

- The Government has no plans to review the Taylor Report's recommendations which identified all­
  seating as the factor that contributed most to spectator safety. We are, of course prepared to listen
  to comments about the provision of spectator accommodation at our top football grounds including
  proposals advocating the return of terraces. However, my personal view is that we have gone too far
  down the all-seater road to revert to terracing now.

-   Believe we are striking the right balance in providing some of the most modern all-seater facilities,
    in terms of safety and comfort, in the world at our top clubs, and allowing some standing
    accommodation at lower division grounds where the risk is reduced due to smaller crowds, subject
    to stringent safety requirements.

-   Most clubs in the lower divisions well on course to meet the safe terracing requirements which w ill
    come into force in August this year.

Sports Grounds Safety Authority

-   Much has been done to improve safety standards. But there is no room for complacency. The
    Government announced in a consultation exercise last year its intention to revise the functions of the
    Football Licensing Authority to enable it to build upon its work on football and offer advice on sports
    grounds safety across a wide range of sports. This proposal was generally welcomed and we w ill take
    steps to reconstitute the FLA as the Sports Grounds Safety Authority as soon as legislative time
    allows.
The Football Task Force

- This Government has recognised the special role football plays in this country by establishing the
  Football Task Force to investigate issues of concern to all those involved w ith the game. The Task
  Force is currently considering the complex issues associated w ith the commercial aspects of the game,
  and I expect to receive its report on this important area by the end of June.

The Green Guide

- The Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (‘the Green Guide')has been revised twice - in 1990 and, more
  recently, in 1997 - to reflect changes in good practice in the design and management of sports
  grounds.


Background

1. In January 1990, Lord justice Taylor's Final Report on the Hillsborough Stadium disaster was published
following the tragic events at an FA Cup Semi-Final there on 15 April 1989, at which 96 people died. The
Taylor Report contained 76 recommendations, many of which, including a reduction in the permitted
crowd density on terraces and the removal of spikes from perimeter fences, were included in a revised
edition of the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (‘the Green Guide’), published in 1990.

2. By far the most important of Taylor's recommendations was th a t standing accommodation should
be eliminated at all grounds designated under the Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975. The then
Government accepted the Report, but chose to lim it the all-seater requirement to football, due to the
particular problems of safety and crowd control experienced in th a t sport. Accordingly, clubs in the old
Division 1 and 2 of the Football League were given until August 1994, and those in Divisions 3 and 4,
until August 1999, to go all-seater.

3. In order to help clubs meet the costs of implementingTaylor, the then Chancellor, in his 1990 budget,
made available £ 100m over a five year period through the Football Trust by means of a reduction in the
rate of Pool Betting Duty. In May 1996 this concession was increased from 2.5% to 3% and extended
to run until March 2000. In the 1999 budget the concession was extended until at least 2002.

4. The all-seater policy was reviewed in 1992 in order to ensure that it targeted more effectively those
clubs where the risk is greatest. In July 1992 it was announced that all clubs in the FA Premier League
and the First Division of the Football League would still be required to go all-seater by August 1994, in
accordance w ith Taylor's recommendation. However, clubs in the Second and Third Divisions would be
permitted to keep some standing accommodation, provided the terracing was safe.

5. The all-seater policy for the 46 clubs in the top tw o divisions was implemented through the Football
Licensing Authority's licensing system, established under the Football Spectators Act 1989. In July 1994
the then Secretary o f State issued an Order under Section 11 of the 1989 Act empowering the FLA to
include conditions in their licences requiring clubs, to have all-seater grounds by a given date. In the
m ajority of cases this was 1 August 1994, but the then Secretary of State, after careful consideration
of applications from 11 clubs for more tim e to comply, granted lim ited extensions of one year each to
five relocating clubs (Derby County, Grimsby town, Middlesbrough, Portsmouth, and Sunderland), and
to one club redeveloping on site (Newcastle United). He also confirmed th a t those clubs in the First
Division of the Football League promoted since 1991 would be have three years from the date of their
promotion to go all-seater.

6. The safe terracing policy for clubs in Divisions 2 and 3 of the Football League w ill also be implemented
using the FLA's licensing system. Such clubs have until August this year either to introduce all-seated
accommodation or to ensure th a t any retained terracing meets minimum standards relating to the
design, layout and strength of crush barriers. The FLA wrote to all lower Division clubs in June last year
outlining the minimum standards that w ill be required for terracing to be retained. We understand from
the Authority that most lower Division clubs are well on course to meet the safe terracing requirements.

SARD C, A pril 1999.
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - BRIEFING

LIN ES T O TAKE

General

Understand the sense of frustration which the families and others feel that no individual
was personally held to account following the disaster.

A private prosecution brought by the Family Support Group against former Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield and former Superintendent Murray is now before the courts.
It would, of course, be inappropriate to comment on this.

■Why won’t th e Governm ent order a new inquiry into Hillsborough?

The original Taylor Inquiry was very thorough and was unequivocal in identifying the
main cause of the disaster as a failure of police control.

The Home Secretary, soon after taking office, asked Lord Justice Stuarc-Smith to conduct
a scrutiny to determine whether there was significant new evidence about the disaster
which was not available to the original inquiry.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith carried out a thorough scrutiny. In his report, which was
published in February 1998, he considered all die material allegations about missing or
concealed videotape evidence, the alleged interference with witnesses and witness
statements and concerns about the use of the 3.15pm cut-off time at the Inquest.

The Home Secretary considered the Judge’s report carefully and he accepted the
conclusion which the Judge reached that the evidence submitted to him does not add
anything significant to the evidence available to and considered by the Taylor inquiry and
the inquests.

"What about the alteration of police statements?

Lord Justice Stuait-Stnith investigated the alteration of police statements in detail in the
course of his scrutiny.

Although Lord Justice Stuart-Smith said thai there were some alterations which it would
have been preferable not to have made, he was satisfied that the procedure followed by
South Yorkshire Police had had no material effect on the outcome of the Taylor Inquiry,
the coroner's inquest or the decision of the Director of Public Prosecutions.


W asn’t the appointm ent of Norm an Bettison (who was serving in the South
Yorkshire Police at the tim e of Hillsborough) as Chief Constable of M erseyside
m isguided?

The appointment of M r Bettison as the Chief Constable of Merseyside was a matter for
the Merseyside Police Authority. M r Bettison was not on duty at Hillsborough and
neither the Taylor Inquiry nor Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny made any criticism of
him.



\\L01RB002\GROUP\Oppu\COMPLNTS\BRIEF\cnp-0916.-doc
                                                                                                 r *o' '
\<L HKK           I c- ct i n u I * c J J i - z l o l u n t f - U i d c o c.<^




          Will the Governm ent place copies of the evidence considered by Lord Justice
          Stuart-Sm ith’s scrutiny in Liverpool Central Library?

          There are no plans to place copies in Liverpool Central Library. Most of the main
          material considered by Lord Justice Scuart-Smith is contained in the appendices to his
          report. Much of the other material considered was already in the public domain from the
          earlier Taylor inquiry and inquests.

          We have placed as much as possible of the other material considered by Lord Justice
          Stuart-Smith in the Library of the House of Commons.

          W hat is the Governm ent doing to ensure th at police officers don’t escape
          punishm ent in future?

          The Government has implemented new police discipline procedures (from 1 April 1999).
          The new procedures operate on the civil standard of proof and remove the double
          jeopardy provision which used to restrict criminal and disciplinaiy action on the same
          facts. The new procedures will also allow a discipline hearing to proceed in the absence
          of the accused.

          The Home Secretary has indicated that forces should show greater commitment to their
          powers to verify claims of sickness and disability and, where appropriate, to postpone a
          request to retire on ill health grounds until the completion of disciplinaiy proceedings.




          \\L01RB002\GROUP\Oppu\CX)MPLNTS\BRIEF\mp-0916.doc
                                                                                                   P. 4/5
12 APR      '99   12=40 HO F2 DIVISION 0171 273 2703




         BACKGROUND

         It is the tenth anniversary of the Hillsborough Disaster (15 April 1989) in which 96
         people died. Lord Justice Taylor was appointed in the immediate aftermath of the tragedy
         to conduct a public inquiry. The inquiiy identified a number of causes of the disaster:

         • The failure to cut off access to the central pens which were already overfull
           There were no maximum safe capacities for the pens.
         - There was no effective visual monitoring of crowd density.
         - The protection afforded by the layout of barriers in the pens was inadequate.
         - Inadequate planning led to dangerous congestion at the turnstiles.
         - An unruly, drunken minority aggravated the problem.
         - Sheffield Wednesday’s signs and ticketing were inadequate and confused.

         O n balance, the inquiry found that, although there were other causes, the main reason
         for the disaster was the failure of police control The report was critical of the actions of
         Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and statements attributed to him in the immediate
         aftermath of the disaster.

         The Coroner’s inquest into the disaster reached a verdict of accidental death in respect of
         the victims.

         The DPP concluded that no person should be prosecuted as a result of the disaster and
         Chief Supt Duckenfield retired on medical grounds before disciplinary charges of neglect
         of duty could be brought against him.

         A Granada Television Drama about the disaster, broadcast on 5 December 1996, made
         allegations of 10 unresolved questions about the disaster.

         The Home Secretary announced on 30 June 1997 that he was appointing Lord Justice
         Stuart-Smith to cariy out a scrutiny of new evidence. On 18 Februaiy 1998 the Home
         Secretaiy’ published his report.

         Shortly after the disaster, the police officers who had been present at Hillsborough were
         required to record their recollections of the day. The officers’ statements were
         subsequently submitted to the force solicitors to advise whether they were in a suitable
         form for submission to the judicial inquiry led by Lord Justice Taylor. In the majority of
         cases, no recommendations were made on the officers' statements. In some, though,
         advice was given to remove comment, hearsay or inappropriate language. The South
         Yorkshire Police’s own evidence collation team also recommended some amendments of
         a similar nature, without reference to the solicitors.

         Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report indicates that he investigated this matter thoroughly
         after it was brought to his attention by the South Yorkshire Police. He did not criticise
         the procedure followed, but there were several statements where he believed it would
         have been preferable for the amendments not to have been made, because what was
         removed was either factual or comment where factual matters were implicit. Lord Justice
         Stuart'Smith said that the Taylor Inquiry were aware that the statements had been vetted
         in this way and he was satisfied that it did not materially affect the outcome of the
         Inquiry or other proceedings.




         \\LQlRB002\GROUP\Oppu\COMPLNTSNBRIEF\mp-0916-doc
                                                                                                    P .5/5'
12 fiPR      '99   12140 HO F2 DIVISION 0171 273 2703




          The Hillsborough Family Support Group is pursuing a private prosecution against
          former Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and former Superintendent Murray, the most
          senior officers in charge at Hillsborough on the day of the disaster.

          Following his appointment as Chief Constable of Merseyside last year, there have been
          allegations made about Norman Bettison. Mr Bettison was serving in the South
          Yorkshire Police at the time of Hillsborough and was among the officers involved in the
          force’s follow up work to prepare for the judicial inquiry and inquests. It is alleged that
          he was involved, therefore, in the force’s ' cover-up’ of the police’s responsibility for the
          disaster.




          \\L01RB002\GROUP\Oppu\COMPINTS\BRIEF\mp-0916.doc
