                                                                                         1 S CC'j 1989 j o ( * f



PS/Mr Moynihanr,                                                  :v'-: ■           M/PSO/32787/89
                                                     •V   !   •    :


                            u
DARLINGTON FOOTBALL CLUB
1.     The Minister asked for a report on the outcome of the
meeting on 3 October of Durham County Council's Public Protection
Committee when it considered a report on the safety arrangements
at Darlington Football Club.

2.     The report to the Committee (Flag A) identifies four main
recommendations from Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report which
have not been implemented although they are of high priority.
These are:

     -   the terraces are not divided into self contained areas,
         although the report states that there are major practical
         difficulties in achieving this;
         Club Stewards do not have radio contact with the police
         control room;

     -   the gates in the pitch perimeter fence do not open fully;

         there were insufficient turnstiles to admit spectators
         during the recommended one hour period at the specified
         flow p.rate.,.
3.     The report was amended verbally' at Committee to say that
in relation to *the fourth point above, the capacity has been
reduced to the appropriate level for the existing turnstiles ie
their ability to fill the viewing area in one hour.

4.     The Committee deferred consideration of this item since a
further report was promised in January 1990 to report on progress
made by the Club on these priority recommendations and a number
of other safety matters which had yet to be considered by the
County Council's Advisory Group on safety at football grounds.
5.     We have asked the County Council to keep us informed and
will repot back to the Minister next January, following the
further report.
6.       The Home Office have no further information to add.


                                                                                               /U Y ( o M r
A R BADEN                                                                       J
SARD
Rm P3/165
Extn 0675                               >\

     October 1989
                            .■ ■                 ■                          !
cc   Mr Lee
     Mr Mould,- HO              .



         ■   • :   '   <■           .    ■   :            •
