                                                                   —


HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY - DRAFT STATEMENT BY HOME SECRETARY
Commenting today on the publication of Lord Justice Taylor's ^
report the Home Secretary, the Rt Hon Douglas Hurd CBE MP said: X


"I am grateful to Lord Justice Taylor and his team for completing
the first part of his inquiry in time to produce an interim
report before the start of the football season.


It is an excellent report which pulls no punches about the causes
of the disaster.


The Government welcomes the broad thrust of the report and
supports the principles of the recommendations. They          a
number of matters which should be dealt with without delay
pending the longer-term findings of the inquiry which will be
published in the final report.


A Home Office circular1 is to be sent out immediately to local
authorities, the police, football clubs and others concerned with
the organisation of football matches, urging them to take action
on the report's recommendations so as to put as many of them into
effect as possible before the beginning of the season. Similar
steps are being taken by the Secretary of State for Scotland.
              t




I am satisfied that the interim report has not identified any
major shortcomings in the law on safety in sports grounds, though
clearly the Government will look at the Safety of Sports Grounds
Act and the Home Office and Scottish Office guide to safety at
sports grounds ^.n the light of the final report of the inquiry.
         ( TU&.     CxoC'^-)
Most of the problems which contributed to the tragady at

     1   A copy of this circular is attached
Hillsborough had been recognised in the past. ~¥ho tragedy-'
           -—-—*       VVv'v (_ cOCi     <*/y)
revealed“by ihe report is t ha t-there have-been shortcomings in
applying those lessons nctswfcfcy on the part of the policer-^ut of
the club and of the local authority responsible for the safety
certificate.


The report reveals -gelte clearly that there are major
deficiencies in the layout and organisation of the Hillsborough
ground which should have been recognised and corrected.

The South Yorkshire Police


It will be for the Chief Constable in the first instance to
consider the conduct of individual officers and the South
Yorkshire police collectively in the light of the inquiry and the
investigation carried out by the West Midlands police. I shall
look to the Chief Constable of South yorkshire initially for a
report on the action he proposes to take.




Supervision of Safety Certificates


Powers recently fealcen by the Government in the Football
                                  \


Spectators Bill will permit the setting up of a new authority
with powers to supervise the way in which local authorities carry
out their responsibilities for the safety of sports grounds if in
due course this is considered necessary in the light of Lord
Justice Taylor's final report.
The tragedy would not have occurred if lessons learnt in the past
had been properly applied. It is for everyone concerned to 1
tcu-ensure they are applied in the future.”
                 hs.8.1/hillsb.dm



DRAFT CIRCULAR


1.   The Chief Executive
      County Councils
      Metropolitan District Councils
      London Borough Councils
      Common Council of the City of London
      Fire and Civil Defence Authorities
2.   Chief Officers of Police
3.   Chief Fire Officers

4.   Chief Ambulance Officers




Dear Sir

HO CIRCULAR      /1989

INTERIM REPORT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY
Introduction
The Interim Report of the Inquiry set up by the Home Secretary
into the tragic events at Hillsborough football ground Sheffield
on 15 April has now been published. A copy of the Report is
attached. Further copies are available from HMSO bookshops.


2.   The purpose of this circular is to inform recipients of the
contents of the Report and to urge them to take required action
without delay in order to implement, as necessary, the Inquiry's
recommendations to improve safety arrangements at sports grounds.
                                    \




Government response
3.   The Home Secretary has welcomed the broad thrust of the
Interim Report and supports the principles of the
recommendations which he believes should be dealt with without
delay pending the longer term findings of the Inquiry which will
be published in its Final Report.
Scope of the recommendations
4.   Although the scope of recommendations is wide they are aimed
primarily at football league grounds and the international
stadiums used for soccer and rugby where there are liable to be
large, densely packed crowds on terraces. Recipients should
nonetheless consider their application to other designated sports
grounds and sports grounds at which large crowds are in
attendance.


5.   The recommendations are in two categories: those requiring
implementation before the start of the new football season or
immediately thereafter; and those which, although requiring
immediate action are likely to take longer to put into effect.
The Home Secretary nevertheless urges recipients to take urgent
action on both categories so as to put into effect as many of the
recommendations as possible before the start of the season.

The guide to safety at sports grounds
6.   It is anticipated that the Guide will   be amended to reflect
the Inquiry's findings in due course after   consultation with
appropriate bodies. Any changes will take    account of the Final
Report's recommendations. If there is any    doubt as to the
nature of crush barrier test described in Annex C of the Guide
advice can be obtained from the Home Office 01-217 5352.

The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
7.   Consideration is also being given to any necessary
enforcement of the Report's recommendations by means of a
Statutory Instrument under section 15A of the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) requiring safety certificates to
include mandatory terms and conditions. Consultation as required
under section 18 of the 1975 Act will first be carried out before
any such Order is made.
Football clubs
8.   A copy of this circular together with the Report has been
sent to all 92 football league clubs and the international
stadiums in the expectation that they will co-operate fully.
Should co-operation not be forthcoming local authorities are
reminded of their powers under s.10 of the 1975 Act for use if
there is judged to be a serious risk to spectators in any part of
the ground.


Resource implications            jV
           fs   __ _ _____ ___
                            at local authorities will need to
examine current priorities in order to action the Inquiry's
recommendations, it is not envisaged that there should be
significant long-term resource implications for them. The cost
of any additional policing and/or provision of ambulance
services at football grounds is expected to be met by the clubs
or ground operators themselves.

Other
10. Any enquiries about this circular except barrier testing
(see paragraph 6 above) should be addressed to Mr A Brown
(01-273 2765).


11.     Copies also go to those bodies on the attached list.

                                      Yours faithfully




                                      A H TURNEY
                                      Fire and Emergency Planning Department
