                                                               u V ? + vvu=>                          •
                           From-. T h e P rivate
                                                                             —                        ’■“rt
                                                                                                 V']'° \ 'VJ

                                                          6                                               ,/VL
                                    CONFIDENTIAL                 H   o m e   O   i- i- k t   .

                                                               Q U E E N ANNE'S CA TE
                       W ? \-     w k     . v
                                            d                    LONDON      S W H I9A T
                                  tc.

                                   ^ U h A Na*oWX*             26 April 1989
                                   fi>      . ic v ,


                                                              DEPARTMENT OFTiit CNVIMNMENT
                                   \\ ^         j                 R E C E IV E D IN
                                   y\,s. ,v0j^ W ~ v
                                                                     “>6 APR 1989
                                              _>^ V®>«^
                                HILLSBOROUGH ENQUIRY
                                                              PRIVATE OFFICE
          T h e H o m e Secretary saw Lord Justice Taylor yesterday to gain some
initial    impressions of the progress of Sir Peter’6 enquiry.               Sir Clive
Whitmore and Mr Whalley, Secretary to the enquiry, were present.
      o
        The Home Secretary thanked Sir Peter for agreeing to undertake the
enquiry and expressed sympathy for the difficulties he had faced in the
days since the disaster at Hillsborough.

        Sir Peter said that he would be free of judicial duties after 27
April and would be holding a preliminary hearing on 28 April to settle
issues Of legal representation.    He hoped to arrange the start of the
hearings for 15 May but would hear shortly whether the police could make
th§ Hgcewary arrangements by then.        Sir Peter had quickly come to
appreciate the magnitude of the task in hand, which was both more complex
and more controversial than the task faced by Popplewell.     To make the
police exercise manageable he hoped it would be possible to concentrate on
a sample Of witnesses representing the full range of opinion. If a 15 May
staft CQUW he arranged he thought that some recommendations could be made
before the new football season:       however he would welcome the Home
secretary’s views.
         TUG Home Secretary said he could envisage three areas which Sir
Peter might wish to cover in his interim report. The first area was the
technical W?4 physical aspects of safety which could be givtgi attention
before the: new football season. The second was the membership scheme set
out in the Football Spectators Bill. He was neither compelled to comment
on this, nor precluded from doing so. This was in part an enabling Bill
creating an Authority to devise a membership scheme.                   There were
consequently several stages at which the eventual form of the scheme could
be influenced.            The Government's original intention had been to obtain
Royal Assent for the Bill by July. This target had shifted to the end of
the present Session, which in practice meant October.               If he wished,
therefore? Sir Peter would be able to express an opinion on the membership
scheme in the expectation that, the Government would consider his view
before the Bill's final stages were reached. The Home Secretary realised
 that the t i m e t a b l e for the Bill created a difficulty for Sir Peter. The
 revised t i m e t a b l e would, however, make it possible to take account of any
 comments O f principle Sir Peter wished to offer in his interim report.
 Finally, sir Peter might have other matters to raise for which legislation
 might he needed but which did not relate to the membership scheme or the
 contents O f the Bill. Any such points could be considered for inclusion in
 the Bill 9T perhaps in a separate Bill at a later stage.

                                                1.

                                         CONFIDENTIAL
                                CONFIDENTIAL


                                     2.


         Sir Peter responded that it would be necessary to devote the early
stages of his enquiry to establishing the facts of the disaster. There
would be much disputation about the facts and the location of responsiblity
for what happened. It should be possible for a short interim report to be
produced in time for consideration before the mid-August start of the new
season, which in practice meant early to mid-July, to cover the question of
perimeter fences and one or two important matters of police procedure. But
it would not be possible to give as wide ranging an interim report as
Popplewell had, since in the case of the Bradford fire there had been little
disagreement over the basic facts presented to the enquiry. He believed
 that his enquiry would in practice have to deal with the question of member­
 ship cards unless this issue was specifically excluded from its terms of
 reference, Put he did not see how he could offer a helpful recommendation
 on the subject until he had completed much of the work. If membership cards
 did form part; Of its remit he therefore could not promise recommendations in
 time for consideration within the revised timetable for the Bill. Unless
 the timetable for the Bill was again changed, Sir Peter accepted that the
 Government might proceed without knowledge of what he might eventually have
 to say on the subject. Sir Peter stressed that he had a completely open
 mind on the membership card issue at present: he did, however, perceive
 membership cards as part of a set of interlocking factors such as stadium
 design and ticket arrangements.

         The Home Secretary asked Sir Peter what he would be likely to say in
 the summer if the Government went ahead with the revised timetable for the
 Bill and he was asked then for a view on the membership scheme: would he
 say that he had not yet formed an opinion? Sir Peter responded that this
 would probably be his answer in such circumstances, although he might say
 that he had a provisional view which he was not yet ready to divulge.

          The Home Secretary asked Sir Peter whether he was really quite sure
 that it was out of the question to form and express a view on the subject
 of membership cards in the three and a half months which would be available
 between the Start of the enquiry, assuming 15 May would be achieved and the
  end of August?   Sir Peter said that this was possible, but he was not
  confident that it could be achieved. Hearing the initial evidence could
  take over a month. There would be cross allegations to hear on a number of
  important points before moving onto more refined areas of judgment, which
  could not be a priority. Sir Peter added that Popplewell had not said that
  there should be a membership scheme, but that consideration should be given
 Ito some form of membership scheme. Sir Peter’s enquiry was certain to be
  presented with the argument that a membership scheme would add to the
  problems Of crowd control outside football grounds. Before forming a view,
  he would need to hear evidence of the answer to this argument. He was not
  saying that it was impossible he would have formed a view by August or
  September but there appeared at the present stage to be a high likelihood
  that he would need longer.

          The following additional points were made in discussion:

            (i) Sir Peter expected to find a good deal of support for
                all seater stadiums, given especially the Liverpool
                decision to convert Anfield. He did not propose to go
                into the question of who should pay for such
                conversions.   The Home Secretary     said that   the
                Secretary of State for the Environment would be
                pursuing this issue in parallel with Sir Peter's
                enquiry, without waiting for or depending upon his
                recommendations;

                                    CONFIDENT
                               CONFIDENTIAL


                                    2   .
      (ii)     The Home Secretary explained   that he had considered
              whether   to issue some fresh guidance to local
              authorities on the exercise of their powers while Sir
              Peter's interim report was awaited, given that the
              football season had several weeks to run. Instead, he
              had decided to remind local authorities of the main
              points of existing guidance.     Sir Peter agreed with
              this approach. There was a danger of further incidents
              at the important end of season matches. But the clubs
              were alert to this danger and some had already taken
               action. If it was recommended that all fences should
               be dismantled there was a danger of disorder;

       (iii) Sir Peter had agreed that       his enquiry should be
             constituted as a Departmental enquiry rather than a
             Tribunal under the 1921 Act. Further reflection had
             led him to conclude that the 1921 Act approach might
             have been the better course, since there would be much
             crossfire and some witnesses could be reluctant to
             testify in the absence of the protection afforded by
             the 1921 Act.    However, to change now would mean
             further d^lay and Sir Peter     was content to proceed
             with a Departmental enquiry for the present.        If
             formidable difficulties arose during the course of the
             enquiry he might have to ask for the enquiry to be put
             onto a 1921 Act basis;

       (iv)    when he held his preliminary hearing on 28 April Sir
               Peter intended to make a statement announcing that the
               costs of witnesses would in normal circumstances be
               met from central funds. This was in keeping with the
               popplewell precedent and been agreed with the Home
               Office. Sir Peter would also say something about the
               constructive purpose of the enquiry which he hoped
               would help to reduce tension.

        The Home Secretary thanked Sir Peter for sharing his thoughts on
how the enquiry would be taken forward. The Government would reflect on the
difficulty which remained over the timetable for the Football Spectators
Bill. The thoughts of the Home Secretary and his colleagues went with Sir
Peter in the weeks which lay ahead.

        Copies of this note go to Andrew Turnbull (No 10), Stephen Catling
(Lord President’s Office), Nick Gibbons (Lord Privy Seal's Office) and
Trevor Woolley (Cabinet Office).




                                              C J WALTERS         X


Alan Ring, Esq.

                                 CONFIDENTIAL
