                          THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                                    LIMITED
                                                     Founded 1863
                                       Patron: H e r M ajesty T h e Q u e e n
                                     President: H .R .H . T h e D u k e o f K en t
                                         Chairman: S ir B e r t M il l ic h ip

   Chief Executive:                                                                    Phone: 071-402 7151/071-262 4542
R. H. G. K el l y fc is                                                                          Telex: 261110
                                                                                           Facsimile: 071-402 0486


                              16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW
  Our Ref:                                        Your Ref:
                      CFCH/MP/2392                                            5 November 1991

Mr. J. Vaughan
Sport and Recreation Division
The Department of Education & Science
Elizabeth House
York Road
London SE1 7PH




                          J
                          NATIONAL PLAN FOR STADIA - TAYLOR REPORT

Thank you for your letter * dated 1 November, and I am delighted that
you, together with Tony Baden will be able to join us at the
presentation on 26 November.    I note, also, that Roger Miles and David
Peters, from the Home; Office, will also be attending.

On 15 November, we will be finalizing the detail of the presentation
and, therefore, I shall write to you again, following that date, to
outline the topics to be covered during the two presentation sessions.




                                                    t




C . F . C . Hughes
Director of Coaching and Education




                                  Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Gate, London W23LW
                                  Incorporated in London Registration Number T7797
                         THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION & SCIENCE
                        ELIZABETH HOUSE YORK ROAD L O N D O N SEI 7PH
                    SWITCHBOARD 071-934 9 0 0 0 FAX 071-934 908 2 G T N No. 3914




David Peters Esq
G2 Division                                                                  November 1991
Home Office
Queen Anne’s Gate
London SW1




                             NATIONAL PLAN FOR STADIA

As you know the Football Association have arranged a presentation by
KPMG, the consultants who devised the national plan for stadia, at the
FA headquarters on 26 November. John Vaughan wrote to Roger Miles
about this on 24 October. I understand from the FA that James
Froomberg and Daryl Conley of KPMG will give the presentation. The FA
will be represented by Chris Willcox, Vice-Chairman, Graham Kelly,
Chief Executive, and Charles Hughes, Director of Coaching. Also
attending will be John De Quidt, Jim Frogatt and Mr G Wilson of the
FLA, Gwilyn Roberts and Christine Gausden of the FSADC and Peter Lee
of the Football Trust. The FA have sent us the attached details of the
topics to be covered during the presentation.

There are a number of issues which we would wish to explore with the
FA and their consultants at the presentation. These are attached and I
would be grateful for any comments you may have and for an indication
of the issues which the Home Office would like to raise with a view to
producing a consolidated list as suggested in John Vaughan's letter to
Roger Miles.
                    0




A R BADEN
Sport and Recreation Division




                                                                                             1
           FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION: NATIONAL PLAN FOR STADIA
         ISSUES TO BE RAISED AT MEETING ON 26 NOVEMBER 1991

Costs of stadia development

(i)   How have the development costs set out in Tables 8 and 9 of
      Chapter 5 of the Blueprint been calculated and how were the
      standards of comfort and facilities arrived at? Paragraph
      5.4.1 states that the costs are based on published research
      undertaken over the last year but we would be interested in
      further details.

(ii) In the total estimated costs what is the split between
     expenditure on essential Taylor requirements on all seating
     and safety and other measures to increase comfort.

Extent of Commercial development

(i)   What degree of commercial development is envisaged in the
      options for stadium upgrade (S) and refurbishment/develop­
      ment (D) in paragraph 5.3.1 and to what extent was possible
      commercial development considered as elements in the options
      for re-development (R), ground-sharing (E) and sharing a new
      purpose built neutral stadium (N)?

(ii) What   estimates   are there    of the contribution which
      commercial development can make towards offsetting the
      capital costs of stadia development and of the revenue
      income arising from commercial development? Paragraph 5.4.1
      states   that  additional commercial development is not
      included in the calculation of stadia development costs.

Choice of Scenario

(i)   We would welcome further explanation of why Scenario 2 is
       favoured and the realism of the assumption that 17 grounds
       will be shared (ie 34 clubs would be willing to share).

Need for new stadia

(i)   We would wish to seek further clarification of how the need
       for 26 or 27 (paragraph 5.3.2 says 27 but Table 2 suggests
       26) new stadia was identified. Paragraphs 5.3.1 and 5.3.2
       give some information on the assumptions made by the
       consultants which are partly based on the expressed
       intentions of some clubs but we would like to explore how
       realistic and firm these intentions are and how likely they
       are to succeed given the possible difficulties of obtaining
       planning permission.

(ii) How the regional allocation of the Premium Stadia (Table 7)
     was decided upon and what progress has been made in
     identifying the location of these stadia?

(iii) What is    the   timetable   for   the   development   of   the   new
      stadia?

                                                                          1
National Stadium

(i)   What is the   current   position on the national   stadium and
      when is the    matter   likely to go before theFA Council?
      Paragraph 5.3.6 sets     out 3 options. We were told at the
      meeting with   the FA   on 25 September that no decisions had
      yet been taken but      that the matter would be put to the
      Council soon.




SARD/DES
