          FS/Secretary of State


          LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INQUIRY


          Mr Moynihan has seen Mr Kinghan's submission of 6 June. He is
          broadly content but has made the following comments on the
          content:

f   #v>              He believes there is merit in referring to the Football
                     Association's recent press release which recognised that
                     a membership scheme would have substantial benefits.

              2 ..   He wonders whether we should not say that the debate on
                     the   membership   scheme  has   nothing   to  do   with
                     Hillsborough, highlighting very strongly the key points
                     in paragraph 10 of the draft paper (sub-paragraphs 5 and
                     6 ).

                     He believes also there is a case to be considered for
                     putting our own views more strongly not in the context of
                     the Hillsborough disaster but in support of the Bill.


          Mr Moynihan considers that these points could be presented in a
          factual way rather than as "evidence".




          ALASTAIR MCINTYRE
          APS/Mr Moynihan

            % June 1989
          cc
          PS/Lord Caithness
          PS/Lord Hesketh
          PS/Sir T Heiser
          Mr Owen
          Mr McDonald
          Mr Fletcher
          Miss Caines
          Mrs Weinberg
          Mr Lee
          Mr Newsom
          Mr Rock
          Mr Russell
         Kgnald
1. Mr McDonald
2. PS/Mr Moynihan
3. PS/Secretary of State


cc:    PS/Lord Caithness        Mrs Weinberg
       PS/Lord Hesketh          Mr Lee
       PS/Sir T Heiser          Mr Newsom       with paper only
       Mr Owen                  Mr Rock
       Mr Fletcher              Mr Russell
       Miss Caines


LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR’S INQUIRY


I enclose a draft paper on the national membership scheme which
we propose to send to Lord Justice Taylor under cover of a draft
official letter, also attached, if Ministers are content.

Your minute of 22 May recorded the Secretary of State's view that
we should not be giving "evidence" to Lord Justice Taylor but
telling him what the Government intends to do and why. This is
the line taken in the draft paper. In explaining the Government's
position on the Football Spectators Bill,        we have relied
exclusively on the Secretary of State's statement on the launch
of the Bill and on Ministerial speeches during the Bill's passage
through the Lords. It does not seem appropriate to try to find
new arguments about the national membership scheme for Lord
Justice Taylor, which we have not used in Parliament.

The covering letter offers to help arrange for Lord Justice
Taylor to see the technology offered by suppliers bidding for the
contract for the national membership scheme. The paper quotes the
claims made by potential suppliers, about the speed of the
technology, as Ministers have done in Parliament, but does not go
into detail about them. It is not for us to justify the
suppliers' claims.

The Home Secretary told Ministers at one of the Prime Minister's
meetings last week that Taylor would look at "the situation in
other countries", in relation to the national membership scheme.
We do not know why he wants to do this, since no other country
has a national membership scheme but we have included a note on
the Council of Europe Convention on Spectator Violence and
offered to make any necessary contacts.

The draft paper refers to the Home Office evidence on: crowd
control problems, their recent legislation and police action.
Ministers may like to see the attached copy of an early draft of
the Home Office paper but I should emphasise that it has not been
approved by Home Office Ministers yet. If it takes the form
proposed in the draft, it will complement our paper quite well.
#
    I would be grateful to know if Ministers are content with the
    attached drafts. Lord Justice Taylor has asked to receive written
    material by Monday 12 June and it would be a good thing if we
    could meet the deadline but a delay of a few days would probably
    not matter much. Given the Secretary of State's approach to Lord
    Justice Taylor's Inquiry, I presume that he will not want to
    publicise our paper; I am not sure that Lord Justice Taylor would
    want us to at this stage anyway.




    NEIL KINGHAN
    SARD


    6 June 1989
                                              (DRAFT: 25 May 1989)


CROWD CONTROL




INTRODUCTION


The Government's objectives in relation to crowd control at
football matches and other sporting events are to ensure that
necessary legislation and practical arrangements exist so that:


     - spectators can watch the event safely and enjoyably


     - violence, disorder and other unacceptable behaviour is as
     far as possible prevented and is dealt with if it arises.


Practical arrangements rest principally with the organisers of
the events (in relation to football, clubs and the football
authorities) and the police.   Ultimately, no arrangements can be
entirely satisfactory without a large measure of responsibility
and self-discipline amongst spectators.


The Home Secretary's general role in relation to policing, under
the Police Act 1964, is to promote the efficiency of the police.
Ke is assisted in this task by Her Majesty's Chief Inspector of
Constabulary who conducts annual inspections of every police
force.   In addition his department is in regular contact on his
behalf with individual police forces and representatives of the
Association of Chief Police Offices (ACPO).


In relation to safety at sports grounds the Home Secretary's role
is to ensure appropriate legislation is provided and is explained
to the relevant authorities and operators (see earlier Chapters)
(G1 - content?)


Unless otherwise stated the information in this Chapter relates
specifically to England and Wales.
The incidence of football hooliganism F8

The annual criminal statistics published by the Home Office show
numbers of offences recorded by type of offence not by
circumstance, so offences inside football matches or otherwise
related to football are not recorded as a separate category.
However, as a guide to the level of trouble at matches, ACPO
collate for each football season the total number of people
arrested at or ejected from Football League matches (arrests 'at'
meaning arrests inside grounds, or those made outside but
directly connected with the policing of matches). In recent
seasons these have totalled:



     Season         Arrests        Ejections

     1985/6          4,143          4,356
     1986/7          5,531          6,466
     1987/8          6,106          6,542



This level of incidents occur despite many efforts to counter
football hooliganism such as the extensive use of police
resources, strict segregation of opposing supporters, the use of
closed circuit television and video at most grounds, and special
efforts for liaison and gathering of information and
intelligence.

Away from grounds the police report many incidents of violence
and disorder connected with football, for example violence or
damage on trains, disorder at motorway service stations or pubs,
and even pre-arranged confrontations between rival supporters.
On the last full day of the 1988-89 football season (13 May 1989)
there were over 300 arrests of football supporters (180 at
football grounds and 126 elsewhere) including several violent
incidents, in which two people received serious head injuries.
Similar incidents, normally on a smaller scale, are often
associated with football.
THE LAW

General police duties and powers

The primary duty of the police is to maintain the Queen's Peace -
to preserve life, to maintain law and order and to prevent and
investigate crime.


The Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE) sets out the
police powers to investigate offences, for example to stop and
search or arrest persons or to detain and question suspects.
(Miss Wooldridge? The police also have common law powers to take
action necessary to maintain law and order or prevent a breach of
the peace.)


There are also a variety of specific offences covering theft,
violence, damage and other matters. The following paragraphs
describe offences and powers relating to disorder, alcohol and
exclusion from football grounds.

Disorder

The offences which football hooligans may commit during bouts of
disorderly activity vary greatly in type and seriousness. At one
end of the scale, section 5 of the Public Order Act 1986 makes it
an offence for a person to use threatening, abusive or insulting
words or behaviour, or disorderly behaviour, or to display any
writing, sign or other visible representation which is
threatening, abusive or insulting, within the hearing or sight of
a person likely to be caused harassment, alarm or distress. The
offence may be committed in public places and, with a few
exceptions, private places. A constable may arrest without
warrant a person who does not stop such behaviour when warned to
do so. On conviction the maximum penalty for the offence is a
fine not exceeding level 3 (currently £400).

At the other end of the scale is the offence of riot in section 1
of the Act. This makes it an offence where 12 or more persons
    who are present together use or threaten unlawful violence for a
    common purpose and their conduct (taken together) is such as
    would cause a person of reasonable firmness present at the scene
    to fear for his personal safety. The offence attracts a maximum
    of 10 years' imprisonment.

    In between these two ends of the scale there are the offences of
    violent disorder (section 2), affray (section 3) and fear or
    provocation of violence (section 4) which attract maximum
    penalties ranging from 5 years' imprisonment and a fine not
    exceeding the statutory maximum (currently £2000) to 6 months'
    imprisonment and a fine also not exceeding £2000. There is a
    specific offence in the Act to deal with threatening, abusive or
    insulting behaviour which is intended to stir up racial hatred or
    is likely to stir it up. A person suspected of committing the
♦
    offence can be arrested without a warrant and on conviction can
    be imprisoned for up to 2 years.


    There are many other offences, outside the scope of the Public
    Order Act 1986, which hooligans may commit during disorderly
    activity. For example, the offences of common assault and
    malicious wounding. These attract maximum penalties of 1 year
    and life imprisonment respectively. The gravest incidents of
    hooliganism may involve murder or attempted murder for which the
    maximum penalty is also life imprisonment. Criminal damage and
    possession of an offensive weapon in a public place are other
    offences which hooligans sometimes commit which can attract terms
    of imprisonment.

    Statute law is not the only means at the police's disposal for
    coping with hooligans. Breaches of the peace may be dealt with
    using common law powers. If the police reasonably apprehend an
    imminent breach of the peace they may take any reasonable steps
    which are necessary to control or prevent it, including arresting
    those responsible. They may bring the offenders before the
    courts where they may be bound over to be of good behaviour for a
    period.
Alcohol

The Government is very concerned about the part which alcohol can
play in spectator violence and has already taken firm action.
Various specific powers in relation to alcohol at football
matches are contained in the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol
etc) Act 1985, as amended. In addition there are a wide variety
of general powers in relation to alcohol licensing which have a
bearing on alcohol in the context of football.

The Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc! Act 1985 restricts
the sale and consumption of alcohol on the way to matches on
football special coaches and trains. It also makes it an offence
to try to enter a ground when drunk or in possession of alcohol
and to possess or consume alcohol within view of the pitch during
the period of the match (from 2 hours before until 1 hour
afterward). Although there is provision for magistrates to grant
exemption orders for premises with no view of the pitch, the
police are empowered to close any bar in the ground should they
believe that sale of alcohol there is detrimental to orderly
conduct or the safety of spectators.   The Act also prohibits the
possession of any bottle, can or other container capable of
causing injury. All Football League grounds, Wembley Stadium and
non-League grounds when used for matches involving League clubs
are designated under this Act. The Act also gives the police the
power to search someone reasonably suspected of committing an
offence under the Act, and to arrest such a person. Given the
nature of offences under the Act this may include searching
coaches on the way to or from matches or on arrival as well as
searching fans waiting to enter a ground or inside a ground.

Schedule I of the Public order Act 1986 extends the Sporting
Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985 to prohibit alcohol on
minibuses on journeys to or from a designated sporting event, and
prohibits the possession of a firework or similar item at, or
while entering, a designated sporting event.
Home Office. Circular 68/1988 (Alcohol and disorder) issued on 5
August 1988 gave wide ranging advice reminding courts and the
police of relevant criminal offences and powers to regulate
licensing, including the power to close all licensed premises in
an area when riot or serious disorder is expected.   (Section 188,
Licensing Act 1964).

In addition to the powers already available to the police, the
Home Secretary agreed last year to try out, on an experimental
basis, a bvelaw which prohibits the public consumption of alcohol
in specified areas. The seven local authorities involved have
designated areas, in consultation with the police, in which the
practice of drinking in public by groups of mainly young people
had reached the state where other citizens found it both
threatening and intimidating. One of the Councils involved,
Scarborough, has included in its designated areas the roads
leading to and surrounding both the (separate) local cricket and
football grounds. The byelaw will be tested for two years,
during which time it will be closely monitored to see whether it
can provide an effective remedy, without becoming oppressive,
which can be made available as a model to other Councils.
Although it is early days, preliminary results in Coventry where
the byelaw has been in force for seven months are encouraging.
The byelaw has been shown to be popular and public drinking on
the streets has effectively stopped.

Exclusion of troublemakers

Part IV of the Act gave new powers to the courts to impose
exclusion orders, prohibiting attendance for a minimum period of
3 months at all prescribed matches of any person convicted of a
football-related offence. This includes offences committed not
only inside or outside grounds, but also on journeys to or from
matches.

[From 1 August 1987, when this power was introduced, to
7 February 1,417 exclusion orders were recorded by the Football
Association. Update?!
This power to impose exclusion orders is without prejudice to a
club's own entitlement to choose who to admit, or refuse to
admit, to their property. Conditions under which this will take
place are set out in each club's Ground Rules, which normally
follow a model drafted by the fDOE? Football League/Association].
Ground rules typically assert the club's right to exclude
someone who refuses to be searched on entry.


The national football membership scheme proposed in Part I of the
Football Spectators Bill is intended to replace exclusion orders
with a positive check on entitlement to admission and mandatory
disqualification for fixed terms. See separate evidence
submitted by the Department of the Environment (DOE).
(DOE - content?)

PRACTICAL ARRANGEMENTS

Responsibility for crowd control at football matches

Chapters 2, 13 and 14 of the 'Green Guide' set out the respective
roles of the management and the police in controlling crowds in
football grounds and other sporting stadia.

Primary responsibility for the safety of the public and the
control of crowds inside a football stadium rests with the
management of the ground. Football is offered as a commercial
enterprise to the public, who pay for admission. It is therefore
a matter for those running the enterprise to ensure it is
conducted safely. To assist the management to discharge its
duties the club appoints stewards, for example to direct crowds
entering or leaving the stadium.

For management to discharge its responsibilities properly
paragraph 204 of the Guide points out that a special police
presence inside the ground may be necessary to deal with any
problem of disorder which may arise, as well as to provide
support and leadership in an emergency. The number and
disposition of the police must be determined by the chief officer
of police who has sole responsibility for the direction of police
operations. So the police are not inside stadia for the
management of crowds unless serious disorder or other emergencies
arise in which case they may be able to provide assistance beyond
the capability of the club's management and stewards.

Outside the ground, on public property, direction of crowds going
to or from a football match is a matter for the chief officer of
police.   However paragraph 205 of the Green Guide emphasises the
need for effective liaison with the club, in connection with
advance planning and debriefing. Co-ordination is necessary not
only for policing inside the ground but also policing outside
directly connected with the match - for example escorting fans or
directing traffic.

In addition to specific operational decisions by the chief
officer, the Association of Chief Police Officers (ACPO) issues
general guidance to its members on the policing of football
matches.


Cost of policing football




Substantial police resources are deployed on football duties. No
precise record is made centrally but on two Saturdays last
November a sample by ACPO revealed an average of 5,000 officers
in England and Wales deployed on these duties on each of the
days. Slightly more were deployed outside grounds than inside.
The total cost of this activity would depend on the precise rates
of pay and periods of duty of each officer involved, but an
indicative cost might be in the range of £200,000 to £300,000 per
"football Saturday".

As a 'special service' within the meaning of section 15 of the
Police Act 1964 the cost of police presence inside the ground, if
the chief officer agrees to provide it, is normally charged to
the club.
Police intelligence and liaison F8


Police operations at football matches are usefully reinforced by
suitable advance planning and, especially, by information eg on
known travel routes and numbers attending and by intelligence on
possible trouble at matches and on individuals thought likely to
cause that.


Good liaison generally exists between police forces whose
supporters are meeting in a fixture, territorial ('Home Office')
police forces and British Transport Police. Many individual
forces have made efforts to collate intelligence on football
hooliganism.


The Home Office intends shortly to establish a National Football
Intelligence Unit as a central police team (under Common Police
Service arrangements) to promote the further development and co­
ordination of local efforts and to take a central view on
emerging national trends and issues of concern.

Some forces have also undertaken covert investigations over
protracted periods to identify small numbers of hard-core
football hooligans who engage in systematic, organised violence.
Some subsequent trials were unsuccessful when evidence was
brought into doubt and all defendants were acquitted.
Appropriate lessons have been learned. But other operations have
been highly successful. Most recently in operation 'Omega' (...
sentencing expected 5/6 June. 25 out of 26 defendants have
pleaded guilty to all substantive charges, including conspiracy.
Heavy press interest likely.)

Perimeter Fences

One of the possible counter-measures to hooliganism is the use
of perimeter fences to assist with segregation of opposing
supporters. See also paragraphs      above.  (Reference to G1
evidence)
Responding to roaior outbreaks of hooliganism - 'Swifter Justice'

Home Office Circular 62/1988 issued on 4 August 1988 invited the
courts, the police and others to formulate contingency plans to
bring very rapidly before a court those involved in large scale
disorder. Swift action was intended to deter further outbreaks
and to demonstrate the determination of the agencies involved to
deal with hooliganism. The initiative envisaged disorder in
general, but included that arising in the context of football.

CONTROL ON ADMISSION


An important ingredient in the safe conduct of football matches
is adequate control on the numbers of spectators admitted within
the authorised limit and, frequently, the segregation of opposing
supporters in different parts of the ground to prevent conflict.
Rigorous control by the organisers is therefore important
whenever there is a potential for trouble, often strengthened by
an 'all ticket' requirement (ie an announcement that spectators
will be admitted only with tickets bought in advance, none being
on sale on the say of the match).


Potential threats to safety related to ticketing arrangements
are those which would result in overcrowding inside grounds:
especially unauthorised entry without tickets or with forged
tickets. Other threats to public order exist for example from
touts selling tickets to persons the organisers wish to exclude
or selling tickets without regard to segregation arrangements so
that rival fans are admitted to the same enclosures. Other crime
can be associated with ticket arrangements such as theft by
snatching valid tickets near the turnstiles.

Ticket allocation

The overall limit on ground capacity, and limits on individual
parts of the ground, are set by the licensing authority and
guidance on this is given in Chapter 16 of the Guide.  (Section
14 of the Public Order Act 1986 also gives the police the power
to limit numbers at any public assembly, but only if the senior
police officer reasonably believes serious public disorder (etc)
may result. We are not aware of this power having been used in
the context of football matches.)


Before tickets are offered for sale organisers normally allocate
a certain proportion between home and away supporters, and
possibly others. This would, reasonably, have regard to expected
demand but also to arrangements for their arrival and separate
entry to the ground (paragraph 205 of the Guide).



While an allocation of tickets that is perceived as fair by all
groups is desirable, that may not be achievable, for example if
total demand for tickets significantly exceeds the overall
capacity of the ground. In those circumstances it is therefore
important that supporters unable to obtain tickets accept they
will be unable to enter the ground; and suitable precautions may
be necessary to deal with those who nevertheless try to enter.

Unauthorised entry

Methods that may be employed to gain entry to football grounds
without authorisation include rushing or forcing turnstiles or
other points on the perimeter of the ground; bribing turnstile
operators; and snatching tickets from others. Entry to the
ground without payment to the operators may constitute an offence
of evasion of liability by deception (Section 2 of the Theft Act
1978); and snatching someone else's ticket may well amount to an
offence of theft (Section 1, Theft Act 1968). Such action poses
activity which the club and police at a ground may need to be
ready to deal with appropriately.  (Depending on circumstances
the police may have the power under common law, for the
preservation of public order and safety, to control access eg in
the vicinity of the ground, turning away those without tickets
to prevent them approaching the turnstiles. F2/IAB content?)
Unauthorised ticket sales


It is desirable for clubs to control the distribution of tickets
so that as far as is practical they do not fall into the hands of
known troublemakers or those known to have abused arrangements
for the distribution of tickets in the past. For some games
tickets are only released for sale at the latest practical
moment, to minimise the opportunities for circulation to ticket
touts and forgers.


The Government is not in principle opposed to re-selling of
tickets being at increased prices. Such commercial activity is a
response to market forces, and would-be purchasers will be clear
if they are paying a premium over the face value of the ticket,
and are free not to buy if they consider the price too high. The
activity of "ticket touts" offering tickets for sale in the near
vicinity of grounds, especially at all-ticket matches, can
present problems as fans may be encouraged to travel there in the
hope of buying tickets. If unsuccessful they may in frustration
be tempted to try to enter the ground anyway.

There are a variety of powers which may be used against ticket
touts. A club may eject a tout from their premises if they wish.
The police may ask someone who is unlawfully obstructing the
highway to move and, if necessary, may arrest him. They may also
act to prevent a breach of the peace. If they have reasonable
grounds to suspect that someone is carrying a stolen or
prohibited article (which would include forged tickets) they may
stop him and search him and they also have power to arrest him if
they reasonably suspect him of having committed theft or fraud or
any other offence for which the maximum period of imprisonment is
5 years or more.

The Government has not been convinced that further powers to deal
with ticket touts are necessary, or that a further specific
offence of ticket touting would be practical or enforceable. It
may well be that any further measures should come from tighter
controls by the organisers of sporting events over the
distribution of tickets, and the imposition of sanctions against
those found abusing the controls.   (C4/D0E comments on this
section?)


Forged Tickets F8/C4

Forged tickets are a serious natter not only because of the
dishonesty, deception and fraud involved but also because they
could lead to serious overcrowding. However practical
difficulties arise both with detecting forgeries, particularly
given advances in printing technology, and in identifying the
persons responsible. There is a responsibility on clubs to try
counter forgery eg by safeguards in the printing of tickets:
watermarks and even holograms have been used on tickets. All
seating areas also assist in detecting forged tickets since it is
obvious when two people have tickets with the same seat number.

Where a person makes or sells a forged ticket he may be guilty of
offences under Section 15 of the Theft Act 1968 and Sections 1 to
5 of the Forgery and Counterfeiting Act 1981 which carry maximum
penalties of up to ten years' imprisonment.

(Newspapers reported that on 5 May Judge John Prosser QC at
Cardiff Crown Court sentenced 3 defendants to terms of 4, 3 and 2
years' imprisonment and a fourth to 1 year's detention following
the distribution of 2,000 forged tickets for Welsh rugby
internationals. It was also reported that fairly serious
problems of overcrowding arose at the matches.)



MATCHES OVERSEAS

The Government also considers it very important to do all it
reasonably can to deter and deal with football hooliganism by
those from our country who travel to matches abroad.

In 1985 very serious disorder by Liverpool fans at the Heysel
stadium in Belgium during a match with Juventus led to the death
of 39 people when a wall collapsed. A substantial police
investigation identified 26 suspects who were extradited to
Belgium; [?] were recently convicted (although some defendants
are appealing). Following the Heysel tragedy English clubs were
banned from UEFA competitions in Europe. Then in the Summer of
1988 over 300 English fans were detained in West Germany during
disturbances at the European Nations Cup.  fTo be updated bv

The Government has sought action in two main respects; through
powers to prevent certain hooligans from travelling to key
matches abroad ('restriction orders'), and through encouraging
effective international liaison between police forces and between
football authorities.

Restriction Orders


Part II of the Football Spectators Bill now before Parliament
proposes for the courts with a new power, on convicting someone
in England or Wales for a football related offence, to impose a
restriction order on him if the court is satisfied that would
help to prevent violence at or in connection with a designated
football match in other countries. Provision is also made, after
designation of the appropriate arrangements, for a restriction
order to be made in respect of a conviction outside England or
Wales for an offence corresponding to a football related offence.
Under the terms of the Bill a restriction order if imposed would
be for two years or, if the accused was sentenced to immediate
imprisonment, five years.

The effect of a restriction order would be that the person must
report to an agency (the reporting agency) on the occasion of a
designated match (outside England and Wales), thus preventing him
from attending. Failure to report as directed would be a
criminal offence punishable by up to one month's imprisonment or
a level 3 fine (currently £400) or both.

The reporting agency is unspecified in the Bill and might for
example be the police, probation service or a private security
firm - or some combination of these. The Bill provides for a
degree of selectivity so that, for example, full internationals
would probably lead to all persons subject to a restriction order
being required to report whereas when individual clubs were
playing abroad only some individuals might be 'called up'. The
Bill also provides for someone to apply for exemption from a
requirement to report, where special circumstances exist, and for
termination of the restriction order.

The Government believes restriction orders will be effective in
significantly reducing hooliganism at football matches outside
England and Wales by persons from those two countries, and will
demonstrate to other countries (especially in Europe) our resolve
to tackle this problem. The proposed powers have received
general support. The conceptual alternative of withdrawing
someone's passport was considered both ineffective (since it is
relatively easy to obtain a temporary British Visitors Passport)
and too sweeping a restriction (since it would prohibit all
foreign travel, whether a foreign match was taking place or not).

Police liaison

Football hooliganism is discussed by European Community partners
under the 'TREVI' committee of law enforcement Ministers and
officials. Under the UK's Presidency of the EC in 1986 a network
of 'Permanent Correspondents' on football was established: each
country has nominated such a person who then acts as the primary
communication channel between police forces in his own country,
and other EC countries, in connection with football.   (Police
forces remain free to communicate directly, if appropriate.) The
arrangements have been put to frequent use and are considered to
be helpful by EC partners.

During the European championships last Summer police liaison
officers from this country went to West Germany to provide on the
spot advice to the German police who were responsible for public
order at matches involving the English team. Advice was provided
on the handling of English supporters, and on the identity and
suspected intentions of troublemakers. Various other EC
countries provided similar support. This too was a considerable
success and the Government intends that it should be repeated for
the World Cup in Italy next year. The lessons from the
experience in Germany have been incorporated in draft guidelines
for international co-operation on the policing of international
football matches; these are being discussed within TREVI.

Football authorities


(DOE - international co-operation on security arrangements,
ticket sales, etc; and. on the Counei-1— of Europe Conventioft-
Spaotafcor Violaneie^s-
»                                             P3/167


                                                       0604




25 May 1989




R M Whalley Esq
Secretary to the Inquiry
  into the Hillsborough Stadium
  Disaster
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London SW1H 9AT




HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY


Thank you for your letter of 23 May. It is this Department's
intention to let you have written material about the proposed
national membership scheme and to meet your deadline of 12 June,
if we can.




NEIL KINGHAN
Sport and Recreation Division
                                                                       •LV3 /S


INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH              The Rt lio n Lord justice Taylor
STADIUM DISASTER
                                           SO Q u e e n Anne’s (iaie
                                           London SW1119AT
                                           ■01-273 2S77/3602/2370


N Kingham Esq
Department of Environment
Sports & Recreation Division
2 Marsham Street
LONDON
SW1P 3PY                                   Date 2 3 MaY 1 9 8 9




Dear Mr Kingham


HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

As you may know, the Home Secretary has asked Lord Justice Taylor
to enquire into the events at Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April
1989 in which 95 people lost their lives and many were injured.
Lord Justice Taylor is being assisted by two Assessors, Mr Brian
Johnson QPM, Chief Constable of Lancashire, and Professor Leonard
Maunder OBE, Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the
University of Newcastle-upon-Tyne.

Lord Justice Taylor's terms of reference are as follows:-

     "To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday
     Football Ground on 15 April 1989 and to make
     recommendations about the needs of crowd control and
     safety at sports grounds."

The first stage of the Inquiry consists of oral hearings in
Sheffield, which began on 15 May.   In the second stage, Lord
Justice Taylor proposes to consider any written submissions which
may be put to him. As you may know, Lord Justice Taylor has
already issued a general invitation for written submissions, but
I am now writing to you specifically on his behalf to ask if you
would like to submit written material to his Inquiry. Perhaps
you would be kind enough to acknowledge this letter (to the
address above) and indicate whether you intend to respond to Lord
Justice Taylor's invitation.   He would find it convenient if any
written submissions could reach him by 12 June if possible:
perhaps you could also kindly indicate whether or not you will be
able to meet that timetable.   Submissions should likewise be sent
to me at the Inquiry address above.
It would be helpful if six sets of any written material could be
sent.  It would be also be helpful if the material could be
indexed and summarised wherever possible.

Lord Justice Taylor may wish to invite some of those who submit
written evidence to him to discuss it with him at a later stage.

                                        Yours sincerely




                                        R M WHALLEY
                                        Secretary to the Inquiry
Mr Kinghan
EVIDENCE TO LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S ENQUIRY
The Secretary of State has seen your minute of 17 May, together with
Mr Macdonald's minute of 18 May and Mr Moynihan's comments.

The Secretary of State thinks that it is important to get the tone
of what we say to Lord Justice Taylor right. He considers that what
we should be doing is telling Lord Justice Taylor what the
Government is going to do and why, rather than making it into
"evidence".   It should be made clear that the introduction of a
national membership scheme represents Government policy and that we
believe the scheme to be necessary irrespective of events at
Hillsborough.   It will therefore be Lord Justice Taylor's job to
accept that there will be a scheme and to look at ^suggestions for
modifying it arising out of Hillsborough.          £^\|
The Secretary of State wold like to see the material you are
assembling for the Inquiry when it is ready. At that stage he may
wish to discuss it with you.




A D RING
APS/Secretary of State
V May 1989

cc:   PS/Lord Caithness
      PS/Lord Hesketh
      PS/Mr Moynihan
      PS/Sir T Heiser
      Mr Owen
      Mr Fletcher
      Mr Macdonald
      Miss Caines
      Mrs Weinberg
                   DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT


                       PRIVATE SECRETARY TO THE
                   PARLIAMENTARY UNDER-SECRETARY
                                OF STATE




Hr-                W                         ik J r   u .   <«

           i U U        Ik .                            1i J -


      <a/iJU^«L                I*-




                       fWk*

                       PS

                       I£              ^ ^
m
    PS /Mr Moynihan

    EVIDENCE TO LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INQUIRY

    I refer,'to Neil Kinghan's minute of 17 May. I strongly support
    the proposals in paragraph 3. We should not give any appear­
    ance of defending the scheme to Lord Justice Taylor.          A
    collection of factual evidence .which is already in the public
    domain should suffice. I suggest also that the evidence should
    be provided with a covering letter signed by an official and
    not by a Minister.




    David McDonald
    Sport and Recreation Division

    18 May 1989


    cc      PS/Secretary of State
            PS/Lord Caithness
            PS/Lord Hesketh
            PS/Sir T Heiser
            Mr Owen
            Mr Fletcher
            Miss Caines
            Mrs Weinberg
            Mr Kinghan
          T Mr Lee
            Mr Newsom
            Mr Rock
            Mr Russell
1. PS/Mr Moynihan
2. PS/Secretary of State


cc:    PS/Lord Caithness               Miss Caines
       PS/Lord Hesketh                 Mrs Weinberg
       PS/Sir T Heiser                 Mr Lee
       Mr Owen                         Mr Newsom
       Mr Fletcher                     Mr Rock
       Mr McDonald                     Mr Russell


EVIDENCE TO LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR’S INQUIRY

Ministers will recall that the Home Secretary told the Prime
Minister's meeting on the Football Spectators Bill last week that
Lord Justice Taylor "would probably ask the Department of the
Environment for a written contribution" on the case for the
national membership scheme. We have not received a direct request
from the Judge but we have been notified by the Home Office that
he would like written evidence to be submitted to him bv 12 June.
The Home Office will be preparing evidence on Part II of the bill
and on other measures which they have taken to prevent disorder
at football matches. ACPO will also be submitting evidence.

I would be grateful for guidance on: (1) whether Ministers wish
us to submit evidence to Lord Justice Taylor; (2) what form the
evidence should take? On (1), we do not seem to have any choice
but to submit evidence, since the Judge will be considering the
scheme and we cannot allow the Government's position to go by
default. On the other hand, I doubt if the Secretary of State
would consider that it was for Lord Justice Taylor to sit in
judgement on the Government's legislative proposals - that is
surely a matter for Parliament.

If Ministers feel that it would be inappropriate to go further in
explaining the case for the scheme to Lord Justice Taylor, than
they have done in explaining it to Parliament, then the answer to
question (2) above may be to base our evidence very largely on
what has been said about the Bill in Parliament, with copies of
the press notices issued when the Bill was introduced. We could
also include a copy of the report of Mr Moynihan's working party
on the scheme and copies of press notices issued following
meetings between Ministers and the football authorities since the
agreement on partial membership schemes and other measures in
February 1987.

The Home Secretary also told the Prime Minister's meeting that
Lord Justice Taylor would "consider the available technology, as
well as the situation in other countries". It is not clear what
the reference to other countries means since no other country has
a national membership scheme for football supporters but we could
offer to provide contacts with other countries, through the
Council of Europe's Standing Committee on Spectator Violence,
which Mr Lee of this division chairs.
iJ^Subject to Ministers' views, we will prepare written evidence on
^^this basis and submit it for approval. I would suggest that it      .
   should then be sent to Lord Justice Taylor under cover of an       1,
   official letter without any publicity.




     (V.
  NEIL KINGHAN                                                 ^
  SARD


  17 May 1989
THE NATIONAL MEMBERSHIP SCHEME



INTRODUCTION                                                                     /


1. This paper is concerned with the Government's proposals for a
national    membership         scheme,        as provided        for   in/Part       I of    the
Football     Spectators        Bill     now      in Parliament.        It     summarises     the
background to the decision to introduce the P^ootball Spectators
Bill and draws attention to Ministers' statements on the reasons
why the Government believes the scheme to tie necessary to counter
hooliganism associated with football. Separate evidence from the
Home Office provides information about/ the continuing problems
of crowd control associated with football matches; other relevant
legislation; and the policing of football.



NATIONAL MEMBERSHIP SCHEME - BACKGROUND


2. In January 1986 the Commi/ctee of Inquiry into Crowd Safety and
Control    at    Sports       Ground/s        chaired      by    Mr    Justice    Popplewell
recommended that:                   /


          "Consideration! should continue to be given to some form of
          membership scheme for Football League clubs in England and
          Wales."         /



Partial membership schemes for individual League clubs were among
the   measures        agreed    between          the    Government      and    the     football
authorities          in   February         1987.       Copies    of    the     press    notice
announcing      the       package     of    measures       are    attached.      The    agreed
object/ve was that all clubs should introduce schemes covering at
least? 50%      of    each    ground's        capacity      by   the    beginning       of   the
198^/89 season. It was also agreed that the Football League would
cmimission a study by independent consultants on the scope, costs
and   benefits/disadvantages                of     a   reciprocal      membership       scheme
embracing all 92 League clubs.
3.    The    Minister         for    Sport's report             to   the    Union      of    European
Football Associations                (UEFA),       in June 1988,            at the end of the
1987/88 season, entitled "Progress on Measures to Combat Football
Hooliganism",             (attached)          recorded          that       progress          on     the
introduction of partial membership schemes had been slow; only 16
clubs       had   met     the       target    of     50%    ground         capacity      agreed      in
February 1987. A consultants' study on reciprocal membership had
been commissioned, as agreed, and received by the Football League
in July 1987;     there                had     been        no    further         action       on    the
consultants' study.


4.    The Minister for Sport's report to UEFA listed a number of
serious incidents of hooliganism at and around football matches
during the 1987/88 domestic season.                         These were followed by the
scenes       of       disorder      involving        English         supporters         during      the
European Championships in West Germany in June 1988.                                        On 6 July
1988, the Prime Minister met the football authorities to discuss
the need for further action.


5. Copies of the joint statement issued after the 6 July meeting
are attached. The Government pressed the football authorities to
introduce         a    national      membership        scheme        to     control      access      to
Football League matches. The football authorities did not believe
that such a scheme could be introduced on a voluntary basis and
the Government            said that it would bring                    forward proposals             for
legislation to give statutory backing to a national membership
scheme. It was agreed that a working party under the chairmanship
of the Minister for Sport,                   consisting of representatives of the
football authorities, the Government and the police, would be set
up to look at the details of the scheme.


6. The Minister for Sport's working party published its report on
9    November         1988.   Copies     of    the    report         and    of   the     DOE      press
notices issued at the same time are attached. The report sets out
the working           party's views          on what       the main         principles         of   the
national membership              scheme should be and contains                      a    series of
recommendations for the football authorities and the Government.
THE FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL


7. The Football Spectators Bill was introduced in the House of
Lords on 16 January 1989. Copies of the Bill as introduced and as
amended to date       in the House of             Lords    are attached.        The main
provisions    of    the    Bill   are   in     two     parts.     Part   I provides      a
statutory framework for a national membership scheme for football
spectators. Part II gives the courts powers to impose restriction
orders on convicted hooligans to prevent them from travelling to
English matches abroad;           Part II is explained in the Home Office
evidence.


8.   The contents     of    the Bill       and the Government's reasons                for
introducing    it   are     summarised       in   two     press   notices    issued     on
publication     (attached).        Among     the       main   points     made    by    the
Secretary of State for the Environment in launching the Bill were
the following:



        "We welcome the measures which the clubs and the police
        have taken to deal with hooligans inside football grounds.
        But their effect has been to keep the lid on the problem,
        not to cure it. At too many matches, violence remains just
        below the surface. Rival supporters have to be kept apart
        by    physical      barriers     and      by    the     employment      of    large
        numbers of police."


        "Outside football grounds,                the behaviour of rival groups
        of supporters makes life intolerable both for law-abiding
        football supporters and for those who live or trade nearby
        or wish to travel by train on the same day as a football
        match."


        "The Bill proposes that everyone who attends a designated
        football match in England and Wales should be a member of
        the national membership scheme, or otherwise authorised by
        the scheme,        and that designated matches should be played
        only on licensed football grounds. Those who are convicted
        of a relevant offence will be disqualified from membership
        of the scheme and the scheme itself will                         allow for the
        Football Membership Authority to ban others who misbehave
        at football matches."
                   "For           the          first   time,       there     will     be    an    effective        and
                   comprehensive                   procedure            to   keep     hooligans          away     from
                   football                matches.       Of    course       there    will       be   attempts      to
                   abuse the system but if the scheme                                  is effective,            those
                   attempts will                   fail.       We believe that             it offers      the real
                   prospect of ending                         football hooliganism both inside and
                   outside grounds.                    If hooligans know that they will not be
                   allowed                 in     to   football          matches,      they       will     have     no
                   incentive to travel to them. The link between football and
                   hooliganism will be broken and football will cease to be a
                   focus for violence."
    -     l{            C - e ic r v v j


12 > r                                                                                      membership scheme
                                                                             ebates    on the^B±Xl          in the
                                                                        place^eft-^feher'following dates:
                                           C
   /2              l Lj         C .         -3~           u

    L    V'Y                -<n                          i-
                                                  Jy* li'Sw vv<i
                                                            ’
                                                            "“'l
                                                                                     Official Report


                    Second Reading                        2 February                 Vol 503 No.29


                   Committee                              20 February                Vol 504          No's 38 & 39
                                                          7 March                    Vol 504          No's 47 & 48
                                                          14 March                   Vol 505          No's 51 & 52


                   Report                                 10 April                   Vol 506 No's 63 & 64
                                                          13 April                   Vol 506 No 66.



    10.        A        number             of     speeches         by    Government         spokesmen       may      be
    particularly of interest to Lord Justice Taylor. Theae~~anre°
    bo low-;— Certain key---poirrt-s- came up regular ly~~vluring tho dobatcns-f



                    -      "membership of the scheme is a means^jaiU-enSGrlngthat
                   everyone who goes to football— nra'CSKes in future can do so
                   without                 fear o f 3£ie±€nce,            and without        being       subject     to
                   obscene o » -'i'S c ia l abuse";
           Q



                                                                                                                                                                        i*"


   t *           v ~ * ^ '! ^ 2n'Ur?        c^ xa.^€^t \                 Iruj                 (~Cj l



 & 1\                                  ■io-'ccr             c/'Jv^s-eiurx^cli                             olaoI                        C^t uu^jvfeo cLuaa^s


v ts     _ pgjjJ^-OLSfc^g.                                            K a J^                 (r4?J\JvJii?--             L^'P^-ds               (^      *> ^-fc.    (j'vix t^ „
                                 ^ “CB'Csfcj'Y'i                              Ct^SrtUiuX^?xi( c\j\jdL                                                        /v£*4? (^iS^
                                          <^rv^T^i
                                                 ou-t|-fff — -4tc--j-cx^^jsJp                                                                    ^^ecjSZ-^*2^ '
                                       ^y-Vsjrc'       -H^U;          /^rJJ^sljXr>T1^r'y^/i^                                  </^        ,



  < * % !£ * •   j                         <£'*-•       iW    i ‘Y ^ C '-< ? .J T    c -ij        ^-sjC^ijhi-ds           c : kJ   "         A * J2      ^   - V _c^   c /j




  K*                 ( 9 % ? 18 ^                      J L xf^o-s^JriJC.                     Ct*£ai^ujfv»          .    "TTso*. ( ^ c w ’i'Yvvrv«.-v-f^


                                                    f^j?,       rV-a.A.«'vvP\|                                                     ScjLftnruJ’
                                                                                                                                             .                 li


 «3tfv        &J2rx#*-b!ad                    <3t,.D         <•*.       ..j^vjZxivao                                                                  (r~b*s*Jh'
                                                                 ■9

 ^vtaesr^^o^cCi                          C»a                                                                  jj-r&yn


                 jdg-           t\                  Atlx:           j^uh^P


         M-J .                         'J\-£U-£              '(a OlO>               It€>S2j }          <T<_      p^OUx.2£>             C-A


                       Ijjj             c^)                                    f-       .. S              G> _         ^iuvcft.


                                                                          UJ                 C^i^L^/YlS^          (      yHCASX€C^^


                                                                                      (-^&^SXG.           <z/)         /^Irc^Js              crn              f-yxkAs^y
     / 6   J



                                                                                     r^Ca^X£3TU2L


                                                 hts^^^s£u^ssrs<ftsAJh^          /olo



                                                                                             7


                                                                                                             hfr?



                      f-boJZjtMs


                   S.     :...<£i-*ar?


      .// *............... >.. . 'd'sc^Ktt?                   r'«^p   c^ryJxJL   Hp^th£ ~




                  y&jJr                            ^;u2juO>       cs ..(■A^Jr' ... i^C^a ^             CjouiQ- ^ c r H^sl


     /uajh^yMai          *rN£-rirsJ[j'-er<?JLrsp       ^<zLsirr\^                      :     >     ir^j\


                                                                 ‘S1


                 J"      c   JL klSS-X                                                           j A



                                         Ji& v     P l< a.                       <2^       tC s& r sd l^Q /K U 2    t-T
                                                                                 .




v/

               r u z s z & J C r &                                                     q Jir&ryJh           OlxtOl
                                                  ■<==s&a-Xaujn          <rJt/"~    i
                                                                                    ^iA^x\s7dLloS‘ <xg <x rmx^Xf"


 €>J    f~&~g.          C'czJLsuY;U?         Cx^Ksd                                                K '^ r\J ,'-^ > ^ lJ ,'^ -p C&~ds



  CLfcAA         C'M?      CcAjTV-C’c/ c'SVv'f" Uv             /'£_# ^C%,'^_£?       Awrvji      <3u/>


l-<*dkezJi                 c J ^ jj   czJc    SJLzjjzj^Ljr-i   i^ -c J fe < -J T    <r*fv                 js z r    'h & fe a J s -



             Q/crv^jry^rxJL^                 C<y^bi                                              <ra^ixJ^yv-^‘-
                                                                                                                         *




                                       ^          ^ L jl       £c L~Q -vW          laaJ/J        c/f     tS    &


 H ^cxjb      \jr~      Oxy^Ll         (-K s ^rd z                                     -^ /
                                                                                      cj    vs                <s.
- "the people who should be excluded from the scheme are
the     hooligans,      who       must          be    kept        away    from     football /
grounds";                                                                                  /


- "there is a practical case for exempting certain groups
from     membership         of        the       scheme       -     the     disabled       and
accompanied          children         in        designated         areas        - /and    for
providing temporary membership for others such'as guests
of the club and foreign visitors";                                         /


- "it is in the interests of all those whc/ attend football
matches       that    the   arrangements               for   checking          members    and
other      authorised       spectators                should / be         as     simple    as
possible";                                                   /


      "^the    suppliers         of     the          technology          have     told    the
Government that there need be no delays at the turnstiles
and that checking membership cards can be done in the same
time as it presently takes to pass the tickets or to pay
for them";                                  /


— — ''-tho-GnTrorrum w t haixa, /klutftya marlp— it Clear that— the key
issue in setting the timetable for the introduction of the
scheme is the need to be satisfied about the availability
of the right technology. Wo ■wall
unjjrl^tfe—^B3a-‘g^tips^±garrK^t ii-^vr±TI wcy k effectively and
ef ficiently“->        /


-   "the      technology     and       experience            of    running       membership
schemes is not new to football                               much has already been
learnt aboiyc the conditions and use of membership cards in
match day Conditions";


- "the isecretary of State will consider the possibility of
phasing the introduction of the scheme but the Government
is concerned that if the scheme were introduced in stages,
hooliganism would be displaced from those clubs at which
the scheme applied to those at which it did not";
          -    "there   is no   case    for   giving    the    responsibility      for
          licensing grounds,      under the Bill,        tp^tocal authorities.
          It    is   in   the   interests      of^-football       clubs,     and   of
          consistency      between     thpm<rhat       the    licensing    authority
          should be a centr^l^6ne, as the Bill provides".



MINISTERIAL SPEECHES



Second Reading                   2 February


- Lord Caithness (opening the debate)                          Cols 1217-1222
- Lord Hesketh (replying to the debate)                        Cols 1298-1305



Committee


First Day                        20 February


- Lord Hesketh (on phasing the scheme and technology)
                                                               Cols 413-416


Second Day                       7 March


- Lord Hesketh (on exemptions from the scheme)
                                                               Cols 1393-1395


Third Day                        14 March


- Lord Hesketh (on the preparation of the scheme)
                                                               Cols 88-90


- Lord Hesketh (on the licensing of football grounds under the
  Bill)                                                        Cols 139-141


- Lord Ferrers          (on the possibility that the scheme's computers
  might break down)                                            Cols       194-5    and
                                                               198-201
Report


First Day                 10 April


- Lord Hesketh (on phasing)


- Lord Hesketh (on exemptions)
                                              P3/167


                                                       0604




25 May 1989




R M Whalley Esq
Secretary to the Inquiry
  into the Hillsborough Stadium
  Disaster
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London SW1H 9AT




HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY


Thank you for your letter of 23 May. It is this Department's
intention to let you have written material about the proposed
national membership scheme and to meet your deadline of 12 June,
if we can.




NEIL KINGHAN
Sport and Recreation Division
                                                                             rv3 1%


A   INQUIRY IN TO THE HILLSBOROUGH             The Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor
    STADIUM DISASTER
                                               50 Q ue e n A n n e ’s Gate
                                               Ijo n d o n SW1U 9AT
                                               01-273 2577/3602/2370


    N Kingham Esq
    Department of Environment
    Sports & Recreation Division
    2 Marsham Street
    LONDON
    SW1P 3PY                                   lX lte 2 3 M a*    1989




    Dear Mr Kingham


    HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

    As you may know, the Home Secretary has asked Lord Justice Taylor
    to enquire into the events at Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April
    1989 in which 95 people lost their lives and many were injured.
    Lord Justice Taylor is being assisted by two Assessors, Mr Brian
    Johnson QPM, Chief Constable of Lancashire, and Professor Leonard
    Maunder OBE, Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the
    University of Newcastle-upon-Tyne.

    Lord Justice Taylor's terms of reference are as follows

         "To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday
         Football Ground on 15 April 1989 and to make
         recommendations about the needs of crowd control and
         safety at sports grounds."

    The first stage of the Inquiry consists of oral hearings in
    Sheffield, which began on 15 May.   In the second stage, Lord
    Justice Taylor proposes to consider any written submissions which
    may be put to him. As you may know, Lord Justice Taylor has
    already issued a general invitation for written submissions, but
    I am now writing to you specifically on his behalf to ask if you
    would like to submit written material to his Inquiry.   Perhaps
    you would be kind enough to acknowledge this letter (to the
    address above) and indicate whether you intend to respond to Lord
    Justice Taylor's invitation.   He would find it convenient if any
    written submissions could reach him by 12 June if possible:
    perhaps you could also kindly indicate whether or not you will be
    able to meet that timetable.   Submissions should likewise be sent
    to me at the Inquiry address above.
It would be helpful if six sets of any written material could be
sent. It would be also be helpful if the material could be
indexed and summarised wherever possible.

Lord Justice Taylor may wish to invite some of those who submit \
written evidence to him to discuss it with him at a later stage. '

                                        Yours sincerely




                                        R M WHALLEY
                                        Secretary to the Inquiry
  Mr Kinghan

  EVIDENCE TO LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S ENQUIRY

  The Secretary of State has seen your minute of 17 May, together with
  Mr Macdonald's minute of 18 May and Mr Moynihan's comments.

  The Secretary of State thinks that it is important to get the tone
  of what we say to Lord Justice Taylor right. He considers that what
  we should be doing is telling Lord Justice Taylor what the
  Government is going to do and why, rather than making it into
  "evidence".   It should be made clear that the introduction of a
  national membership scheme represents Government policy and that we
  believe the scheme to be necessary irrespective of events at
  Hillsborough.   it w i n tnerefore be Lord Justice Tavlor's job to
  accept tKat there will be a scheme and to look at ^suggestions for
  modifying it arising out of Hillsborough.

  The Secretary of State wold like to see the material you are
  assembling for the Inquiry when it is ready. At that stage he may
  wish to discuss it with you.




 A D RING
 APS/Secretary of State

2 2 May 1989


  cc:   PS/Lord Caithness
        PS/Lord Hesketh                  bVvS    ecVvttw
        PS/Mr Moynihan
        PS/Sir T Heiser
        Mr Owen                           vY *             a          ^
        Mr Fletcher
        Mr Macdonald
        Miss Caines
        Mrs Weinberg
        Mr Rock
        T$F-’A£
                      DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT


                          PRIVATE SECRETARY TO THE
                      PARLIAMENTARY UNDER-SECRETARY
                                   OF STATE




fcuvLt/tui.   ^ ~ k SX.

\i*_                 *W «»U       U.

Uve.     i^ihuJt^a              t-Arcf           .




                          PS

                          ifc
*

    PS/Mr Moynihan
                                    i
    EVIDENCE TO LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INQUIRY

    I',referJto Neil Kinghan's minute of 17 May. I strongly support
    the proposals in paragraph 3. We should not give any appear­
    ance of defending the scheme to Lord Justice Taylor.          A
    collection of factual evidence .which is already in the public
    domain should suffice. I suggest also that the evidence should
    be provided with a covering letter signed by an official and
    not by a Minister.




            >-
    David McDonald
    Sport and Recreation Division

    18 May 1989


    cc     PS/Secretary of State
           PS/Lord Caithness
           PS/Lord Hesketh
           PS/Sir T Heiser
           Mr Owen
           Mr Fletcher
           Miss Caines
           Mrs Weinberg
           Mr Kinghan
         * Mr Lee
           Mr Newsom
           Mr Rock
           Mr Russell
          1. PS/Mr Moynihan
          2. PS/Secretary of State


          cc:    PS/Lord Caithness                Miss Caines
                 PS/Lord Hesketh                  Mrs Weinberg
                 PS/Sir T Heiser                  Mr Lee
                 Mr Owen                          Mr Newsom
                 Mr Fletcher                      Mr Rock
                 Mr McDonald                      Mr Russell


          EVIDENCE TO LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INQUIRY

          Ministers will recall that the Home     Secretary told the Prime
          Minister's meeting on the Football Spectators Bill last week that
          Lord Justice Taylor "would probably ask the Department of the
          Environment for a written contribution" on the case for the
          national membership scheme. We have not received a direct request
          from the Judge but we have been notified by the Home Office that
          he would like written evidence to be submitted to him bv 12 June.
          The Home Office will be preparing evidence on Part II of the bill
          and on other measures which they have taken to prevent disorder
          at football matches. ACPO will also be submitting evidence.

          I would be grateful for guidance on: (1) whether Ministers wish
     1*   us to submit evidence to Lord Justice Taylor; (2) what form the
j         evidence should take? On (1), we do not seem to have any choice
          but to submit evidence, since the Judge will be considering the
          scheme and we cannot allow the Government's position to go by
WV>A>»-   default. On the other hand, I doubt if the Secretary of State
          would consider that it was for Lord    Justice Taylor to sit in
ir        judgement on the Government's legislative proposals - that is
          surely a matter for Parliament.

 v J i v U ^ if Ministers feel that it would be inappropriate to go further in
       ^     explaining the case for the scheme to Lord Justice Taylor, than
             they have done in explaining it to Parliament, then the answer to
             question (2) above may be to base our evidence very largely on
             what has been said about the Bill in Parliament, with copies of
             the press notices issued when the Bill was introduced. We could
             also include a copy of the report of Mr Moynihan's working party
             on the scheme and copies of press       notices issued following
             meetings between Ministers and the football authorities since the
             agreement on partial membership schemes and other measures in
             February 1987.

          The Home Secretary also told the Prime Minister's meeting that
          Lord Justice Taylor would "consider the available technology, as
          well as the situation in other countries". It is not clear what
          the reference to other countries means since no other country has
          a national membership scheme for football supporters but we could
          offer to provide contacts with other countries, through the
          Council of Europe's Standing Committee on Spectator     Violence,
          which Mr Lee of this division chairs.
Subject to Ministers' views, we will prepare written evidence on
this basis and submit it for approval. I would suggest that it     .
should then be sent to Lord Justice Taylor under cover of an       J.
official letter without any publicity.



  N.
NEIL KINGHAN
SARD


17 May 1989
