                                                                                              1 9 OCT 1990     0
The Football League Information Office.
Lytham St. Annes, Lancashire, FY8 1JG. Telephone: 0 2 5 3 729421 Telex: 6 7 6 7 5


              ONE GAME, ONE TEAM, ONE VOICE - MANAGING FOOTBALL'S FUTURE


          Football League present blueprint for joint initiative with F.A


                  Representatives                 of      The      Football           League        yesterday
          (Thursday,          18th October)            made a comprehensive presentation to
          The     Football           Association          Executive       Committee          in   which      the
          League outlined their proposals for a Joint Board of Management
          to oversee the National game..


                  The presentation entitled,                     'ONE GAME, ONE TEAM, ONE VOICE
          -   MANAGING         FOOTBALL'S          FUTURE1,        identifies          how    the    football
          authorities can for the first time be united under one banner
          in order to determine the game's overriding strategic policies.
          The    League        have        recommended          that    the     Joint     Board      comprise
          twelve members - five representatives from the F.A. Council and
          five    members           from    the    League       Management        Committee,         together
          with their respective Chief Executives.


                  Commenting           today       (Friday,       19th        October),      William        Fox,
          President of The Football League                            said,    "We very much see the
          concept        of     a     Joint       Board     being      the      only    way       forward     if
          association           football          in    this      country        is     to     realise       its
          ambitions       to the           full and that          applies       equally to the grass
          roots of the game right through to the International side.                                          We
          believe     that          there     will     be   an     incremental          benefit      for     the
          National game at every level if we proceed along these lines,
          which     in        turn     will       provide       the    added      value      and     stimulus
          necessary to promote the game to greater effect."
        The League        also    see the Joint             Board as the platform to
provide direction and leadership      for                           football      which     has
undoubtedly been missing in the past.


         As for the professional game, League clubs face the very
daunting         task      of      implementing             Lord        Justice      Taylor's
recommendat ions          in    the     years    ahead      and    so    it   is absolutely
essential that we maximise the opportunities available to us",
added Mr. Fox.


        The     League     Management           Committee         had    been     engaged    in
discussions with the F.A. on the question of its representation
on   the      governing    body       for some        considerable time.            Although
these      discussions         began (as    long      ago    as    1986 , it      had   become
apparent       to   the        League    that     a    more       radical       approach    was
required if progress in this direction was to be achieved.


        They feel that a joint initiative is required to galvanise
the game and take it forward into the 21st Century.



18th October 1990



FOOTNOTE


     The attached synopsis outlines the main points contained,
in the League's presentation.
ONE GAME, ONE TEAM, ONE VOICE - MANAGING FOOTBALL'S FUTURE


    Synopsis of The Football League's proposals to The
    Football Association for a Joint Board of Management
               to oversee the National Game



The Concept of a Joint Board

The Football League propose that a Joint Management Board be
formed between the F.A. and the League comprising twelve
members:

       five representatives from the F.A. Council
       five representatives from the League Management
       Committee
       both Chief Executives

Joint Board to operate at the policy making and strategic Level
on issues which are of joint concern thereby creating one game,
one team, one voice to manage football's future.

Existing committees of both the F.A. and the League to continue
working as required by their respective parent bodies but in
accordance with the overall direction of the Joint Board.


The rationale for a Joint Board

Platform for strong, pro-active leadership

Galvanising effect producing unified policies

 Incremental benefits for all levels of football

Better, more effective promotion of the National game

Realisation of English football's true potential

Preparing the game for the 21st Century


The specific responsibilities and objectives of a Joint Board:

To create a climate of understanding which addresses the 'club
versus country' confrontation:

        benefits for the National side
        benefits for the clubs

 To identify the optimum package of domestic competitions and
 provide a co-ordinated approach to the management of fixtures:

        maximise income
        minimise expenditure
                                                         C o n t d ./2
                             - 2 -


To cultivate a unified approach to discipline and establish
clear standards for the rest of football:

       appropriate sanctions
       effective deterrents
       consistency of application


To co-ordinate effective representations to associated bodies
and outside organisations:

        F.I.F.A. and U.E.F.A.
        P.F.A., Football Trust, etc.
        Government, E.E.C., etc.
        F.L.A.
        Wembley

To maintain progress made towards curbing hooliganism at
football, matches:

        International level
        European club competitions
        domestic games (League and non-League)
                    /


To promote links between football and the community (in
conjunction with the P.F.A.):

        football development
        community development

To promote excellence within the game

        schoolboy football
        Lilleshall
        treatment of injuries
        refereeing

To ensure that spectator safety and the upgrading of grounds
remain top priorities:

        implementation of Taylor Report
        U.E.F.A./F.I.F.A. requirements
        realisation of opportunities

To launch a joint initiative for a World Cup bid:

        partnerships with local authorities
        Central Government backing
        new National Stadia

To develop strategic financial planning:

        corporate approach
        property
        new technology
                                                    C o n t d ./3
To develop strategic financial planning:

        corporate approach
        property
        new technology


To develop a corporate commercial/marketing operation for
football:

        improve commercial spend within football
        maximise buying power and strength
        demonstrate self help capabilities
        offer comprehensive package to potential sponsors
        combine PR and press relations to enhance overall image


Areas of common interest - sponsorship, television, videos,
licensing (product endorsement), Wembley, publishing,
franchising, agents.
