kh. 4.20/visitnw.dm

                                     cc   Ms   Adams
                                          Mr   Yates
                                          Mr   Moriarty
                                          Mr   Mower
                                          Mr   Turney
                                          Mr   Watts
                                          Mr   Smith (F8) -
                                          Mr   Kinghan DOE (SARD)*/
                                          Mr   Blacklock SED




Miss Bannister



HOME SECRETARY'S VISIT TO N. WEST:

As requested, I enclose short briefing material for use when the
Home Secretary visits the North West later this week.




                                          D J MOULD

                                          20 April 1989
          Adequacy of the Guide


Line      The Guide was revised in October 1986 in the light of
to take   recommendations from the Popplewell inquiry.


          Does the Guide contain advice about the ingress to
          sports grounds?


Line      Yes.   The Guide specifically highlights the dangers of
to take   crowd pressure and overcrowding and includes advice on
          crowd dispersal, crush barrier specification stewarding
          and controlled egress.


          What is the purpose of crush barriers on a standing
          terrace?


Line      To control the movement, density and pressure build up
to take   on a terrace.


          Is there guidance on perimeter "barrier" fencing?


Line      The guidance lays down the importance of exits to the
to take   pitch through the fence for emergency purposes.


          Should the fences come down?


Line      This is something which the Inquiry will consider.
to take   [I understand some clubs have already done so.    This is
          a matter for the clubs themselves and the local
          authority responsible for the issue of the safety
          certificate if it contains conditions requiring a
          "barrier" fence.]


          Who is responsible for safety?


Line      Prime responsibility lies with the ground operators to
to take   ensure the safety of their customers.
          Who is in charge: the club or the police?

Line      It will be one of the tasks of the inquiry to examine
to take   the arrangements made by the club and the police for
          the stewarding and policing of spectators at the match.
          There is invariably close consultation between the
          police and clubs over such arrangements.

          IF PRESSED:


          The police have responsibility for the preservation of
          the peace and the maintenance of public order.    If they
          perceive a threat to public order or public safety,
          they have a duty to take action to counter it.    This is
          an operational Judgement for the senior police officer.

          Popplewell implemented?

Line      H M G 's response to the Inquiry's safety recommendations
to take   was published in June 1986.   The Fire Safety and Safety
             Places of Sport Act 1987 implemented in stages
          brought into effect legislative changes to implement
          the Inquiry's recommendations.


          Sports grounds used for soccer, rugby league, rugby
          union and cricket identified as having accommodation
          for over 10,000 spectators were designated as requiring
          a safety certificate.
           BACKGROUND BRIEFING NOTES


           All seated football stadia - what progress?


Line       [As already stated] we are urgently looking into this
to take    [nothing further to add].


           Will the football authorities be consulted?


Line       We shall take account of their views.
to take


           Football Membership Bill - future of


Line      ^Subject to developments.
to take


           Restrictions on crowd terraces meantime?


Line        Safety certificates already contain conditions
to take     restricting numbers of spectators.


            Who determines terms/conditions of safety certificates?


Line        Local authorities who must consult the police and
to take     either the fire authority or building authority.


            Is there guidance to authorities/ground operators


Line        Yes.   The "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds" provides
to take     advice to both.


            Status of the Guide


Line        The Guide is a voluntary code but may be called up in
to take     terms and conditions in safety certificates.
