K H .3.29/FENTON.DM
                               DRAFT

                                                 cc     Ms Nicholson


From:      Mr Bolton
           G2 Division

           Ext 3322



To:        Miss Dent
           Private Office



HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY: CORRESPONDENCE FROM COMMANDER FENTON, ST
JOHN'S AMBULANCE


I understand that it was agreed with The Speaker's office that
we should reply direct(l|jsa               to Commander Fenton and
that a copy of the letter should be passed to his office for
information.    I have now written as within.


You may care to know that Commander Fenton is         a longstanding
correspondent with the Division.       We agreed some time ago to
include more detailed advice in the Home Office/Scottish
Office Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds on first aid.          That
is being taken up within the general revision of the Guide
following the Hillsborough Inquiry's Final Report.


I enclose a short draft note which you may care        tosend   with a
copy of the reply to the PS to The Speaker.




                                            P E BOLTON



FEP/90 35/48/89
K H .3.29/FENTON.DM

                             DRAFT LETTER

FEP/90 35/48/89


Commander D Fenton MBO MBE
St John's Ambulance
London (Prince of Wale's) District
Edwina Mountbatten House
63 York Street
LONDON W1H 1PS                                  March 1990




Dear Commander Fenton


SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS: FINAL REPORT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH
INQUIRY

Your letter of 23 February to The Speaker about the role of St
John Ambulance at football grounds has been passed to the Home
Office.     I have been asked to reply.


First, I am sorry you have not received a reply to your letter
of 15 February marked for the attention of Mr Brown.         I am
afraid we have not been able to trace any record of having
received that letter so perhaps I can take this opportunity to
respond to the points you raise both in that letter and the
one which you sent to The Speaker.


The importance of first aid and medical provision at major
sports grounds is, I believe, reflected in hrrs It##                 "Ta
recommendations.      The contribution made by St John Ambulance
at football grounds and elsewhere is both known and valued by
spectators and participants alike.        I think this is implicit
in the Interim Report^ paragraphs 296 and 297Yin describing
the prompt response of St John's Ambulance on that fatal day
at Hillsborough, ^ r h e amendment to the Interim Report
recommendation on the provision of ambulances so as to include
private ambulances approved bv the ambulance authority
          is not intended to exclude St John's or other voluntary
organisations.    Indeed, it has quite the opposite effect of
giving clubs more choice when providing ambulance cover.        That
cover can be from a private firm or from a voluntary
organisation.    The safeguard on standards is that whatever is
provided must be approved by the ambulance authority.


We are pleased to learn that St     John Ambulance is able to play
such an effective role in the provision of improved first aid
and medical facilities at football grounds in London.      We
shall, as you suggest, provide more guidance on this issue in
the revised Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds.     We shall be
consulting Commander Hammond, among others, shortly.


The membership of the Football Licensing Authority (FLA) has
yet to be determined.    I cannot   therefore giveyou an
assurance on its composition at     this stage but we have noted
your views.


I am arranging for a copy of this letter to be passed to the
office of The Speaker and for an additional copy to be sent to
Commander Hammond for information.


                                           Yours sincerely




                                           P E BOLTON


                                           (Fire and Emergency
                                           Planning Department)
