                                     Mr Storr
                                     Mr Yates
                                     Mr Chilcot
                                     HMCIC
                                     Mr Boys Smith             H   ome   O   ffice
                                     Mr Malone-Lee
                                                             Q U EEN A N N E ’S GATE
                                     Miss Edwards
                                     Mr Addison               L O N D O N SWIH 9AT
                                     Mr Nagler
                                     Mr Sandiford
 Our Ref:   POL/89 850/4/30          Mr Whalley
                                                                    17 July 1989
                                     Mr Archer
                                     Ms Ransford
                                     Mr Durbin




 Thank you for your letter of 4 July in your capacity as Chairman of the
 Police Consultative Committee for the J2 Sub Division about the costs of the
 inquiries by the West Midlands police into the Hillsborough Stadium Tragedy.

         ?6Cre^arX has accepted' in his reply of 28 April to a Parliamentary
                  faumont-Dark 311(3 in his letters to other West Midlands MPs,
            i      / OStf °futh€ P01106 inquiries which are being undertaken
™ SS                         y West Midlands Police officers should not fall
on the West Midlands Police Authority.

 Additional costs" include the cost of overtime worked by the West Midlands
                   thuir     force area to cover duties which would otherwise
have been undertaken by officers seconded to the Hillsborough inquiry.

h o - Z J S ®aid     will take a while to sort out the precise mechanics of
how the West Midlands police should be reimbursed.

I recently met members of the South Yorkshire Police Authority to discuss
their concerns and I put a proposal to them about how the costs should be
met. I have also written to them confirming this. I am still awaiting a
reply from them. Until I have this, I am afraid that I am unable to confirm
the arrangements to you.

I have also met a deputation from the West Midlands Police Authority to
        M ^ ma^ter% •I m most anxious to reach agreement on the reimbursement
        Midlands police costs at the earliest possible opportunity. I hope
 ■fi u ? P roP°s  which I have put to the South Yorkshire Police Authority
will help to achieve this.                                               1

With regard to the efficiency of the West Midlands police and the service
             °fff f' 1 ?ave been fc?ld ** Mr Dear^ the Chief Constable of the
West Midlands police that the duties of the officers, who are absent from the




                                                      /force conducting




B C L Bainbridge Esq
force conducting the inquiries, have been covered by other personnel working
overtime. Whilst clearly an exercise of this nature puts uncomfortable
strains on a force, the Chief Constable has said that there has been no
diminution of service to the people of the West Midlands and no lowering of
police efficiency.

When the Enquiry began, something in excess of 350 staff were involved. This
was reduced on 5 June to 125, it will be reduced again on 17 July to 65.




                                                      FERRERS
                                                             H   ome   O   ffice
                                                           Q U EEN ANNE'S GATE
      g?SS3                                                 L O N DO N SWIH 9AT
   ^£ R   Of   %
                                                                   17 July 1989
Our Ref:       POL/89 850/4/30




  0u C s(lb cJ(jfcj   M^tf
You will recall that in my letter of 16 June I said that I would write to you
again following my meeting with members of the South Yorkshire Police
Authority on 20 June, at which we discussed the costs of the inquiries by the
West Midlands police into the Hillsborough Stadium Tragedy.

I put a proposal to the South Yorkshire police about how the costs which are
being incurred on the investigation, should be met, and I have written to them
confirming this. It would involve South Yorkshire meeting the costs initially
but with special assistance from central government in recognition of the
special features of the case.

They are now considering the proposal. I hope this will help to achieve an
agreement on the reimbursement of West Midlands' additional police costs.

I re-iterate that the costs should not fall to the West Midlands.

I have been awaiting a reply from South Yorkshire for sane time.    I shall
write to you again as soon as I hear from them.




                                                      FERRERS




Councillor D M Ablett
                                                           QUEEN ANNE'S GATE
                                                            LO N DO N SWIH 9AT



                                                              17 July 1989
Our Ref:   POL/89 850/4/30




Thank you for your letter of 6 July enclosing an article which appeared in the
Wolverhampton Express and star about the cost of the inquiries by the
West Midlands police into the Hillsborough Stadium Tragedy.

I have written to the Clerk of the West Midlands Police Authority informing him
that, at ray recent meeting with members of the South Yorkshire Police
Authority, I discussed their concerns and put a proposal to them about how the
costs which are being incurred by the West Midlands should be met.

I have also written to Sir John Layden, the Chairman of the South Yorkshire
Police Authority about the proposal. The authority is now considering this,
and I am awaiting their response.

I am anxious to reach an agreement on the reimbursement of the West Midlands
police costs as soon as possible and I hope that the proposal which I have put
to South Yorkshire Police Authority will help achieve this.




                                          QUi)




                                                 FERRERS




Mrs Maureen Hicks MP
