       HOME OFFICE
           G2 DIVISION
 Fire and Emergency Planning Dept
Queen Anne’s Gate London SWiH 9AT
         Tel: 01-273 a c m

        With Compliments


                   /(A
h s .8.14/fgrounds.dm




                                        273 3099




BRADFORD                                FEP/89 17/35/1
West Yorkshire
BD7                                     14 August 1989




Dear Mr

SAFETY AND DEVELOPMENT OF FOOTBALL GROUNDS:   RESEARCH PROPOSAL

Your letter of 12 June and enclosures to Dr Cullen of the Health
and Safety Commission has been passed to. this Department in view
of our responsibilities for the safety of Sportsgrounds Act 1975
(the 1975 Act).

Now that    the interim of the    Hillsborough Inquiry has been
published, the Inquiry may nowwish to address the question of
f utureresearch in its Final Report.      I think, therefore, we
should await the longer term findings of the Inquiry before we
decide how best to proceed.    I am nevertheless grateful to you
for putting forward a constructive research proposal, details of
which we have noted and which we shall bear in mind in the light
of any recommendations by the Inquiry.

The scope of your suggested research seems to go further than
safety at existing sports stadium at which the 1975 Act and
associated guidance iss^aimed.     For example you refer to new
stadium design and development together with such matters as flow
rate calculations during egress from buildings. These issues may
touch upon the responsibilities of others and I am therefore
copying the correspondence to the Department of Environment,
Sports and Recreation Division and Building Regulations, for
information.

                                        Yours sincerely




                                        D J MOULD
                               IV w
                                              1 9 JUL 1989 lohZb


                              Health &        Baynards House
                                              1 Chepstow Place
                              Safety          Westbourne Grove
                                              London W2 4TF
                              Commission      Telephone 01-243 6000
                                              Direct Dialling 01-243 6^ St?
                                              Fax 01-727 1202
                                              Telex 25683
Mr p E BO]
        ol|ton
G2 Division
Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London SW1H 9AT                                        18 July 1989




Dear Mr Bolton

SAFETY AND DEVELOPMENT OF FOOTBALL GROUNDS   RESEARCH PROPOSAL

Further to my telecon of 17 July with Mr Casey, I attach the
research proposal received by HSC from Mr              A copy of
HSC's holding reply is also attached.

I should be most grateful if you would arrange a reply to Mr


Yours sincerely



                  /I ric,e.
JOHN PRICE
Assistant Secretary - HSC
                                                                             Bradford
                                                                       West Yorkshire
                                                                            BD7

                                                               [Tel:


12 June 1989


Dr EJ Cullen
H ealth & Safety Commission
Baynards House
1 Chepstow Place
Westbourne Grove
London W2 4TF




D ear Dr Cullen

RESEARCH ON SAFETY AND DEVELOPMENT OF FOOTBALL GROUNDS

I w rite in connection with a proposed research project which I believe would be of
g re a t value and interest to you and the community.

I have a degree in Psychology and an opportunity for further research.        My
investigations have uncovered a lack of information on many aspects of safety and
com fort at football stadia. As a Psychologist I believe I can provide answers to
several important questions where research is presently to be found wanting. For
example:

1.   How can Psychology improve training for, management of and communication
     during emergencies? In what ways will the study of behaviour in fires and
     emergencies enable improved fire-safety design, and to what extent will all
     this prove of g reater value than yet more technical innovation?

2.    How valid are engineers' Flow R ate Calculations in view of the complexity of
      human behaviour during egress? How can study of this behaviour lead
      engineers to new safer, more realistic Flow R ate Calculations?

3.    How do crowds respond to different forms of instruction and warning under
      different circumstances (i.e. emergencies)?

4.    How useful and effective are the Exit Route signposting and safety marking
      systems recommended in paragraph 57 of the Guide to Safety a t Sports
      Grounds (HMSO, 1986)?

5.    In term s of safety and com fort versus crowd management: which is the way
      forward for stadia design?

6.   .How do physical p aram eters and conditions relate to experiences, movements
      and densities of crowds? That is to say, what are the e ffe c ts of the built
      environment on behaviours and experiences, and what e ffe c ts will changes
      (all-seaters; I-D cards etc.) have on attitudes and perceptions? Given our
      antiquated stadia, does "this primitive environment encourage some people to
      re a c t in a primitive manner?" (McElhone Report, 1976).


                                                                   /Continued
                                            -   2-




7.     How do supporters see th eir club's place in the community? Many grounds
       are, as Simon Inglis suggests, "outdated tem ples of under-use". So how can
       they be developed to regain their place as the c entre of the community?

8.     As Psychology has been successfully applied to leisure, heritag e
       interp retation and other re c re a tio n a l pursuits, what can football learn from
       other branches of the leisure and re c reation industry? How can stadia
       develop to a t t r a c t and keep new supporters?

I have also made enquiries about safety-design preparations for the World Student
Games (Don Valley Stadium) in Sheffield, and I await the research
recom m endations of Lord Ju stic e Taylor's re po rt on the Hillsborough disaster.

Although the absence of answers to these questions represents a dearth of
information, if you have a research in terest in stadia development, safety and
design I believe I can undertake to provide you with answers. Moreover, I o ffer this
service at a much more c o st-e ffe c tiv e ra te .

If you would like more information please do not hesitate to c o n ta c t me. The
a tta c h e d Appendix provides fu rth e r details regarding the MSc course and its
research potential. I am available for interview at your discretion, and I look
forward to hearing from you at your earliest convenience.

Yours faithfully



______________, BSc

Enc.
APPENDIX




12 June 1989

                                                                                  Bradford
                                                                            West Yorkshire
                                                                                 BD7

                                                                    [Tel:




Having completed my undergraduate studies in 1988, achieving an Upper Second
Class Honours Degree in Psychology, I have been accepted for a place to read for
an MSc in Environmental Psychology a t the University of Surrey.

The research requested o verleaf is the course dissertation to a standard and quality
of MSc. It is my desire to work under Professor David C anter, who is a leading
ex p ert on human behaviour in fires and its implications for m anagem ent, training
and design, with publications to this e ffe c t. He was extensively involved in the
Popplewell Inquiry of 1985, as well as the Kings Cross Fire Inquiry.
Professor C anter and Dr David Uzzell are about to have published "Football in its
Place: An Environmental Psychology of Football Grounds" in which safety is
discussed and recom m endations made for the future of the game. Clearly the
de p artm en t has unparalleled expertise and facilities for the requested research, as
indicated by the a tta c h e d le t t e r of recom m endation.

More information, including re fe re n c es if required, is available from Dr Uzzell (the
Course Director) on Guildford (0483) 509175.
nap      UNIVERSITY OF SURREY
 I y'    Guildford Surrey G U2 5XH                T e le p h o n e (0483) 571281      Telex 859331
          D e p a r t m e n t o f Psychology-       D ire ct Line (0483) 509175       Fax 0483 300803


          David Canter, H e a d o f D ep a rtm e n t a n d Professor o f Psychology
          Harr)- McGurk, Professor o f Developm ental Psychology



                                                                                      February 1989



 TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN




 I am pleased to write in support of             1s application
     ^inancial support to read for the M.Sc. in Environmental
 Psychology.

 This is an unique course - the only one of its kind in Europe.
 The competition to get on the course is considerable and we only
 select those students who are both highly qualified and clearly
 have a lively and committed interest in the application of
 psychology to environmental issues.

 Mr.       has impressed us with his application, and we would
 anticipate him making a valuable contribution to the course.
 Furthermore, it is clear that our course would substantially
 assist his career interests and opportunities.

 If I can provide you with any further information please do not
 hesitate to contact me.


                                                Yours faithfully,




                                                <
                                                y h,L'T
                                            Dr. David L. Uzzell
                                            Director,
                                            M.Sc. in Environmental Psychology
