13 September, 1990




Mr S Bilbe
Fire & Emergency Planning Department
Home Office
Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON
SW1H 9AT



Dear Mr Bilbe

I thought it was time to put typewriter to paper again as the new football season
has been under way for almost a month! So far, things are going very well, but we
are still getting over    the shock of the first game of the season. Southampton were
away to Aston Villa,      andVilla Park is now all seating for away fans (this was a lot
to take for the first match, not to be able to stand on our beloved terraces!).
Guess how much the ticket cost? £5, not even close - £6, you can do better than
that - £7, your getting very warm - £8 almost hot now - £9, correct!!              £9, I
didn't believe it, how can a club justify £9 for a league match, heaven help any fans
that get them in the cup, they'll all have to take out second mortgages to afford to
go.     If you didn't buy your ticket in advance and waited until you got to the
ground, it was only £7 to sit behind the goal so not quite such a hole in your
pocket, but still it is now starting to become an expensive day out. Football used to
be a family game, but if Mum, Dad and two children want to go, thats £36 just for
tickets, then petrol and the occasional burger or drink, Dads not going to get much
change out of £60.       Still, that, I suppose, is one of the pitfalls of being a football
supporter. There is       one point I would like to make.       If all grounds are to be
converted to all seating there should be a law governing the width between the rows
of seats, and also the exits provided. Villa Park was (I hate to say) great. There
was sufficient room between the rows to stand comfortably when people wanted to
get in or out, and enough leg room to sit comfortably too, even for the tallest
people. The exits were also large enough to accommodate everyone there. At
Anfield this was a completely different m atter. The seating is very cramped and it
is very difficult to stand and let someone past, and although there are three exits
from the terraces they all amass into one very small exit causing a bottle-neck. It
seems that Aston Villa have given the seating arrangements a lot of thought, and
Liverpool have just put in as many seats as possible into the space they had
available with hardly any thought to the fans comfort or safety.

Two more little things if you don't mind me taking up too much of your time. This
will probably be the last time we converse by letter, as, like most other things, we
let the new laws take their course. Point one, Southampton Football Club did not
inform the fans that the Villa match was all seating, so the game had to be delayed
for 10/15 minutes to let all the fans in. I did speak to the Ticket Office at The
Dell and was informed that it cost too much to advertise (I was also told that true
fans were at the ground two hours before kick-off, but thats another story!). Point
two, and I don't know if you keep a copy of all the letters you send out, but have
you changed your name? I hope not, and that I am writing to the right Mr Bilbe,
only your last letter ended with the name Mr Bible!!

Thank you for taking the time to reply to my previous letters, it is nice to know
that someone in the big city does take the time to read and write to a mere minion
like myself.

Yours sincerely
       HOME OFFICE
       Queen Anne’s Gate London SW 1H 9A T

                                   Direct line 071-273        2582
                                  Switchboard 071-273 3000



                                                             Your reference

                                                         Our reference

                                                             Date
                                                                 2.1 August 1990




Dear

Thank you for your letter of 18 June in reply to mine of
15 June.  Please accept my apologies for the delay in
replying.                                        x

There is little which I can add to my previous letter with
           thV ntro<*ucti°n of all seated accommodation at
 ootball grounds.   This is, we believe, a major step towards
creating a better safer environment in which all spectators
can enjoy the game.

The Final Report acknowledges that clubs may wish to charge
rnore for seats than for standing, but it points out that a
price structure, which suits the pockets of those who presently
 t Y hu° s^ n d , should be considered. It is for clubs to decide
S eS d e r £oYhe?n' ° V 5 ! ? uld ' ,
                                    in— «>e P ^ c e of a d m L s i o f
               f?" meet the cost of ground improvements.       You
may be aware that the Government has made £100 million
finai? ?       clubs over the next five years and that other
rinancial assistance is available to them for ground
improvements.

The Government accepted the principle that grounds in the
First and Second Divisions of the Football League should
become all seated by August 1994. That remains our position
We recognise that some clubs face difficult decisions on how
best to proceed.   We do not wish to discourage them frSm
™ ° ™ 9 . away om existing, sometimes out of date, premises and
obtaining new purpose built accommodation, provided this ^s a
practicable attainable option.              P         tniS    a

We recognise that clubs will not be able to make progress at
the same rate.  For this reason we have said that? p ? o v ” ed
S HI       is satisfactory progress towards achieving the
       t' Strict adherence to the interim stages may not
always be appropriate.  it may be that any First or Second
Division club which has not advanced its plans for a Sew
stadium m time to meet the deadline will find that the
licence issued by The Football Licensing Authority, subject to
conditions directed by the Secretary of State, for the
existing ground will require spectators only to be admitted to
seated accommodation.  However, full account will be taken of
all circumstances before making such a direction.

You m^y be aware that, in conjunction with the Scottish
Office, we publish the 'Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds'
which is also known as the Green Guide.   The booklet provides
guidance to ground management, local authorities   etc on,
amongst other things, safety of spectators in seated
accommodation.  In his Interim Report following the tragic
fire at Valley Parade, Bradford Mr Justice Popplewell said
that had the Green Guide been complied with the tragedy would
not have occurred.  The Guide is currently in the process of
revision to take account of the recommendations contained in
Lord Justice Taylor's Final Report.

I acknowledge your concern over the matters you have raised
and I hope that this letter has helped ease that concern.
Please do not hesitate to contact me further if I can be of
any assistance.

                                       Yours sincerely




                                       MR S BIBLE
                                       (Fire and Emergency
                                       Planning Department)
