                      DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL HERITAGE
                             Sport an d Recreation Division
            Sanctuary B u ild in g s Great Smith Street W estm inster London SW1P 3H'l
                    S w itc h b o a rd 071 925 5000 Fax 071 925 6934 GTN 3060



Ms K Hunt                                                               Direct Line
Central Policy Planning Unit                                            071-925 6371
Department of the Environment
Room N14/11A                                                            Direct Fax
2 Marsham Street                                                        071-925 6934
London
SW1P 3PY
                                                                        19 June 1992




       PORTSMOUTH CITY COUNCIL'S LETTER TO THE PRIME MINISTER
Thank you for your letter of 15 June asking for a contribution
for a reply to Portsmouth City Council's letter of 2 June to the
Prime Minister. You did not specify exactly what contribution you
are expecting from us but I assume that it is on all-seater
stadia. I suggest that in the draft reply you use wording along
the following lines:
      "The Secretary of State for the Department of National
      Heritage announced on 4 June the Government's plans to re­
      examine the all-seater requirement at Third and Fourth
      Division clubs in the Football League and to consider the
      position of those Second Division clubs with very low
      average attendances. Although on the basis of average
      attendances Portsmouth may not fall into this categoryt I
      would make the point that on the timetable for achieving
      all-seating the Football Licensing Authority have made
      clear that it is incumbent for clubs to inform it of any
      circumstances which prevent them fbjv achieving all-seating
      by the August 1994 deadline."
As background I enclose a copy of the 4 June announcement.




A R   ba:
                                  Department of the Environment
                                  Room N14/lla
                                  2 Marshara Street
                                  LONDON     SW1P 3PY
                                       Phone 071 276 3532
                                       GTN       2 76 3 332

                                       Fax    071   276 3483
Mr Tony Baden
Department of National Heritage
Room 3/63
Sanctuary Buildings
Great Smith Street


                                                              15 June 1992




Please see the attached letter from Portsmouth City Council to
the Prime Minister.
I would be grateful if you could provide a contribution for a
reply that Mr Redwood's office is to send. We have been asked
to put up advice by 22 June so I would be grateful for your
comments by 19 June.




KAY HUNT
Central Policy Planning Unit
       k
V
                                                                       Civic Offices
                                                                       Guildhall Square
                                                       £u»oe\          Portsmouth P01 2AL
    Councillor Dr Alan Burnett                                         Tel: (0705) 834108
    Leader of the Council             City of Portsmouth               Secretary: 834172


             -Tune 1992


           Dear Prime M inister
           May I draw y o u r attention to a num ber of points which concern Members
           of th is a u th o rity , and I believe, many other local cou ncils.

           Given your experience as a local Councillor, yo ur avowed intention to
           auopt a more listening style of governm ent, and your concern fo r the
           quality of public services and the consum er, I hope our demands will
           strik e a chord with you and your Cabinet colleagues.

           (1)   Local Government Reform I tr u s t you will p re s s ahead with the
                 Local Government Commission to create one tie r of Councils and
                 make Hampshire one of your f ir s t a reas, a n d , in the case of
                 Portsm outh, re tu rn most of the powers and services we had p rio r
                 to 1974.
           (2) Compulsory Competitive T endering           We a re in favour         of
               competition, b u t it should be fa ir - may I u rg e you in an y fu tu re
               proposals to lift the controls on the public sector competing in
               the p riv ate se cto r.     (We a re a t p re se n t having to make
               red u n d an cies, not because of inefficiency, b u t largely because of
               th is re s tric tio n ).

           (3)    We have assiduously trie d to collect the Community Charge (and
                 k e p t it down to £189.95 this y e ar) b u t an y financial help to affect
                 the £ 4 .7m net cost of adm inistration/collection above the          ra te s
                 over 3 years would be gratefully welcome.

           (4)    We see no point in sending Community Charge non p a y ers to
                 p riso n (although th is has h a p p e n e d ). We would ask you to change
                 the regulations to su b stitu te Community Service as an a lte rn a tiv e
                 w here ap p ro p riate.

           (5) The insistence on all seater stadia fo r our own and other football
               clubs is causing sev ere problem s.     Could you please relax th e
               reg ulations so th a t Clubs like Portsm outh Football Club     can
               grad u ally work tow ards this end.


           The Rt Hon John Major MP
           Prime M inister
           House of Commons
           London SW1 OAA
(6) Our big g est problem in try in g to         solve our housing problem is
    th a t we cannot spend more of our          capital re c e ip ts. Again, if th e
    p re s e n t restric tio n s were relaxed   (not abolished) we could b u ild
    homes and create jobs (10,000                unemployed in the C ity a t
    p r e s e n t) .
(7) L ifting controls on multiple occupancy has allowed many family
    houses to be converted and occupied b y single, u n re la te d
    p e rso n s.     We would like  some planning    powers to   be
    re-in tro d u ce d .
(8) We are proud of ou r flourishing municipal f e r r y port and u rg e
    you to lift controls on borrow ing to in v est, and do no th in g to
    force us to sell it off.
I believe most of these suggestions would be supported b y local
councillors reg ard less of political allegiance.    T hey would lift th e
burd en of central control and perm it u s to get on with solving some of
the problem s which confront u s in th e next y ear or so.
I would be grateful if you could give me your views on these m atters at
your earliest convenience.

Yours sincerely,


Councillor Dr Alan B u rn e tt
Leader of the City Council
