I would like to remind the House that although the immediate
matter which is the subject of this debate is the implications of

the final report of Lord Justice Taylor’s inqwiry into the

Hillsborough tragedy, the event which was "the primary "'Cause of

our being here tonight was the tragedy itself. [I need scarcely

remind the House/the Rt Hon Member for Sparkbrook has already
reminded the House/] that it claimed the lives of 95 people and
caused more than 400 injuries.     I wish to place on record my

sorrow and my sympathy to the relatives and friends of those who

died, to those who were injured and, in some cases, to those who

continue to care for thte injured.



I sincerely hope that that needless loss of life at Sheffield

last April will not simply be another entry in the list of major

tragedies which has inflicted football over the years.      Instead I

hope that it will be the beginning of a chain of improvements and
developments which will perhaps prevent such a tragedy happening

again,   if the conclusions of this report do have such an ^effect,

the loss of those lives' will not have been entirely in vain but

may I say that I can fully understand that because it comes too
              i   t   .   .   -

late, even that would bfe little consolation to the people of

Merseyside and to the friends     and relatives of the Hillsborough

victims.



I also Wish to record again my appreciation and thanks to Lord

Justice Taylor for the very considerable amount of work which he
put into this valuable report over the past 9 months.      I would

also like to thank his assessors,    Mr Brian Johnson, the Chief
Constable of Lancashire and by Professor Leonard Maunder who is
Professor of Mechanical Engineering at the University of

Newcastle upon Tyne.     Lord Justice Taylor would acknowledge

himself that the special knowledge and experience which they

brought to the Inquiry can only add to the importance of this

report and to the credibility of its recommendations.



Over the past'9 months Lord Justice Taylor has addressed himself

essentially to 3 different issues.     The first, I remind the

House, was his thorough investigation of the circumstances which

led to the tragedy at Hillsborough which was the subject of his

interim report.     The interim report contained 43 recommendations

to improve safety in football and other sports grounds, most of
which he regarded as urgent and which were brought into effect,
with few exceptions, before or shortly after the start of the

1989/90 football season.


The second task - the crowd control and safety - has led to Lord

Justice Taylor's analysis in his final report on the state of

British football.     In his own words it is a "bleak picture*' which
he paints in that part of the report which he has called '"Three

sombre lessons after Hillsborough".     His analysis that poor

conditions and facilities for spectators, and the poor exaaple

set by those who are concerned with the management of

professional football have done little to improve standards of

behaviour by fans, has implications for public disorder and for

public safety that must be heeded.     With this part of the report
we must consider the specific recommendations which he has made

for a movement towards all seated accommodation at football

grounds and other sports venues for improving safety, and on

offences.



Thirdly of course he has commented, and I would ask hon members

to remember that it was, as the report makes clear, Ministers who

invited him to comment, on the effect of the proposals for a

national football membership scheme.     His conclusions led ae to

announce yesterday that the Government had decided not to place

before this House at present proposals for the setting up of the

football membership authority and the football membership scheme

itself.     As I said yesterday, the legislation which would enable

us to set up such a scheme will not be repealed.^There is much

that is useful in the Football Spectators Act 1989 and, indeed,
we intend to use Part I of the Football Spectators Act to (

implement some of the other recommendations in the Taylor report

as I shall presently explain.     Part 11 of course is not in
contention.



Lord Justice Taylor's report will not make easy reading for the

football industry.     It points to previous reports on crowd safety

and the extent to which they have gone unheeded; and to how

complacency is still to be found at many grounds and in many

board rooms even after Hillsborough.    He illustrates this by

relating the complacent remarks of senior club officials.       More

worrying perhaps, he refers to the more recent incident at

Middlesbrough on 9 December where it is clear that some of the

specific lessons of Hillsborough had either not been learnt or
had not been applied, though mercifully the number of injuries on

that occasion was very small.


The report suggests a picture of a general malaise or blight over

the game due to a number of factors which he identifies

principally as old grounds, poor facilities, hooliganism,

excessive drinking and poor leadership.   He says that crowd

safety and crowd behaviour are closely related to the quality of
the accommodation and facilities offered and to the standards
which are encouraged and enforced.



He is critical too of some of the methods which have been

introduced to control hooliganism, in particularly segregation.

Though segregation was introduced to keep rival fans apart, Lord

Justice Taylor feels that it encourages worse behaviour.    As he

says "If people are confined as potential offenders, that concept

may in some cases be self-fulfilling".



The fans are not given a clean bill of health by this report.
Both in the interim report and the final report there is

reference to the effects of too much alcohol in a minority of
cases.



But his main criticism is addressed to those who run the

industry and who have permitted these squalid conditions to

develop, - conditions which encourage rather than dissuade the
hooligan.



For all the reasons which Lord Justice Taylor has identified we
are in agreement with his conclusions that on grounds of safety

we should move towards the phasing out of the standing

accommodation at major football matches and at certain other

major sports grounds.   I said yesterday that we accepted this

recommendation.   We propose to use Part I of the Football

Spectators Bill to achieve it by bringing into force those parts
which will permit the setting up of the Football Licensing

Authority and give it power to issue licences to football
grounds.



What we envisage is that the conditions of the licences will be

related to the timetable for the phasing out of standing

accommodation recommended in the report.   We shall clearly need

to discuss with the football authorities how this should be

achieved in practice.     Consultation of this kind will also be
important in the case of some other sports which have designated
sports grounds under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act some of
which are not fully enclosed.



Some members may feel that the move towards all seated

accommodation will force clubs to turn away spectators.      I can

only ask them to read the report carefully.   Many clubs already

have more seated accommodation than the numbers of spectators who

on average attend their grounds.   10% reduction in standing

capacity will not affect them for some time, if at all.      Some say

it will change the atmosphere and image of the game.     That may

well be a change for the better.   Lord Justice Taylor points to

experience in Scotland and says that he is satisfied that in

England and Wales, as in Scotland and abroad, spectators will
become accustomed and educated to sitting.      The evidence he has

received shows that more recently where seating has been

installed the fans have come to accept it and like it.


Some clubs will no doubt be concerned at the cost of improving
their seated accommodation, the facilities for spectators and the
other measures for removing squalid conditions recommended in the

report.   Lord Justice Taylor presents a number of ways in which

money might be raised.       He says, and we agree, that the bulk of

the money must come from the industry itself.       There is a basic

rule in this country, originally in common law but now also in

statute law that it is the duty of occupiers to take reasonable

care towards those whoa they invite into their premises.       So far
as the Government is concerned, its view is that if the
                         I

professional football industry wishes to invite members of the

public to watch the game, it must expect to pay for the

facilities which are necessary to ensure that those members of

the public are to be protected against unsafe conditions or

unsafe behaviour.



As I said yesterday there are some areas of fiscal policy which
we shall need to look at but the bulk of the finance for ground
improvement will have to be raised by the clubs or, or I might

add, by their national bodies and the report suggests a number

of ways in which this can be done.



I come now to the recommendations made in the report for specific

changes relating to safety conditions.       A number of detailed

recommendations were contained in the interim report.       It must
be acknowledged that some of the interim recommendations caused

difficulty in a minority of cases.    That was perhaps not

surprising, given the very diverse nature of the sports grounds,
both for football and other sports, to which the recommendations
were intended to apply.   That is acknowledged in the final report

and a number of the interim recommendations have been modified.

We shall be drawing these changes to the attention of the local

authorities and clubs concerned shortly in a circular.       I do not

want to comment on the safety recommendations in detail.

I agreed yesterday that I would place in the Library of the House

a schedule setting out the Government's response to the
recommendations contained in chapters 3, 4 and 5 of the final
report and that has now been done.     There are however one or two

matters on which I would like to comment particularly.



The first is the setting up of an organisation to review or

supervise the way in which local authorities carry out their

responsibilities under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 and

the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 in respect

of safety at sports grounds and other sports venues.     Part I of
the Football Spectators Act 1989, in particular section 13, gives

such a role to the Football Licensing Authority in respect of

designated football grounds;     designated that is for the purposes

of the 1989 Act.   I have already said that we propose to set up

the Licensing Authority to bring about all seated accommodation

and we shall also bring into force the powers to permit it to

review these safety functions.     I regret the need to set up such

an organisation but I do not think that we can doubt, in the

light of Hillsborough and the more recent Middlesbrough incident,
that such a move is necessary.   Lwe shall   proceed with this as

soon as possible but it will clearly not be practicable to set it

up and to recruit an effective inspectorate overnight.      I hope

however that we shall have made considerable progress by the

beginning of the next football


Lord Justice Taylor suggests that the powers of the organisation

should be extended to cover not only all sports grounds
designated for the purposes of the 1975 Safety of Sports Grounds

Act but also where there are designated stands under Parts III of

the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 or indoor

places of sport licensed under Part IV of that Act.      We shall

need to consider this carefully.    The powers under the 1989 Act

extend only to football grounds and on past experience that is

where roost of the problem lies.   There may be a case for

extending these safety responsibilities to cover other major

sports grounds, perhaps by agreement, and in the same way to

regulated stands (for example at racecourses).      But we have some

reservations at present about extending these supervisory

responsibilities of the Football Licensing Authority to indoor
                       <



places of sport.   These are dealt with by district authorities

under entertainments licensing legislation and there might be

some inconsistency in supervising the way in which a district

authority licenses its civic centre when it is used for a boxing

match but not supervising it when it is used for a Christmas

pantomime.   This is obviously something which wex shall need to

consider further with the authorities concerned.



There are a number of specific recommendations for the amendment
of the Green Guide.     The Green Guide, as honourable members will

know, is a document published by the Home Office and the Scottish

Home and Health Department which owes its origins to the

technical working party set up by    Lord Justice Wheatley in the
course of preparing his report on crowd safety at sports grounds

which was published in 1972.     The document has been revised on a

number of occasions in the light of experience gained in the

light of later incidents.     We shall of course be taking immediate

steps to revise the guide again but I think we can justifiably

point to the fact that it has stood the test of time remarkably

well.   Indeed it is difficult not to conclude that if the

guidance which it contains had been properly followed and applied
at Hillsborough and more recently at Middlesbrough, neither

accident would have happened.



I turn now to the role of the police in ensuring safety and

effective crowd control at sports events.     A key issue here is
the liaison between the club and the police.     There must be no

opportunity for each to stand aside thinking that the other is

dealing with the matter.     I am particulary grateful therefore

for the thoughtful discussion in the Report [206-214] of which

functions should be discharged by the police and which by the

club's stewards.   I agree with Lord Justice Taylor that the

question is one of balance [209].



If the balance tips towards heavier police involvement, there

would be substantial resource implications with which chief

officers, police authorities and I, as Home Secretary, would
have to be concerned.
If the balance tipped too far the other way stewards might find

themselves expected to deal with matters which call for the
authority and experience of the police.     Lord Justice Taylor's

recommendation (broadly repeated from his interim report) for a

written statement of the respective functions of club and police

for crowd safety and control will, I believe, enable the right

balance for each ground to be struck in the light of local

circumstances.    I endorse this recommendation [and I welcome
particularly the clarification that the written document should
be seen as a statement of intent and not as a legally enforceable
contract].



The proper balance between police and stewards depends very much

upon the quality of the stewards.     I am sure that Lord Justice

Taylor is right to look to the clubs for an improvement in this

quality.     I welcome his recommendation   [R.42] for clubs to

recruit and train sufficient fit, active and robust stewards.



Increasing the capacity of the stewards would reduce the clubs'

call for special police services.      Such a reduction would

release police officers for duties outside the ground, not

necessarily connected with football: a benefit to the public
generally.



For these reasons, and because it is right in principle, I

support the Report's recommendation [R.53] that police

authorities should ensure that charges made to clubs for

policing inside grounds are realistic.      I shall encourage
consistency of police authority practice with regard to

charging, subject to the need, recognised in the report, for

local discretion.



The Report also makes recommendations about the training of

police commanders [R.52] and of police officers whose duties
require them to recognise crowd densities and to understand

crowd dynamics [R.12, 16].   I endorse these and the other

recommendations dealing with police planning.   I have no doubt

that chief officers will respond to these recommendations in

the same positive way that they did to those in the interim

report.



Lord Justice Taylor has some wise things to say in his report,
about hooliganism. Like many before him, he has concluded that
there is no single measure which will defeat football
hooliganism and even a package of measures will take time to
have effect.   [425.]


In recent years the Government has been attacking the hooligan
problem on many fronts: we have taken action against alcohol
abuse in the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985;
we have introduced in section 5 of the Public Order Act 1986 a
new offence of disorderly behaviour; the police have developed
their tactics by making effective use of closed circuit
television (CCTV) at grounds and by increasing the gathering and
use of intelligence on hard-core hooligans.
At the end of 1989 we established the National Football
Intelligence Unit (NFIU).    It has already made a good start in
compiling and collating centrally intelligence on the most
serious and persistent football hooligans.


Turning to hooliganism abroad, at our initiative there has been
set up, under the TREVI arrangements for cooperation within the
European Community, an information network of permanent football
correspondents.   We have developed guidelines on the policing of
international matches which we have put before our TREVI partners
and which have been warmly welcomed.   We are cooperating fully
with the Italian authorities in providing advice and assistance
for their policing of British supporters attending the World Cup.


Part II of the Football Spectators Act 1989 has been welcomed by
Lord Justice Taylor. Under Part II of the Act courts may impose
restriction orders on those convicted of football-related
offences as defined in the Act.   Those subject to restriction
orders will be prevented from travelling to key matches abroad.
I believe its provisions will have a salutary effect on those
hooligans whose disgraceful behaviour abroad has so blackened the
reputation of football.   We plan to implement Part II as soon as
the practical arrangements and the remaining Parliamentary
procedures have been completed.    [This is expected to be in early
May. ]


Following bilateral agreements with other countries our courts
will be able to impose restriction orders on offenders convicted
abroad of corresponding football-related offences.     We are giving
priority to concluding an agreement with the Italian authorities.
We aim to have these arrangements in place before the World Cup.
I expect the provisions of Part II to have a useful deterrent
effect on the behaviour of football spectators abroad.


Taken together these measures against hooliganism which I have
described are having an effect.^ Lord Justice Taylor notes the
small rise in attendance at matches in each of the last 3 years.
His evidence suggests that measures taken in the last couple of
years have reduced violent misbehaviour inside grounds.


He expresses, therefore, cautious optimism about the situation
inside grounds.      [280] But we cannot be satisfied with this
position. ^ E v e n less can we be satisfied about misbehaviour
outside grounds and on journeys to and from matches.


I am determined that we shall pursue vigorously our strategy
against hooliganism.   We shall encourage the enhancement of CCTV
systems and the training of their operators.      There is great
potential here: good optical evidence identifies the culprit
securely and may prevent him wasting the court's time by
contesting the charge. We shall also develop to the full the
potential of the NFIU.   [A computer system is being procured as
a matter of urgency and is expected to be fully operational
shortly.] Lord Justice Taylor sees the work of the unit as an
important element in the future strategy for reducing
hooliganism. I agree with him. The NFIU will increase local
forces' effectiveness by enabling them to target their resources
on the ringleaders and organisers of violence.
                                                               /



Lord Justice Taylor recommends the creation of some new offences
specific to behaviour in football grounds. He also recommends
consideration of applying attendance centre orders and electronic
tagging to convicted football hooligans. I shall consider these
matters sympathetically against the background of the existing
provisions of the criminal law. But it would be wrong for me to
give an instant commitment to propose to Parliament changes which
require careful consideration and consultation with the police
and other interested bodies.


In discussing strategy for combatting football hooliganism I
have considered first the policing of football and the
provisions of the criminal justice system.      But football
hooliganism has taken root and flourished in the particular
circumstances in which football is played and watched.         It is
right, therefore, for a part of our response to hooliganism to
be to look to change those circumstances.        [The national
                   (jLj-Ga-rv - t r M S jf /-v o
Membership Scheme                                              change/
the atmosphere at matches by excluding the hooligan element.]
There is a great responsibility here which rests on the clubs and
the football authorities.  [I have already dealt with the onus on
them to improve facilities and I have dealt with our approach to
all-seater stadia.] I have in mind particularly their
responsibility for deciding who shall be admitted to their
grounds.   Membership schemes of various sorts are discussed in
chapter 10 of the Report.    Lord Justice Taylor recognises the
practical difficulties and limitations of such schemes.        Although




                                                          1
r(*       short of making a formal recommendation for the
Art roduction of an away members only scheme he urges its further
cor.s ideration.   I hope that the football authorities and
ir.iividual clubs will take his advice.

I come now to the report's recommendations in connection with      the
proposed membership scheme.    It was right for the Government to
plan for such a scheme.    It must of course be clear, indeed it
always has been clear that if the principal advantage of a
national membership scheme was its ability      to   identify anddeter
those people who have previously been identified as football
offenders, then its disadvantage was that it could not be
operated without some delay, however small, at the turnstiles and
some additional use of police resources to deal with those who
sought unlawful entry to grounds and so on.     But what must be
remembered is that the problem which the membership scheme was
intended to address also causes disorder at the turnstiles and
is the major reason why it is necessary for up to 5,000 police
officers to be deployed on Saturdays to maintain order at
football grounds.    There was always the possibility, and we asked
Lord Justice Taylor to assess it, that the balance of advantage
attached to the membership proposals would outweigh the
disadvantages.     If the report had come to that conclusion then I
think that hon Members on both sides of the House would agree
that it would have been prudent and proper for the Government to
have proceeded with its proposals.


What Lord Justice Taylor examined was not the general principle
of the national membership scheme, but the feasibility and
practicability of the particular proposals which were the subject
of the invitation to tender which was issued by the consultants
employed by the football authorities. In the event he has
concluded that there are considerable disadvantages in those
proposals and we have for that reason decided not to proceed with
the setting up of the football membership authority.    Lord
Justice Taylor has concluded that he cannot support the
implementation of Part I of the Act.    For reasons which I have
already explained, we cannot agree entirely with that conclusion,
as it is our intention, as soon as practicable, to use those
             ,,f lift 1 to which I have already referred.    We will not
t i if.; ; m „   f I,« tf.oiie parts which relate specifically to the
r .tLali 6esX«SB'.;p *eh«ae and the football membership authority.


: -,ave dealt in thi* apeech with what I regard as the major
          arising from the Taylor report. There are      many more.     We
•r-.ail of course encourage the Football League and      Football
Association to liaise, perhaps with the Sports Council and
others, to set up an advisory council which can produce guidance
on football stadium design. That is a sensible and constructive
proposal. The report rightly criticises that minority of fans
who drink to excess, resort to hooliganism and cause public
disorder. But it is right to acknowledge that the vast majority
of people who go to watch football matches, even in the appalling
squalid conditions which exist at some major grounds, are decent
well behaved people who are not involved in such conduct and who
want nothing to do with it.


The important thing about Lord Justice Taylor's report is that it
suggests a way ahead. It is not a way which will bring about
overnight improvements in conditions at football grounds or
overnight improvements in the conduct and behaviour of
spectators.        It quite properly places major responsibilities on
all those concerned in professional football, to bring about
improvements in their sport.


I finish my       speech tonight with the words which I used in my
statement yesterday.        Mr Speaker, we are giving the industry and
the clubs a       final opportunity to put themselves in order. The
public will       not forgive them if they do not now act.




                                                                    1
