                                                                               t'JVDED ^



                                      THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED
Lytham St. Annes, Lancashire, FY8 1JG. T e le p h o n e 0253 729421. T elex 67675. Fax 0253 724786.                                                         Secretary ). D. Dent

                    Chief Executive: A. Sandford                          T ele ph one : 0602 508720                    Facsimile: 0602 508621

5th March 1990




The R t . Hon. D. Waddington
Home Secretary
The Home Office
Queen Anne Gate
London SW1H 9AT




Dear Home Secretary,

I enclose herewith a copy of a letter which I have sent to the Secretary
of State for the Environment.   I am not quite sure how government intends
to handle the implementation of Lord Justice Taylor's report on the
Hillsborough disaster.   I felt however, that you would wish to have a
copy of my letter to the Secretary of State for the Environment and would
be pleased to meet you to discuss any aspects of it which will come within
the remit of your department.

Yoi




ARr
ChitiJ.   £i.X.fc3UU L X VS3




                                Please re p ly to: City House, M aid M arian Way, N ottingham NG1 6BH

                A lI co rre s p o n d e nGg-t o b e a d d r ess ed to -T h e S o crotary. R e g is te re d O ff-tao-otHabev'e . R e g is te re d in E n g la n d 80612
                                                                                                                                             ■n

                                                  °o
                                                        ^iV D E D ^


                              THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED
Lytham St. Annes, Lancashire, FY8 1)G. T e le p h o n e 0253 729421. T elex 67675. Fax 0253 724786.                S e cre tary). D. D ent

                  Chief Executive: A. Sandford      T e le ph one : 0602 508720   Facsimile: 0602 508621



1st March 1990


R t . Hon. Christopher Patten
Secretary of State for the Environment
Department of the Environment
Marsham Street
London




Dear Secretary of S t a t e ,

Mr. Douglas Ellis, the Chairman of Aston Villa Football Club
and member of the Football League Management Committee has
told me of your conversation with him at the Birmingham
Chamber of Commerce dinner on Thursday last.   Particularly,
he has told me of his request for you to consider government
assistance to Football League clubs in order to enable clubs
to implement the recommendations in Lord Justice Taylor's
report on the Hillsborough Stadium disaster.

I now write on behalf of the Football League to confirm that
request.   In particular the League will be looking for
financial assistance to be given to clubs as well as for
favourable consideration in respect of planning applications.

On the financial front emphasis has been placed on the cost of
implementing Lord Justice T a y l o r ’s recommendations whereby,
progressively, all clubs will move towards all seater stadia.
It should not go unnoticed however that many of Lord Justice
Taylor's other recommendations will also incur considerable
expenditure by clubs.    I know that a figure of £130M has been
mentioned as the price for implementing the Taylor
recommendations regarding all seater stadia.         This figure was
supplied by the Football League's structural engineering
consultants, Messrs. Corduroys and represents no more than a
desk-top estimate by them, albeit using their extensive
knowledge of Football League grounds, of putting seating on
terracing and putting a cover over that seating.         The
breakdown is £30M for t,he provision of seating and £100M for
providing cover.     It must be recognised however, that this




                         Please re p ly to: City House, M aid M arian Way, N o ttin gh am N G I 6BH

                         -—   — «■-. t   i -j    t-i—   g    ----- n —   I            p oc r jc f- or oc )   FnplanH 8061?
will do no more than turn inadequate terraced areas into
inadequate seated areas.   It will do nothing whatever to
provide the wide range of facilities for spectators which Lord
Justice Taylor calls for in his report.    What that total
cost will be no-one can yet know but best estimates seem to
indicate a multiplier of 3, 4 or 5 on the £130M figure.    In
order to provide a much more accurate estimate, the Football
League has now commissioned Messrs. Corduroys to assist clubs
in coming to a realistic estimate of the cost of implementing
the Taylor report.   It is anticipated that Corduroys analysis
will probably be available in approximately three months time.
I thought however, that even at this early stage you would
want to be aware of the basis of the £130M figure which has
been mentioned.

I would also draw attention to the announcement from the
Football Trust that £75M will be provided over 10 years.    I
would point out that this is not new money.   For some years
now the Football Trust has been providing approximately £2.5M
per annum directly to Football League clubs and £5M per annum
indirectly through the Football Ground Improvement Trust.
This latter money has wholly been used for ground safey
measures and the former sum has been used for such matters as
the introduction of closed circuit television to combat
hooliganism and to meet part of the escalating police charges.
 Lord Justic Taylor's report calls for further measures to be
taken on ground safety which will undoubtedly carry with them
a considerable cost and he calls for a realistic charge to be
made for police services (we are not sure whether a
'realistic' charge will take the cost up or down).    It seems
unlikely therefore that there will not be very much left over
from the monies coming from the Football Trust in order to
implement all seater stadia or to provide for the much better
facilities for spectators for which the report calls.

You will be aware that Lord Justice Taylor identifies three
areas where government financial assistance might be made
available.

      a)   from a reduction in VAT on the Spot the Ball
           competition

      b)   for a greater part of the betting levy on the pools
           competitions being diverted into football and

      c)   for tax relief being granted on ground improvements.

Before making a case to government in respect of these issues,
we have thought it better to quantify in the way set out
above, the likely cost to clubs of implementing the Taylor
recommendations.   I hope you would agree that that is a both
sensible and responsible course for us to adopt and that the
delay in presenting our proposals would not be held against
us.
So far as planning permissions are concerned, nearly all clubs
will be faced with either major reconstruction works at their
existing grounds or alternatively, moving to entirely new
sites where it would be impracticable and/or uneconomic to
seek to develop existing grounds.   If Lord Justice Taylor's
expectations are to be met, then it will mean that planning
applications to develop existing grounds, planning
applications in respect of new grounds and planning
applications for alternative uses for existing grounds will
need to be considered sympathetically.   We would therefore
ask that you should direct local planning authorities that
there should be a presumption in favour of planning
permissions in these areas.   I would of course, be pleased to
discuss the details of this with your officials.

We understand that it is the government's intention to accept
the Taylor recommendations that the standing areas in 1st and
2nd division grounds should be reduced by 20% from August next
(and by a further 20% for each of the next four years) and in
3rd and 4th division grounds by 10% (with a further 10% in
each of the next 9 years).   If this is to be done sensibly,
then clubs will need to make their overall plans now so that
they can work out the incremental steps which will need to be
taken in order to meet these reductions, whilst at the same
time making adequate arrangements for replacement seating to
cater for their current requirements.   We want to be in a
position to give clubs the best possible advice so that
expenditure will not be unnecesarily incurred or wasted at a
time when every penny must be made to count.

We have been seeking a meeting with you through our
Government Agents Messrs. GJW.   I would hope that you would
feel that there is sufficient in the foregoing to warrant a
meeting at an early date so that we are in a position to
advise clubs on how best to proceed.

Yours Sincerely
