                               W ith C o m p l i m e n t s


                                                              <3


F8 D iv ision
H om e O ffice
                               Ut
Q u e e n A n n e ' s G a te
LO N D O N
SW1H 9 A T
                                                             oK
T el:   01 -2^F3      2T<snsc 3
                                               (DRAFT: 7 June 1989)


PART V


CROWD CONTROL AND POLICING


This part of the Home Office evidence considers the control of
crowds at football matches, and the involvement of the police in
that.    Main sections below deal with the incidence of hooliganism
(paragraph     ), the criminal law as it relates to football
matches (paragraph     ), the courts, the police, the allocation of
responsibility for crowd control at football matches (paragraph
    ), control on admission (paragraph      ), and matches
overseas (paragraph      ).


The Government's objectives in relation to crowd control at
football matches and other sporting events are to ensure that
necessary legislation and practical arrangements exist so that:


        - spectators can watch the event safely and enjoyably


        - violence, disorder and other unacceptable behaviour is as
        far as possible prevented and is dealt with if it arises.


Practical arrangements rest principally with the organisers of
the events (in relation to football, clubs and the football
authorities) and the police.     Ultimately, no arrangements can be
entirely satisfactory without a large measure of responsibility
and self-discipline amongst spectators.


Unless otherwise stated the information in Part V relates
specifically to England and Wales.


The incidence of football hooliganism


The annual criminal statistics published by the Home Office show
numbers of offences recorded by type of offence not by
circumstance, so offences inside football matches or otherwise
related to football are not recorded as a separate category.
However, as a guide to the level of trouble at matches, the
Association of Chief Police Officers (ACPO) collate for each
football season the total number of people arrested at or ejected
from Football League matches (arrests 'at' meaning arrests inside
grounds, or those made outside but directly connected with the
policing of matches).    In recent seasons these have totalled:


     Season          Arrests         Ejections


     1985/6           4,143            4,356
     1986/7           5,531            6,466
     1987/8           6,106            6,542


The figures for 1987/88 equate to an average of 3 arrests and 3
ejections at every Football League match - thus on average there
were some 120 arrests and 130 ejections at League matches on
Saturdays during that football season, assuming 40 such games
took place.   This average level can very significantly be
exceeded: on the last full day of the 1988/89 season (13 May
1989) there were over 300 football related arrests comprising 180
at football grounds and over 120 elsewhere, including several
violent incidents in which two people received serious head
injuries.


This level of disorder occurs despite the many efforts already
being taken to reduce hooliganism, referred to in following
paragraphs.


THE CRIMINAL LAW


There are several criminal offences for example of theft,
violence and damage that may relate to misbehaviour at football
matches.    In addition the following paragraphs describe certain
offences and powers relating to disorder, alcohol and exclusion
from football grounds.


Disorder


The offences which football hooligans may commit during bouts of
disorderly activity vary greatly in type and seriousness.       At ont
end of the scale, section 5 of the Public Order Act 1986 makes it
an offence for a person to use threatening, abusive or insulting
words or behaviour, or disorderly behaviour, or to display any
writing, sign or other visible representation which is
threatening, abusive or insulting, within the hearing or sight of
a person likely to be caused harassment, alarm or distress.       The
offence may be committed in public places and, with a few
exceptions, private places.    A constable may arrest without
warrant a person who does not stop such behaviour when warned to
do so.   On conviction the maximum penalty for the offence is a
fine not exceeding level 3 (currently £400).


At the other end of the scale is the offence of riot in section 1
of the Act.    This makes it an offence where 12 or more persons
who are present together use or threaten unlawful violence for a
common purpose and their conduct (taken together) is such as
would cause a person of reasonable firmness present at the scene
to fear for his personal safety.    The offence attracts a maximum
of 10 years' imprisonment.


In between these two ends of the scale there are the offences of
violent disorder (section 2), affray (section 3) and fear or
provocation of violence (section 4) which attract maximum
penalties ranging from 5 years' imprisonment and a fine not
exceeding the statutory maximum (currently £2000) to 6 months'
imprisonment and a fine also not exceeding £2000.     There is a
specific offence in the Act to deal with threatening, abusive or
insulting behaviour which is intended to stir up racial hatred or
is likely to stir it up.     A person suspected of committing the
offence can be arrested without a warrant and on conviction can
be imprisoned for up to 2 years.


There are many other offences, outside the scope of the Public
Order Act 1986, which hooligans may commit during disorderly
activity.     For example, the offences of common assault and
malicious wounding.    These attract maximum penalties of 1 year
and life imprisonment respectively.     The gravest incidents of
hooliganism may involve murder or attempted murder for which the
maximum penalty is also life imprisonment.     Criminal damage and
possession of an offensive weapon in a public place are other
offences which hooligans sometimes commit which can attract terms
of imprisonment.


Statute law is not the only means at the police's disposal for
coping with hooligans.     Breaches of the peace may be dealt with
using common law powers.     If the police reasonably apprehend an
imminent breach of the peace they may take any reasonable steps
which are necessary to control or prevent it, including arresting
those responsible.   They may bring the offenders before the
courts where they may be bound over to be of good behaviour for a
period.


Alcohol


Various specific powers in relation to alcohol at football
matches are contained in the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol
etc) Act 1985, as amended.     In addition there are a wide variety
of general powers in relation to alcohol licensing which have a
bearing on alcohol in the context of football.


The Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985 restricts
the sale and consumption of alcohol on the way to matches on
football special coaches and trains.     It also makes it an offence
to try to enter a ground when drunk or in possession of alcohol
and to possess or consume alcohol within view of the pitch during
the period of the match (from 2 hours before until 1 hour
afterward).   Although there is provision for magistrates to grant
exemption orders for premises with no view of the pitch, the
police are empowered to close any bar in the ground should they
believe that sale of alcohol there is detrimental to orderly
conduct or the safety of spectators.      The Act also prohibits the
possession of any bottle, can or other container capable of
causing injury.    All Football League grounds, Wembley Stadium and
non-League grounds when used for matches involving League clubs
are designated under this Act.     The Act also gives the police the
power to search someone reasonably suspected of committing an
offence under the Act, and to arrest such a person.     Given the
nature of offences under the Act this may include searching
coaches on the way to or from matches or on arrival as well as
searching fans waiting to enter a ground or inside a ground.


Schedule I of the Public Order Act 1986 extends the Sporting
Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985 to prohibit alcohol on
minibuses on journeys to or from a designated sporting event, and
prohibits the possession of a firework or similar item at, or
while entering, a designated sporting event.


Home Office Circular 68/1988 (Alcohol and disorder)   (see Annex H)
issued on 5 August 1988 gave wide ranging advice reminding courts
and the police of relevant criminal offences and powers to
regulate licensing, including the power to close all licensed
premises in an area when riot or serious disorder is expected.
(Section 188, Licensing Act 1964).


In addition to the powers already available to the police, the
Home Secretary agreed last year to try out, on an experimental
basis, a bvelaw which prohibits the public consumption of alcohol
in specified areas.   The seven local authorities involved have
designated areas, in consultation with the police, in which the
practice of drinking in public by groups of mainly young people
had reached the state where other citizens found it both
threatening and intimidating.   One of the Councils involved,
Scarborough, has included in its designated areas the roads
leading to and surrounding both the (separate) local cricket and
football grounds.   The byelaw will be tested for two years,
during which time it will be closely monitored to see whether it
can provide an effective remedy, without becoming oppressive,
which can be made available as a model to other Councils.
Although it is early days, preliminary results in Coventry where
the byelaw has been in force for seven months are encouraging.
The byelaw has been shown to be popular and public drinking on
the streets has effectively stopped.


Exclusion of troublemakers


Part IV of the Act gave new powers to the courts to impose
exclusion orders, prohibiting attendance for a minimum period of
3 months at all prescribed matches of any person convicted of a
football-related offence.    This includes offences committed not
only inside or outside grounds, but also on journeys to or from
matches.


From 1 August 1987, when this power was introduced, to
26 May 1989, 1,785 exclusion orders were recorded by the Football
Association.


This power to impose exclusion orders is without prejudice to a
club's own entitlement to choose whom to admit, or refuse to
admit, to their property.    Conditions under which this will take
place are set out in each club's Ground Regulations, which
normally follow a model drafted by the Football League.    Ground
regulations typically assert the club's right to exclude someone
who refuses to be searched on entry.


The national football membership scheme proposed in Part I of the
Football Spectators Bill is intended to replace exclusion orders
with a positive check on entitlement to admission and mandatory
disqualification for fixed terms.     See separate evidence from the
Department of the Environment (DOE).


THE COURTS (Cl - content?)


The Government's role in relation to penalties is to ensure that
the courts have available to them adequate powers.     For most
offences applicable to disorderly behaviour at football matches
custodial penalties are available.     Sentencing in individual
cases is for the courts themselves.


Responding to maior outbreaks of hooliganism - "Swift Justice"


Home Office Circular 62/1988 issued on 4 August 1988 invited the
courts, the police and others to formulate contingency plans to
bring very rapidly before a court those involved in large scale
disorder.   Swift action was intended to deter further outbreaks
and to demonstrate the determination of the agencies involved to
deal with hooliganism.    The initiative envisaged disorder in
general, but included that arising in the context of football.


THE POLICE


Policing arrangements in England and Wales operate under the
tripartite relationship governed by the Police Act 1964, the
three parties comprising the Home Secretary, and local chief
constables and police authorities.     Chief constables are
autonomous in that they have operational control of the officers
in their force, but are accountable to their police authority who
are responsible for maintaining an adequate and efficient police
force.   (Arrangements in the Metropolitan Police are different as
the Home Secretary is the police authority for that force.)


The Home Secretary acts in a supervisory role, largely by
influence over the other parties in the tripartite system.       Some
actions by the police authority (eg appointment of chief
constables, setting the establishment for a force), require his
approval.    He also has powers to intervene if matters are not
proceeding properly.     The Home Secretary is assisted in this task
by Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Constabulary who conduct annual
inspections of every police force.


General police powers and duties (Mrs Evans - content?)


The [? common law] duties of a constable can be summarised as
being to prevent the commission of crime, to prevent action he
reasonably apprehends may result in a breach of the peace, and to
protect life and property (see paragraph 320 of Volume 3 6 of
Halsbury's Laws of England (4th Edition)).


The Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE) sets out the
police powers to investigate offences, for example to stop and
search or arrest persons or to detain and question suspects.
Other statutes also confer specific powers on the police.        In
addition the police have common law powers which enable them to
discharge their common law duties (above).     Such powers are
flexible and depend on reasonable justification, based on the
circumstances of each case.    Beyond all these powers the police
can seek the co-operation of the public, dependent on their co­
operation.


Police action in relation to football


The police regularly provide substantial numbers of officers at
football matches, to maintain public order, apprehend offenders
and (outside grounds) to direct crowds.    The relationship between
the police and clubs, and their respective duties, are considered
in more detail in the next main section (paragraph      ).   Inside
grounds the police often make use of video and closed circuit
television systems to detect trouble and gather evidence for use
in court.    British Transport Police often escort groups of
supporters travelling to matches by train, and police
reinforcements may be necessary eg in town centres where football
supporters are expected to congregate, especially if they are
likely to encounter opposing fans.


Besides operational involvement with football matches, most
police forces have a liaison officer for football who exchanges
information with other forces and with clubs in preparation for
forthcoming fixtures.    Some forces maintain intelligence records
on known football hooligans in their area, and various criminal
investigations have been mounted against 'hard core' teams of
hooligans.     These are matters on which ACPO may comment further
in evidence to the Inquiry.


The Home Office intends shortly to establish a National Football
Intelligence Unit as a central police team (under Common Police
Service arrangements) to promote the further development and co­
ordination of local efforts and to take a central view on
emerging national trends and issues of concern.


Police resources


The cost of the police presence regularly provided at football
matches - especially on Saturdays during the football season - is
substantial.     Central records of police expenditure do not
identify specific activities such as policing of football, but a
sample by ACPO on two Saturdays last November revealed an average
of 5,000 officers deployed on football duties, slightly more
outside grounds than inside.    The police consider this sample to
be broadly representative of the season as a whole.    The total
cost of this activity would depend on precise rates of pay and
periods of duty of each officer involved, but an indicative cost
might be in the range of £200,000 to £300,000 per 'football
Saturday'.


As a 'special service' within the meaning of Section 15 of the
Police Act 1964 the cost of police presence inside the ground, if
the chief officer agrees to provide it, is normally charged to
the club.     Since it is for the chief officer to determine what is
a satisfactory level of policing for a match, the chief officer
in effect also sets the cost charged to clubs for policing inside
the ground.


Expenditure on policing football matches not recovered from clubs
has to be born from public expenditure.     Moreover, football
duties often represent a substantial diversion of police effort
from other police work.


RESPONSIBILITY FOR CROWD CONTROL AT FOOTBALL MATCHES


Chapters 2, 13 and 14 of the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds
('the Guide') set out the respective roles of the management and
the police in controlling crowds in football grounds and other
sporting stadia.     The introduction to Chapter 14 of the Guide
advises that where there is a disorderly element among the crowd
intent on violence, additional safety measures are needed to
contain and minimise the potential disruption, to isolate
quickly, identify and remove the offenders and to prevent their
re-entry on future occasions.


Inside a football stadium primary responsibility for the safety
of the public and the control of crowds rests with the management
of the ground (paragraph 204 of the Guide).     Football is offered
as a commercial enterprise to the public, who pay for admission.
It is therefore a matter for those running the enterprise to
ensure it is conducted safely.     For this purpose the management
appoints stewards, for example to direct crowds entering or
leaving the stadium, to help achieve an even flow of people to
viewing areas and safe dispersal of spectators on the terraces or
viewing slopes (paragraph 195 of the Guide).


For management to discharge its responsibilities properly
paragraph 204 of the Guide points out that a special police
presence inside the ground may be necessary to deal with any
problem of disorder which may arise, as well as to provide
support and leadership in an emergency.     The number and
disposition of the police must be determined by the chief officer
of police who has sole responsibility for the direction of police
operations.     So, to interpret the Guide, the police deployed
inside stadia are not present to manage crowds unless the chief
officer of police judges that disorder, crime or other
emergencies might arise, in which case they may be able to
provide assistance beyond the capability of the club's management
and stewards.


Outside the ground, on public property, direction of crowds going
to or from a football match is a matter for the chief officer of
police.   Very often it is considered necessary to ensure strict
segregation of opposing supporters, eg by close escort of
visiting fans from railway stations to and from the football
ground.


Paragraph 205 of the Guide emphasises the need for effective co­
ordination between the club and the police (with specific
reference to potential crowd disorder).     This extends not just to
arrangements inside the ground but also those outside which are
relevant to the match; and to advance planning, and to debriefing
to evaluate existing arrangements and provide the flexibility to
deal with different circumstances.


The detail of such arrangements is however for individual chief
officers and clubs, who may discuss the adequacy of their
arrangements with the local authority who issue the safety
certificate.   In addition, ACPO issues general guidance to its
members on the policing of football matches and may comment
further in their evidence to the Inquiry.


Commentary


The dual responsibility of police and clubs in relation to crowd
control at football matches and other events is in the
Government's view inevitable: public order outside grounds must
be the responsibility of the police, whereas it is the
Government's view that it would not be right for the police to be
obliged to accept primary responsibility for the control of
crowds admitted by to commercial enterprise on private property.
This does however emphasise the need (i) for effective
coordination between all parts of the agencies involved in
controlling crowds at matches - particularly the club and the
police and (ii) for a fully effective presence by both the police
and club stewards.


CONTROL ON ADMISSION


An important ingredient in the safe conduct of football matches
is adequate control on the numbers of spectators admitted within
the authorised limit and, frequently, the segregation of opposing
supporters in different parts of the ground to prevent conflict.
Rigorous control by the organisers is therefore important
whenever there is a potential for trouble, often strengthened by
an 'all ticket' requirement (ie an announcement that spectators
will be admitted only with tickets bought in advance, none being
on sale on the day of the match).   Part IV, above, dealt with the
use of perimeter fences to assist in segregation (paragraphs 68).


Ticket allocation


The overall limit on ground capacity, and limits on individual
parts of the ground, are set by the licensing authority and
guidance on this is given in Chapter 16 of the Guide.    (Section
14 of the Public Order Act 1986 also gives the police the power
to limit numbers at any public assembly, but only if the senior
police officer reasonably believes for example that serious
public disorder may result.    We are not aware of this power
having been used in the context of football matches.)


Before tickets are offered for sale organisers normally allocate
a certain proportion between home and away supporters, and
possibly others.     This would, reasonably, have regard to expected
demand but also to arrangements for their arrival and separate
entry to the ground (paragraph 2 05 of the Guide).


While an allocation of tickets that is perceived as fair by all
groups is desirable, that may not be achievable, for example if
total demand for tickets significantly exceeds the overall
capacity of the ground.     In those circumstances it is therefore
important that supporters unable to obtain tickets accept they
will be unable to enter the ground; and suitable precautions may
be necessary to deal with those who nevertheless try to enter.


Unauthorised entry


Methods that may be employed to gain entry to football grounds
without authorisation include rushing or forcing turnstiles ox
other points on the perimeter of the ground;      bribing turnstile
operators;   and snatching tickets from others.     Entry to the
ground without payment to the operators may constitute an offence
of evasion of liability by deception (Section 2 of the Theft let
1978);   and snatching someone else's ticket may well amount to an
offence of theft (Section 1, Theft Act 1968).      The club and
police at a ground may need to be ready to deal with such action
appropriately.     (Depending on circumstances the police may have
the power under common law, for the preservation of public order
and safety, to control access eg in the vicinity of the ground,
turning away those without tickets to prevent them approaching
the turnstiles.    F2/LAB content?)


Entry to a ground without a valid ticke 1j/of particular concern
because that could lead to the ground being filled beyond its
authorised capacity.
Unauthorised ticket sales - C4


It is desirable for clubs to control the distribution of tickets
so that as far as is practical they do not fall into the hands of
known troublemakers or those known to have abused arrangements
for the distribution of tickets in the past.     For some games
tickets are only released for sale at the latest practical
moment, to minimise the opportunities for circulation to ticket
touts and forgers.


The Government is not in principle opposed to tickets being re­
sold at increased prices.     Such commercial activity is a response
to market forces: and would-be purchasers will be clear if they
are paying a premium over the face value of the ticket and are
free not to buy if they consider the price too high.     However the
activity of 'ticket touts' offering tickets for sale in the near
vicinity of grounds, especially at all-ticket matches, can
present problems as fans may be encouraged to travel there in the
hope of buying tickets.     If unsuccessful they may potentially be
tempted to try to enter the ground anyway or cause difficulties
outside.     If successful in obtaining a valid ticket they may
breach segregation arrangements and be admitted to an area
reserved for opposing spectators; and tickets may be acquired by
those the organisers would wish to exclude.     But it is not clear
to what extent ticketless fans are in practice drawn to matches
specifically by the prospect of obtaining a ticket from a tout,
as opposed to the hope that the club will sell tickets at the
gate or the intention from the outset of gaining unauthorised
entry.


There are a variety of powers which may be used against ticket
touts.     A club may eject a tout from their premises if they wish.
The police may ask someone who is unlawfully obstructing the
highway to move and, if necessary, may arrest him.     They may also
act to prevent a breach of the peace.     If they have reasonable
grounds to suspect that someone is carrying a stolen or
prohibited article (which would include forged tickets) they may
stop him and search him and they also have power to arrest him if
they reasonably suspect him of having committed theft or fraud or
any other offence for which the maximum period of imprisonment is
5 years or more.


There is a body of opinion which supports legislation to prohibit
ticket touting at grounds as a further deterrent against those
without tickets travelling to all ticket matches.   However, the
Government has not been convinced that further powers to deal
with ticket touts are necessary, or that a further specific
offence of ticket touting would be practical or enforceable, or
that it would succeed in reducing the number of fans arriving
without tickets at grounds.   It may well be that any further
measures should come from tighter controls by the organisers of
sporting events over the distribution of tickets, and the
imposition of sanctions against those found abusing the controls;
or by a more rigid policy on refusing to sell tickets at the gate
once a match has been declared all ticket.


Forged Tickets - C4


Forged tickets are a serious matter not only because of the
dishonesty, deception and fraud involved but also because they
could lead to serious overcrowding.   However practical
difficulties arise both in detecting forgeries and in identifying
the persons who print and distribute forged tickets.      It is
important that clubs try to counter forgery eg by safeguards in
the printing of tickets:   watermarks and even holograms have been
used.   All seating areas also assist in detecting forged tickets
since it is obvious when two people have tickets with the same
seat number.


Where a person makes or sells a forged ticket he may be guilty of
offences under Section 15 of the Theft Act 1968 and Sections 1 to
5 of the Forgery and Counterfeiting Act 1981 which carry maximum
penalties of up to ten years' imprisonment.


MATCHES OVERSEAS


There have been a number of incidents of hooliganism in recent
years involving English fans at football matches abroad: notably
the serious disorder by Liverpool fans at Heysel, Belgium in 1985
which led to 39 deaths; and in the Summer of 1988 over 300
English supporters were detained by West German police following
disturbances at the European Championships.     14 Liverpool
supporters were recently convicted of manslaughter in respect of
the Heysel disturbances, although some of these convictions axe
subject to appeal.


The Government has been keen to establish good liaison between
the UK and other countries regarding the movement of football
spectators and known hooligans, for example under the European
Community 1TREVI1 committee of law enforcement Ministers and
officials.   In addition the Government has proposed new powers
(below) to restrict convicted football hooligans from travelling
to certain matches abroad.


Restriction Orders


Part II of the Football Spectators Bill now before Parliament
would provide for the courts with a new power, on convicting
someone in England or Wales for a football related offence, to
impose a restriction order on him if the court is satisfied that
would help to prevent violence at or in connection with a
designated football match in other countries.     Provision is also
made for a restriction order to be made in respect of a
conviction outside England or Wales for an offence corresponding
to a football related offence.   Under the terms of the Bill a
restriction order if imposed would be for two years or, if the
accused was sentenced to immediate imprisonment, five years.


The effect of a restriction order would be that the person must
report to an agency (the reporting agency) on the occasion of a
designated match (outside England and Wales), thus preventing him
from attending.   Failure to report as directed would be a
criminal offence punishable by up to one month's imprisonment or
a level 3 fine (currently £400) or both.


The reporting agency is unspecified in the Bill and might for
example be the police, probation service or a private security
firm - or some combination of these.    The Bill provides for a
degree of selectivity so that, for example, full internationals
would probably lead to all persons subject to a restriction order
being required to report whereas when individual clubs were
playing abroad only some individuals might be required to do so.
The Bill also provides for application for exemption from a
requirement to report, where special circumstances exist, and for
termination of the restriction order.


The Government believes restriction orders will be effective in
significantly reducing hooliganism at football matches outside
England and Wales by persons from those two countries, and will
demonstrate to other countries (especially in Europe) our resolve
to tackle this problem.   The proposed powers have received
general support.   The conceptual alternative of withdrawing
someone's passport was considered both ineffective (since it is
relatively easy to obtain a temporary British Visitors Passport)
and too sweeping a restriction (since it would prohibit all
foreign travel, whether a foreign match was taking place or not).
