                                                   DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL HERITAGE
                                                   Hone Guards Road, London SW1P 3AL
                                                   Telephone: 071-270 5925
                                                   Facsimile: 071-270 6026

 From the Secretary ofStatefor National Heritage
THE RT. HON. DAVID MELLORQC MP
                                                                            fa


        C92/3151                                                            tli
                                                                            i\/ %cJIsak
        Tom Pendry Esq MP                                                   M/
        House of Commons
        London
                                                                            k
                                                                            I      fte<5o* SHHP
                                                                            JV llopS&A
        SW1A OAA
                                                            f   June 1992




                    L'^Wi
        ALL-SEATING POLICY AT FOOTBALL LEAGUE GROUNDS
        Thank you for your letter of 18 May enclosing a submission on
        All-Seated Stadia and the Taylor Report from the Parliamentary
        All-Party Football Committee. I am grateful for the considered
        way in which the Committee has put forward its case.
        Later today I will be announcing that I have been re-examining
        the Government's policy requiring all Football League grounds
        to go all-seater in accordance with the recommendations of the
        Taylor Report.
        We continue to support the principles of improved spectator
        safety and comfort which were set out by Lord Justice Taylor in
        his final report on the Hillsbrough Stadium disaster.     And I
        have decided that it would be wrong to reconsider either the
        principle or the timetable for all-seating at First Division
        grounds in the Football League (the new Premier League). It is
        essential that our top clubs meet the standards necessary to
        compete in Europe and make full use of the resources available
        to them to provide grounds of which we can all be proud of as
        we enter the 21st Century.    I am also fully committed to the
        principle of all-seating for the great majority of Second
        Division Clubs.                                                             . •



        The review will therefore concentrate on whether the retention
        of standing accommodation should be permitted at some grounds
        in Divisions Three and Four and if so whether this, should be in
        all cases (subject to the FLA determining that the terrading is
        safe), or on the basis of a fixed capacity threshold, as you
        suggest.                                                                          '
  Before coming to a decision I shall be taking representations
  from other interested bodies. I shall also of course consider
  the arguments put forward by the Committee.




. DAVID MELLOR
SECRETARY OF STATE
DEPARTMENT OF
NATIONAL HERITAGE
