hs.4.1/hfsg.dp


From:   D A Peters                        cc   Mr Innes} w/o
        G2 Division                            Mr Miles} enc
        x31 33

        1 April 1992


N Roberts
Assistant Private Secretary



LETTER DATED 12 MARCH FROM MR B DEVONSIDE, HILLSBOROUGH FAMILY
SUPPORT GROUP ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE TAYLOR REPORT

You requested advice on and a draft reply to, a letter written
on 12 March by Mr Devonside, Secretary of the Hillsborough Family
Support Group (Annex A ) . Copies of the earlier correspondence
about this matter are at Annex B.

2.   In the light of recent press reports Mr Devonside is
concerned that the Government may be contemplating a change in
its policy requiring all Football League clubs to eliminate
standing accommodation at their grounds in accordance with the
Taylor deadlines. He has written to the Home Office on several
occasions, and in May 1990 met Lord Ferrers to discuss matters
arising from the Taylor Report.

3.   This is a delicate matter. Both the Minister for Sport and
the Education Secretary are known to be privately sceptical of
the value of imposing the all-seater requirement on 3rd and 4th
Division clubs.   They would like an early review.    While Home
Office Ministers think there may be a case for allowing some 3rd
and 4th Division clubs to retain standing accommodation they
would prefer to wait until 1st and 2nd Division clubs have all­
seated grounds or are at least committed to converting their
existing rounds.    The Home Secretary wrote to Mr Clarke on
10 March setting out the reasons for maintaining the current
line, see Annex C.

         Devonside mentions an article in the Sunday Times
(1 March) in which the Minister for Sport was alleged to have
said that there may be a case for reviewing the all-seater
requirement for 3rd and 4th Division clubs.   Other papers also
carried similar reports. However, the Minister has denied making
any public statements or speaking to reporters about this.

5.   Mr Devonside also enquires whet'her the Football Licensing
Authority will be held up in their plans to issue licences for
football league grounds before the start of the next season. As
you may know, the Football Spectators Act 1989 is not well suited
to the revised purpose to which we wish to apply it, of requiring
Football League grounds to go all-seated.       This legislation
therefore requires amendment and it may be necessary to delay
introduction of the licensing procedures planned for this year.
However, a separate submission about this will follow in due
course. Since Mr Devonside's point was covered obliquely in the
final paragraph of your letter of 10 March and it is still the
wish of the FLA to begin licensing soon - albeit a wish which is
looking increasingly unlikely to be fulfilled - I do not think
you should elaborate further at this stage.

6.   A draft reply to Mr Devonside is enclosed at Annex D for
your use.




                                        D A PETERS

Encs



FEP/90 19/35/5
                                                                     M lXiH C A.




12th March 1992




Mr N Roberts                                       --------------------
Assistant Private Secretary-
Home Office
Queens Anne's Gate
London
SW1H 9AT

Dear Mr Roberts

LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR, FINAL REPORT ( RECOMMENDATIONS )

Thank you for letter of 10th March,          in    connection      with   my
^nquiry relating to the above report.

Accepting Taylors Report, my concern is with the campaign
against all seater stadia which is attracting publicity and
appears to be gaining some support, are we about to see a u-
turn by the Government in relation to seating?    Only recently
Mr Robert Atkins Minister for Sport MP was quoted in the Sunday
Times (Sport) page 14 1st March 1992,  "There will be no change
in our plans regarding first and second division teams.  We may
have a look at the lower divisions and could leave them out."

Are there any plans to change the ruling on all seater in
respect of third and fourth division clubs, and will the FLA
be held up in their plans to begin issuing licenses to football
league grounds later this year?

With comments from the Sports Minister and Mr Tom Pendry MP
regarding this matter, I would be interested to know what has
prompted them to consider this action, and to know your veiw of
the position.

I look   forward   to   your   reply   and   may     I     thank   you    in
anticipation.

Yours sincerely

                                                         C<~ Myf          .


B W Devonside
                                                          An   n e x   3




 4th February 1992




 Mr Robert Atkins MP                           ---------------------
 Minister For Sport
 House Of Commons
 Westminis ter
 London

 Dear Mr Atkins

 Lord Justice Taylor,   FinaL Report (Recommendations)

Jfoff nearly 3 years' since the Hillsborough Disaster, and the
^P^ublication of the Taylor Report, we are, as expected, hearing
  the same stale arguments from those with a vested interest,
  precisley as we did after Bradford and Popplewell.

  Mr Tom Pendry M P , Chairman of the all party committee on
  football has publicly endorsed those stale arguments by saying
  " We want more flexibility to help clubs which would have very
  great difficulty paying for all seater changes, many are
  already facing increases in their bills for policing at a time
  when arrests and convictions are falling."

  I recoqnise the cost involved in implementing Taylor's
  recommendations is huge, but as your aware the present
  government has redirected £100m to the Football Trust, surely
  the clubs have a duty to the public to do something for
  themselves for perhaps the first time in their history.

  I am concerned by those who don't support argument and debate
  for the implementation of Taylor's recommendations.

  In his report Taylor quotes Popplewell and he clearly thinks
  these worth repeating " almost all the matters into which I
  have been asked to inquire and almost all the solutions I have
  proposed, have been prevoiusly considered in detail by many
  disinguished Inquiries over a period of 60 years."

  I am concerned for the safety of individuals, amd our national
  sport, but in that order. Therefore I# would welcome yours views
  regarding the Taylor recommendations*and the Conservative
  Partys position now that argument for backtracking appears to
  be gaining momentum.

   Yours sincerely
>\l
                                      hcc
                                                     /
                                            Mr Petei}3            '•■r
%                                           Mr Smith
                                                                     H   om e   O   ffice
                                                                  QUEEN ARNE'S GATE
                                                                   LON DO N SW1H SAT




    T        -   A±.(_ •St/W o -5TYID (A                 \©   March 1992




        "b«xU“ fA-f
                                  *
        Thank you for your letter of 4 February to Mr Atkins
        expressing your concern...about the implementation of the
        recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor's Final Report on the
        Hillsborough Stadium disaster. As you know your letter has
        been passed to this Department in view of our responsibilities
        for matters arising from, the Taylor Report and for sports
        ground safety in general.    I must apologise for the delay in
        replying to your letter.*

        Lord Justice Taylor recognised, in his Final Report, that
        there is no single solution to all the problems of crowd
        safety and control that exist at football matches.  However,
        he was satisfied that seating does more to achieve these
        objectives than any other measure.  This is a view which the
        Government supported when the Report was first published and
        which it continues to support.

        As you also know Lord Justice Taylor recommended that clubs in
        Divisions One and Two of the Football League should admit
        spectators only to seated accommodation from August 1994,
        whilst those in Divisions Three and Four should do so from
        August 1999.  The Government continues to urge all Football
        League clubs to meet these deadlines, and intends that the
        same timing should apply to the Premier League.

        Under the Football Spectators Act 1989 the Football Licensing
        Authority (FLA) was established to implement certain key
        recommendations of the Taylor Report, among them the
        conversion of all Football League grounds to all seated.



                                                         /it is intended....

        Barry W Devonside Esq
It is intended that the FLA will begin issuing licences to
Football League grounds later this year. Once the licensing
procedure is in operation it will be against the law to
knowingly admit spectators to watch a designated football
match at an unlicensed ground.




                          N ROBERTS
                 Assistant Private Secretary
                                                                      Awnex C




                                      Q U E E N ANNE'S GA T E L O N D O N   SW1H 9 AT


                                                            1 0 March 1992

                                                                CC
                                                                         /2a sl
                                                                     mA /t&M
                                                                     rHA $<Jf(cf/




                                                                     rn             MB      \
                                                                     fit                 Sch^
r understand that, y o u held a meeting with Robert Atkins on
4 March to consider whet he r Premier: League clubs should continue
to have access to Reduction in Pools Betting Duty money. One of
my officials attended the meeting as an observer.

The meeting also discussed the application of the Taylor
recommendation on all-seated stadia to clubs in the Third and
Fourth divisions. As I think you know, we in the Home Office
consider that we should hold the. Government policy line that all
clubs should convert their grounds by the deadlines recommended
in the Taylor Report.  This will maintain pressure on clubs and
ensure that they all act to improve the safety of their grounds.
The recent disturbances at Birmingham show that the old problems
are still very much alive.

While there may be a case for revising the requirement for Third
and Fourth division clubs in the future we think it may be too
early to do so now.   I would much prefer to wait until all the
First and Second division clubs are converted or at least fully
committed before considering revision of. the requirement.   Any
slight opening of the door now would surely encourage the larger
clubs to try to take advantage.   We would wish to avoid that.

X am not convinced therefore that it w ou l d be wise for officials
of  our departments    to prepare   a    joint paper containing
recommendations.




The Rt Hon Kenneth Clarke, QC, MP
Department of Education and Science
                                                                     ANNEX D



DRAFT LETTER FOR SIGNATURE BY THE ASSISTANT PRIVATE SECRETARY TO
THE MINISTER


Barry W Devonside Esq

                                                         FEP/90 19/35/1

____________________                                        April 1992



Dear Mr Devonside,


Thank you    for   your    letter of    12 March       in reply   to mine   of
10 March about the implementation of the Taylor Report.


While it would be wrong           for me to attempt to anticipate           the
outcome of     the General Election,        I can say that        the present
Government's    policy      on    all-seated   football    grounds    remains
unchanged; namely that standing accommodation at Football League
1st Division grounds should be eliminated, by August 1994 in the
case of (Premier League) and 2nd Division clubs, and by August
1999 for those in the 3rd and 4th Divisions.


We have consulted the Minister for Sport's office and understand
that   the   report   in    the    Sunday Times   of    1 March   which     you
mentioned was not         based   on any press    interview given by        the
Minister.
