.R.
  NOTE OF A MEETING HELD ON 24 JULY 1990


  TAYLOR REPORT:    NEW OFFENCES


  Present:     Home Secretary
               Lord Ferrers
               Mr Patten
               Mrs Lee
               Mr Cogbill
               Mrs Evans
               Mr Rhodes
               Mr G Sutton
               Mr Moorey
               Mr Brandon-Bravo
               Mr Leigh
               Mr Storr


        The meeting had been arranged to consider the proposed new offences in
  the Taylor Report and other recommendations. It had before it Mr Goddard's
  submission of 11 July, Mr Patten's note of 17 July and Mr Storr's notes of 16
  and 19 July recording the Home Secretary's comments.

  TICKET TOUTING OFFENCE

 2.    There was general support for the proposed new offence, which would
 apply specifically to tickets for football matches.       The only potential
 difficulty was the possibility that the new offence would lead to calls for
 ticket touting generally to be outlawed. But a clear distinction could be
 made between football, where people travelling without tickets in order to buy
 them at the ground on the day contributed to disorder, and other sports where
 the objection to ticket touting was because of the high prices fans had to
 pay. It was noted that the organisers of some sporting events, for example
 the Ryder Cup, attached conditions to the sale of tickets which covenanted
 those to whom they were sold not to sell them on. It was possible that the
 civil law could be used to enforce this.

 MISSILE THROWING

 3.   There was general agreement that a specific offence of missile throwing
 was justified.

 CHANTING OBSCENE OR RACIALIST ABUSE

 4.    The proposed offence of chanting obscene or racialist abuse was slightly
 different to the other proposed offences in the ground because the chanting
 of abuse could not be said to contribute directly to violence and disorder at
 football matches.    Mr Patten's note of 17 July raised concerns about the
 implications of changing the law in this area for the general law on racial
 or religious incitement. While the proposed new offence was vulnerable to
 "nanny state" criticism, it was part of a package of measures inside the



                                       1.
ground and to dismiss this one part of the package would send the wrong
message to football supporters and the ethnic minority communities alike.

5.    The Home Secretary was initially dountful about the enforceability of
the proposed offence, but had discussed this point with Lord Justice Taylor,
who had convinced him that it was indeed enforceable. This view had been
strengthened by the Home Secretary's recent visit to the Metropolitan Police
Public Order Training Centre at Hbunslow, where he had seen a demonstration
of evidence-gathering techniques at football grounds.      The case for the
proposed new offence was therefore accepted.

RUNNING ONTO THE PITCH

6.    There was some concern that the proposed new offence would stop the less
harmful celebrations of victory at the end of a match as well as the
calculated pitch invasions at which it was aimed. But the police view was
that any invasions of the pitch had the potential to spur disorder. The case
for the offence was a strong one.

ATTENDANCE CENTRES

7.    The suggestion in the Taylor Report of removing the upper age limit of
21 for attendance centre orders was the most difficult of the proposed
package. Attendance centres not only restricted liberty but also provided
constructive activity for young people, including physical education, first
aid, life saving and sporting pursuits.        An infusion of older, more
troublesome offenders, might disrupt the present attendance centre regimes.

8.    Possible alternatives were considered.     Requiring those subject to
exclusion orders to report to a police station at the time of football matches
would carry considerable resource implications for the police, particularly
if they were required to chase up those who did not report. ACPO would object
because of the resource implications, and also on the basis that enforcing
orders in this way would widen the police role to include the enforcement of
punishment as well as the prevention and detection of crime. It was agreed
that officials would consider further how to make the enforcement of exclusion
orders more effective and would provide further advice for Ministers.

ELECTRONIC TAGGING

9.    while there was a good case for curfew orders, enforcement by electronic
tagging had its drawbacks. There would be considerable objections to the idea
of making a person subject to an exclusion order for two years or so wear an
electronic tag for that period of time. Requiring a person to attend a police
station simply for the purpose of having a tag put on his wrist before a
football match and taken off afterwards would carry resource implications.
For these reasons, it was agreed not to pursue the proposal further.

HANDLING

10.   The proposed offences were not suitable for inclusion in the forthcoming
Criminal Justice Bill but might well be candidates for the Criminal Law Bill
now planned for the following session.    If there were a demand for quicker
action, a Private Member's Bill was a possibility.        For the moment, no
announcement on the Government's decision need be made.
FOLLOW-UP ACTION

11.      Mr Rhodes - for further advice on exclusion orders, please.




Private Office                              P R C STORR
25 July 1990                             Private Secretary


c .c .   Ms Snow
         Ms Spencer
         Mr Yates
         Mr Hammond
         Mr Faulkner
         HMCIC
         Mr Angel
         Mr Boys Smith
         Mr Norris
         Mr Turney
         Miss P Edwards
         Mr Moorey
         Mr Cogbill
         Miss A Edwards
         Miss Goose
         Mr E Grant
         Mrs Lee
         Mr Nagler
         Mr Goddard
         Mr Kinney
         Mr j B Taylor
         Mr Crawley     (SHHD)
         Mr McClelland (NIO)
         Mr J Vaughaa— (DoE)
         Mr P Gregory (DE)
         Mr Lunn        (DTI)
