(
    HPITTREP

                                    From   A R Baden
                                           SARD C

                                    Date    4 February 1992

                                    Copy   Mr Horne
                                           Mr Vaughan
                                           Mr Goodwin

    PS/Mr Atkins

    FOOTBALL: PITT REPORT AND FOOTBALL LEAGUE REQUEST FOR MORE MONEY
    FROM GOVERNMENT

    1. You asked for a line to take in connection with the article
    in today's Daily Telegraph, which has been followed by a Press
    Association story, which puts forward the Football League case
    for an extension of the Pool Betting Duty concession for a
    further 5 years. A report produced by Dr Simon Pitt claims that a
    dozen clubs are facing extinction and more generally that many
    clubs are in no position to implement the Taylor report. Tom
    Pendry has also written to the Chancellor today demanding an
    early decision on whether pool betting duty money would be
    extended. He has referred to John Major's letter to him, when
    Chancellor, promising that an early decision would be made.

    2. There are some important factual omissions in the Pitt report
    on the basis of these press reports, most notably that while
    attendances declined in the first half of the 1980s they have
    risen every season since 1985-86 to £19.5m in 1990-91 and that
    police charges are partly paid for by the Football Trust. In the
    1990-91 season it paid £2.78m out of a total policing bill of
    £7.76m (ie 36%). However the main weaknesses of the Dr Pitt's
    case are that it ignores the commercial potential of football and
    evades the issue of redistribution of money within the game.

    3.   We have spoken to Treasury about the concession and in the
    lead up to the Budget the Minister would be advised not to say
    anything other than that this is a matter for Treasury
    colleagues. A decision is of course always possible even without
    evidence of the Premier League wealth as part of the more general
    tax strategy of the Budget.

    Line to take

    Financial position in general


    I am most concerned at recent reports of the financial situation
    facing some of the smaller professional clubs, a concern which I
    hope is shared by football as a whole. Football needs to seize to
    commercial opportunities before it on a unified basis and ensure

                                                                    1
I




    «
        that new found wealth does not all remain in the hands of a few
        very rich clubs at the top of the game. Is it right for example
        that the lion's share of TV income goes to those First Division
        clubs whose matches are televised? This is why I have been
        calling for details of how the new wealth claimed by the FA,
        including as a result of the proposed creation of a Premier
        League, is to be distributed. It is vital that some of this money
        goes to help the smaller clubs implement Taylor.


        RPBD Concession

        The extension of the present concession is a matter for Treasury
        Ministers to consider.




        A R BADEN
        Rm 3.63
        Ext 6371




                                                                        2
