       HOME OFFICE
       Queen Anne's Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                      Direct line 0 1 -2 7 3   2582
                                    Switchboard 0 1 -2 7 3 3 0 0 0



                                                                     Your reference


                                                                     Our reference

                                                               FEP/90 35/48/139
                                                                     Date

                                                                17 May 1990




Dear
Thank you for your recent letters to Mr Moynihan and the Prime
Minister which have been passed to this department in view of
our responsibilities for the Safety of Sports Grounds Act. I
apologise for the delay in replying to you.

Your view that all seated accommodation at football grounds
will not solve the problems of crowd safety and control has
been noted. However, it is a view which the government does
not share and which does not equate with the views expressed
by Lord Justice Taylor in his Final Report on the Hillsborough
Stadium disaster. He recognised that there was no single
solution to achieve total safety and cure all the problems of
crowd control. However, he was satisfied that seating does
more to achieve these objectives than any other single
measure. Furthermore this is in line with the policies of
both FIFA and UEFA.
                                                                      Yours sincerely




                                                                       MR S BILBE
                                                                       (Fire Emergency
                                                                       Planning Department)
             '•10 DOWNING STREET,
                   WHITEHALL



PRIVATE SECRETARY



We attach a letter which the Prime Minister fLstL
received.

' -efers to corre^poriSence sent to youfefr

Please arrange for your Department to deal with
it as they think fit.

Please arrange for your Department to send a M l
reply as soon as possible. If you are not responsible
for this matter, please transfer the-letter to the
appropriate Department and-lg f us know. Not
writer.


Departments, to whom copies have been sent
(  y We have not sent an acknowledgement.
(V ) We have sent a plain acknowledgement.
( ) We have sent an acknowledgement, saying
     that the letter is receiving attention.
( ) A copy of the acknowledgement which we
     have sent is attached.
                                  Correspondence Section
                                  Date: ■—     7
Bas 273554/8938224 20m 7/89 ATP
                                                                     » vvl M i
18 February 1990

                                                                            &   '   3
Dear Mrs Thatcher

I feel I must write to you concerning the f o o t ba l] ^^ itfC iU H V Ul LI i y ' p a s t .
year.  I have listened to so many authoritarians on this subject I feel it
is time the self appointed experts listened to 'a football supporter .

On behalf of many thousands of us who stand on the terraces, season after
season I very much resent 'the powers that be' telling me what is best for
meI That I will be comfier and safer sitting on a moulded plastic seat.    1
feel very passionately that the people who hold the entire future of our
beloved game in the palm of their hands, haven't a clue what it s all about.

I am along with my husband and two children a very dedicated Norwich City
football fan. We choose to stand on the terraces for several reasons,
atmosphere and prices to name but two. Above all my dedication to Norwich
City is my devotion to my children and the last thing in the world I would
do is put their lives at risk.

All seater stadiums are not the answer to the safety problems.   In a fire
how do I get my children out of a tangle of twisted plastic seats? Seats
are obstacles in an emergency. Hillsborough was a dreadful one off tragedy
caused by overcrowding and bad organization from much earlier in the day.
Some terraces certainly are far too large and badly designed, I feel they
should span across rather than   backin such depth in some places.I certainly
don't profess to know the answers but I doknow that all seater stadiums are
most definately not the answer to the football problems of today.

 Apart from all the finer details do the powers that be realise the average
 football supporter is working class? Norwich for one club tries so hard
 to encourage families.  An inevitable price rise in converting to all seats
 would lose so many members for most clubs. Not all are as lucky as we at
 Morwich. From the outset the police are friendly, the stewards are very
 organised, the turnstiles are open early and the club itself organizes
 pre-match children's football and family enclosure competitions.   It all
 makes for a better atmosphere.    Wehave no fences at Carrow Road from a
 capacity of over 23,000 no-one   hasstepped a foot on our pitch.  Surely
 these minor details tell you something.

 I know this letter is a drop in the ocean but at least I have said my piece
 and I know I have tried. I do hope you will think of the football supporters
 views on reflection.

 Yours sincerely
                                                   I




12 Tebruary 1990


Dear Sir

I feel I must write to you concerning the football revelations of the past
year. I have listened to so many authoritarians on this subject I feel it
is time the self appointed experts listened to 'a football supporter'.

On behalf of many thousands of us who stand on the terraces, season after
season please would you say a word to the powers that be on our behalf?

I am along with my husband and two children a very dedicated Norwich City
football fan. We choose to stand in the terraces for several reasons,
atmosphere and prices to name but two. Above all my dedication to Norwich
City is my devotion to my children and the last thing in the world I would
do is put their lives at risk.

All seater stadiums are not the answer to the safety problems.  In a fire
how do I get my children out of a tangle of twisted plastic seats? How do
we scramble to an exit should there be an emergency? I feel the problems
are man made from overcrowding bad organization and badly designed
stadiums.  Surely some terraces~axe far too large maybe terraces should
span across rather than back in such depth.  I certainly don't profess to
know the answers but I do know that all seater stadiums are most definately
not the answer to the football problems of today.

Apart from all the finer details do the powers that be realise the average
football supporter is working class? Norwich for one club tries so hard to
encourage families. An inevitable price rise in converting to all seats
would most definately lose members for the majority of clubs. Not all are
as lucky as we, at Norwich.

I know this letter will be a drop in the ocean but at least I have said my
piece and I know I have tried.  I do hope you will look into this subject
I'm sure NCFC would be only too willing to co-operate with you.

Yours sincerely
