                                         ^                    a * ;                   M          l W Hv               2 5 0CT 1990


                                                                                 (x) — -                      fK^WV'' ^ ^
                                                                                            6iy4 (A aAAJ                 <

                                                                                                                                i i/\Ao
                                                         $     !    £     $
                                                             °^M )ED


                                 T H E FO O TBALL LE A G U E L IM IT E D
   Lytham St. Annes, Lancashire, FY8 1JG. T e le ph one 0253 729421. Telex 67675. Fax 0253 724786.                    Secretary ). D. Dent




1/139                                                                                                 18th October,                 1990



Rt. Hon. Earl Ferrers,
Minister of State,
                                                                              19 OCT Z              ^                          L\   U f a
Hone Office,                                                          ^P'-rr . . . . .      '■
50, Queen Anne 1s Gate,
LONDON,
SWlH    9AT.



Dear Lord Ferrers,


        ONE GAME, ONE TEAM, ONE VOICE - MANAGING FOOTBALL'S FUTURE


      As you may be aware the Football League Management Committee
have for some considerable time been engaged in discussions with the
Football Association on the question of its representation on the
governing body. Although these discussions began as long ago as 1986,
it has become apparent to the League that a more radical approach was
needed if progress in this direction was to be achieved.

      In August, therefore, with the full authority of the Management
Committee, I wrote to the Chairman of 'the F.A. Council, Mr F.A.
Millichip,  setting out proposals for a Joint Board of Management
with the League.  We proposed that the Joint Board consist of five
representatives nominated by the F.A. and five members from the
League Management Committee, together with the respective Chief
Executives.  This recommendation was subsequently discussed at an
emergency meeting of the F.A. Executive Committee.   In order that the
reasons for our proposals could be more fully understood, however,
the Executive Committee invited the League to make a full and
detailed presentation to them at their following meeting which is
being held today.

      In order that you are fully appraised of our rationale for
requesting a Joint Boarcf, I felt that you should be sent the
presentation document prepared for today's meeting and a copy is duly
enclosed. Also enclosed is a synopsis of the main points contained in
the document.




                                                                                                                               Contd./2

                All correspondence to be addressed to The Secretary. Registered Office as above. Registered in England 80612
                                  2



      We very much see the concept of a Joint Board being the only
way forward if association football in this country is to realise its
ambitions to the full.  I should stress at this point that we include
football at all levels in that objective - from the grass roots of
the game right through to the International side.  We believe that
there will be an incremental benefit for the National game at every
level if we proceed along these lines, which in turn will provide the
added value and stimulus necessary to promote the game to greater
effect.  The Joint Board would also enable football to have a single
voice for the first time and provide direction and leadership which
has undoubtedly been missing in the past.

      As far as the professional game is concerned, League clubs face
the very daunting task of implementing Lord Justice Taylor's
recommendations in the years ahead and so it is absolutely essential
that we maximise the opportunities available to us.  Only a joint
initiative can do that.

      I would urge you, therefore, to give every support to these
proposals in order that football can stand united on this issue, thus
creating a structure which will provide the platform to take the game
forward into the 21st Century.




                          Yours sincerely,




                               W. Fox
                             President
ONE GAME, ONE TEAM, ONE VOICE - MANAGING FOOTBALL'S FUTURE


    Synopsis of The Football League's proposals to The
    Football Association for a Joint Board of Management
               to oversee the National Game



The Concept of a Joint Board

The Football League propose that a Joint Management Board be
formed between the F.A. and the League comprising twelve
members:

       five representatives from the F.A. Council
       five representatives from the League Management
       Committee
       both Chief Executives

Joint Board to operate at the policy making and strategic level
on issues which are of joint concern thereby creating one game,
one team, one voice to manage football's future.

Existing committees of both the F.A. and the League to continue
working as required by their respective parent bodies but in
accordance with the overall direction of the Joint Board.


The rationale for a Joint Board

Platform for strong, pro-active leadership

Galvanising effect producing unified policies

Incremental benefits for all levels of football

Better, more effective promotion of the National game

Realisation of English football's true potential

Preparing the game for the 21st Century


The specific responsibilities and objectives of a Joint Board:

To create a climate of understanding which addresses the     'club
versus country' confrontation:

       benefits for the National side
       benefits for the clubs

To identify the optimum package of domestic competitions and
provide a co-ordinated approach to the management of fixtures:

       maximise income
       minimise expenditure

                                                         C o n t d ./2
                             - 2 -


To cultivate a unified approach to discipline and establish
clear standards for the rest of football:

        appropriate sanctions
        effective deterrents
        consistency of application


To co-ordinate effective representations to associated bodies
and outside organisations:

        F.I.F.A. and U.E.F.A.
    -   P.F.A., Football Trust, etc.
        Government, E.E.C., etc.
        F.L.A.
        Wembley

To maintain progress made towards curbing hooliganism at
football matches:

        International level
        European club competitions
    -   domestic games (League and non-League)

To promote links between football and the community (in
conjunction with the P.F.A.):

        football development
        community development

To promote excellence within the game

        schoolboy football
        Lilleshall
    -   treatment of injuries
        refereeing

To ensure that spectator safety and the upgrading of grounds
remain top priorities:

        implementation of Taylor Report
        U.E.F.A./F.I.F.A. requirements
        realisation of opportunities

To launch a joint initiative for a World Cup bid:

        partnerships with local authorities
        Central Government backing
        new National Stadia

To develop strategic financial planning:

        corporate approach
        property
        new technology
                                                    C o n t d ./3
To develop strategic financial planning:

        corporate approach
        property
        new technology


To develop a corporate commercial/marketing operation for
football:

        improve commercial spend within football
        maximise buying power and strength
        demonstrate self help capabilities
        offer comprehensive package to potential sponsors
    -   combine PR and press relations to enhance overall image


Areas of common interest - sponsorship, television, videos,
licensing (product endorsement), Wembley, publishing,
franchising, agents.
