                                                                     (b
hs.10.17/hillsbl5.dm

MEETING WITH THE INQUIRY 17 OCTOBER:   OPENING REMARKS

BACKGROUND SPEAKING NOTES FOR YOU IN INTRODUCING HOME OFFICE ORAL
EVIDENCE

General

Introduction of colleagues forming the Home Office "team”


I am grateful for the opportunity of appearing to give oral
evidence. The Home Office will do what it can to co-operate.

2.   We shall be glad to respond to any particular points either
now or, if we are unable to do so immediately, come back to you.

Home Office Role

3.   Say, by way of background, that there are a number of
statutes within the area of responsibility of the Home Office
which have as one of their purposes measure^ to secure the
safety of the public in places of public resort.  (Eg Theatres
Act,   Cinemas Act,   provisions relating to Entertainments
licensing, the Fire Precautions Act.)

4.   Generally speaking the Government has not sought to
legislate unless either the need for legislation has been shown
because of a tragedy (there are several examples of what is
sometimes called "tombstone" legislation) - or because there is
statistical evidence of risk - (as in the case of fires in houses
in multiple occupation dealt with in the current Housing and
Local Government Bill).

5.    In almost every case the pattern of Home Office legislation
has been to provide the framework of a system (whether licensing
or a safety certificate procedure) which is enforceable by a local
authority.
6.   In most cases we have not sought either to control the terms
and conditions or to supervise the local authorities in the
exercise of their powers and responsibilities - largely on the
grounds that it was neither appropriate nor necessary to do so.

7.   The position is slightly different in the case of fire
safety   legislation  because   of   the  Secretary   of   Statei
responsibilities in law for the efficiency of the Fire Service -
but even there the Inspectorate's role relates to the fire
brigade - not to the fire authority.

8.   Home Office involvement in sports grounds safety arose in
view of the general responsibility of the Home Secretary for
public safety and specifically in response to the Wheatley
Report.  This Department has therefore taken on responsibility
to:

     (a) create the legislative framework in order to secure
     reasonable safety at sports grounds - ie the Safety of
     Sports Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act);

     (b) to produce guidance on the operation of the Act and
     safety criteria at sports grounds generally but with
     particular orientation towards football in view of the
     history of accidents within the professional game;

     (c) to act as the appellate authority, until 1.1.88, for
     disputes between local authority clubs and interested
     parties who wish to dispute terms and conditions within
     safety certificates.

The Legislation

9.   The 1975 Act followed very broadly the Wheatley Inquiry
recommendations following the Ibrox Park accident in 1971.
Enforcing authorities for the purposes of the Act were local
authorities - as recommended by that Inquiry.
10. Technical guidance was also produced by Lord Wheatley. That
guidance forms the basis of the present day Green Guide which has
been adapted and revised over the years in the light of practical
experience.

11.   The 1975 Act has of course itself been amended following the
Popplewell inquiry.

12. The original role of the Home Office as appellate authority
was intended to bring a central view on disputed issues. In fact
appeals under the 1975 Act were few and far between. Some half
a dozen in all were made and none of these were pursued to the
end. Until appeals were transferred to Magistrates' Courts as
from 1.1.88 the Home Office had not in fact issued any judgement
on an appeal matter.

13. The role as appellate authority in fact added to the
difficulty in providing any form of Home Office advice to either
clubs or local authorities in case such advice subsequently
formed part of a safety certificate which became the subject of
an appeal.


14. With the expansion of designation under the 1975 Act
following the Bradford fire and the Popplewell inquiry, appeals
were moved to Magistrates' Courts. This brought appeals under
the 1975 Act in line with those made under the Fire Precautions
Act 1971.

15. This change along with others was brought about by Part II
of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 (the
1987 Act) with effect from 1.1.88.

16. By this time the system of safety certification was well
established. The Popplewell inquiry concluded that it had proved
effective in securing improvements in safety, as being operating
satisfactorily at designated grounds.     The inquiry had been
generally impressed with how well the 1975 Act had operated.
Popplewell Inquiry


17. The final report of the Popplewell inquiry made various
recommendations on changes to legislation.
                                                i

18. These were the subject of             a Home    Office   consultative
document published in June 1986.

19. That document received a broadly favourable response from
those who replied.

20. The 1987 Act implemented the proposals outlined therein
bringing into effect the safety recommendations of the inquiry.

21. Part II of the 1987 Act, amending the 1975 Act, came into
effect from 1.1.88.

22. Part III of the 1987 Act, introducing                    a system of
certification for stands able to accommodate                 500 or more
          / U / t f U / qootL?
spectators/came into effect as from 1.1.89.


The Green Guide

23. Prior to its original publication in 1973 the guide had been
the subject of an extensive consultation.   It had been revised
previously in 1976 when it was retitled so as to apply to
football grounds.

24.   The   guide   continues   to   be   orientated   towards   football
grounds.   But as recognised by the Popplewell inquiry it has
application to all sports grounds.


25. The guide was revised in October 1986 in line with the
Popplewell inquiry recommendations. At that time we invited
local authority associations and sporting bodies to comment on
the new edition in what we saw as an on-going exercise of
updating and clarification.
26. We envisaged that-from time to time new material would be
received, evaluated and included in revised editions.

27. We were in fact considering suggestions received from the
ACC in the Autumn of 1988.


28. We were also working on expanding the guide to include
advice on first aid provision following representations from
St John's Ambulance. It is also clear to   us   thatsome further
changes are necessary   in the interests of      clarity and
presentation.

Future Developments

29. Obviously we await recommendations of the final report in
deciding the way forward.

30. Anticipating the inquiry's views on some form of national
oversight, the Football Spectators Bill now makes provision for
a newly created Football Licensing Authority to have safety
functions including oversight of the exercise of local authority
powers in relation to safety certificates.

31. The new authority will also have a role to play           in
introducing more seated accommodation at football grounds.

32. The nature of the legislation is such of course that the new
authority's scope is limited to those football grounds at which
matches designated under the provisions of the Bill are played.


33. It would not for example have any scope to oversee safety
certificates issued in respect of rugby grounds.
