       THE SCOTTISH OFFICE
       Education Department                                        43 Jeffrey Street
                                          (U b~/         „ I,      Edinburgh EH 1 1DN
                                                                   Edinburgh

                                     Af   h4
Roger Haugh Esq
G2 Division
                                     L    Ua .I b./i (jr ■ * / ■   Telephone 0 3 1-2 44
                                                                   Fax 0 3 1 -2 4 4 5387
                                                                                           4484

Home Office
Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON                                             Your ref:
SW1H 9AT
                                                   Our ref :

                                                  2# February 1991



TAYLOR REPORT: IMPLEMENTATION IN SCOTLAND

Further to our recent discussions, I attach a near-final version of the
circular which we are proposing to issue on the implementation in Scotland
of the Taylor Report. The draft has today been sent round the various
interested bodies who commented on the first draft of the circular and
they have been given until 8 March to make any comments on matters of
principle. I would be grateful for any comments which you have have for
your interests by that date.

In the past few months we have had a series of meetings with police and
football authorities, in particular, about the detailed proposals for
all-seated stadia.   The line taken in paragraphs 4-14 reflects those
discussions and you will wish to note that we have introduced refinements
on promotion and relegation issues and on the sale of tickets for certain
matches involving Rangers and Celtic.

Mr Forsyth, our Minister of State with responsibility for Sport in
Scotland, has seen and approved the terms of the attached draft. He
takes the view that this circular should be issued as soon as possible and
he feels, that we should treat as a separate exercise our joint
consideration of the Home Affairs Committee Report "Policing Football
Hooliganism". I will be in touch separately about our handling of that
Report but, in the meantime, I would welcome any comments which you
may have on the attached draft.




alan   mcpherson
Head of Sports Policy Branch




A2800718.021                                                           R e cycled
LIST O F RECIPIENTS

Scottish Football Association

Scottish Football League

Scottish Rugby Union

Convention of Scottish Local A uthorities

Association of Chief Police Officers (Scotland)
Association of Scottish Police S uperintend en ts

Scottish Ambulance Service
St Andrew's Ambulance Association
B ritish Red Cross (S cotttish Branch)
Scottish Branch of Chief and A ssistant Chief Fire Officers Association




A2800618.021
D RAFT


                                                                  SOE D Ref: JZD/12/34

SOED Circular Number

Regional, Islands and District Councils
The Cleric to the Joint Police Committee/Board
The Cleric to the Joint Fire Committee/Board
The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities
The Chief Constable
The FLremaster
The Scottish Football Association
The Scottish Football League
The Scottish Highland Football League
Football Clubs in the Scottish and Highland Football Leagues
The Scottish Rugby Union
Other Interested Parties.

L O R D JUSTICE T A Y L O R ’S    FINAL       REPORT        ON   THE      HILLSBOROUGH
STADIUM DISASTER

1.     This circular provides detailed guidance from the Secretary of State
on the implementation in Scotland of the recommendations in Lord Justice
Taylor's Final report on the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster.                     Departmental
letters of 30 January, 12 March and 12 April 1990 have provided interim
guidance on some of the recommendations.                   This circular confirms and
extends that guidance.


2.     Annex A contains, for information, a copy of the Government's initial
response to Lord Justice Taylor's final recommendations, as laid before
Parliament on 29 January 1990.       Guidance below expands on that initial
response following consultation with interested parties during 1990.                      For
convenience, this guidance follows the groupings set out in Part V of the
Final Report.


3.     It is necessary to stress the scope of the recommendations and the
flexibility which will required if they are to be implemented successfully.
Although    the   emphasis   on   football        safety   in    the    Final    Report    is
self-evident, Lord Justice Taylor also urged that his recommendations
should be considered relevant to other sports stadia.                  At paragraph 14 of
the Final Report, Lord Justice Taylor acknowledges that "crowd problems
are directly related to the nature of the event and the numbers attending
it".   The same sentiments are expressed in the general principles of the
1990 edition of the    Guide to Safety at Sports                 Grounds     (the "Green
Guide").    As suggested by Lord Justice Taylor and the Green Guide,
local authorities and other interested parties, such as the owners of



A2800642.021                              1   .
D RAFT


sp o rts g ro u n d s, should take p ro p e r account of individual circum stances
such as the siz e , n a tu re and configuration of g ro u n d s, the relevant
sp o rts event tak in g place and the likely size of crowds when considering
the application of Lord Justice T aylor's recommendations to p articu lar
sp o rts g ro und s. As is made clear in the Green Guide, the responsibility
for the safety of sp ectato rs lies at all times with the ground management.
Local authorities have the responsibility to e n su re th a t conditions set out
in safety certificates made u n d e r s ta tu to ry powers are complied w ith, b u t
it is for all sp o rts ground managements to adopt as ap p ro p riate the
guidance contained in the Green Guide and the safety recommendations
made b y Lord Justice Taylor.

ALL-SEATED A C C O M M O D A T I O N


4.   In April 1990, Mr Michael F o rsy th , Minister of State with
responsibility for sp o rt in Scotland, had meetings with the Scottish
Football Association, the Scottish Football League and the Scottish Rugby
Union on the implementation in Scotland of Lord Justice T aylor's
recommendations, p a rticu larly those relatin g to all-seated accommodation.
These meetings took place on the basis th at the S ecretary of State has no
s ta tu to ry powers to enforce any recommendation, eg on all-seated
accommodation work; and th at th ere was a general determ ination th at
Lord Justice T aylor's recommendations should be implemented as soon as
was       practically possible   in   the   in te re s ts of  public  safety.
P aragrap hs 6-13 below relate to a framework fo r implementation of
all-seated   accommodation     at      football   g ro u n d s.   P arag rap h 14   covers
all-seated accommodation a t M urrayfield.


DEFINITION O F ALL-SEATED A C C O M M O D A T I O N


5.       It is im portant to s tre s s th a t Lord Justice T aylor's recommendations
on all-seated accommodation do not re q u ire th a t all ex istin g sta n d in g areas
should be converted to seating .              They mean th at from specific dates
designated grounds should provide only seated accommodation for
s p e c ta to rs .




A2800642.021                                2.
D RAFT


TIMETABLE FOR FOOTBALL GROUNDS


6.   As detailed in the D epartm ent's le tte r of 12 April 1990, Mr F orsyth
has agreed th at:


      6.1 Premier Division grounds and the national football stadium
      should be all-seated by A ugust 1994, so fa r as is practicable;

      6.2 designated grounds in the F irst and Second Divisions should be
      all-seated by A ugust 1999, so fa r as is practicable;

      6.3 any club unable to comply with those timetables may in
      exceptional circum stances take longer to complete n ecessary works
      b u t of course those p a rts of the ground in use must satisfy the
      safety guidelines set out by the th en c u rre n t Green Guide.

ENFORCEMENT AND MONITORING


7.   In accepting the football a u th o ritie s’ willingness to comply voluntarily
with all-seated accommodation req u irem en ts, Mr F o rsy th emphasised that
the Government would consider seeking s ta tu to ry enforcement powers
should clu b s’ p ro g re ss on a volu ntary basis be inadequate. It was also
agreed th at the football auth orities would them selves monitor the p ro g re ss
of all-seated works and would re p o rt annually to the Departm ent on
p ro g re ss being achieved b y individual clubs. S u bsequently, the Scottish
Football Association and the Scottish Football League have jointly set up
the Scottish Stadia Committee to monitor p ro g re ss and to provide advice
on accommodation m atters as a p p ro p riate to individual clubs and to
o th e rs , such as local au th o rities' safety teams. The firs t annual p ro g re ss
re p o rt is req u ire d b y 31 May 1991 and should be a rigorous appraisal of
the plans and timetable fo r all-seated work of individual club s, sufficient
to enable the Departm ent to consider and advise Ministers on the p ro g re ss
being made tow ards relev an t ta rg e t d ates.        The S ecretary of State
accepts th a t the Scottish Stadia Committee's annual p ro g re ss will contain
information of a commercially sensitive n a tu re and th a t consequently its
circulation should be re s tric te d . Whilst the S ec re tary of State appreciates
th a t the Committee does not wish to send its re p o rt to o th e r p a rties in




A2800642.021                             3.
DRAFT


order to preserve its confidentiality, the Secretary of State expects that
individual clubs will keep their certifying authority and safety team fully
advised of their plans and progress (see paragraph 12 below).


G R O U N D S T O BE M A D E ALL-SEATED


8.         It is important to stress that only those football grounds which are
designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 as providing
accommodation for more than 10,000 spectators need to be converted to
all-seated accommodation.            Thirty-one clubs in Scotland have designated
grounds, namely:-


           Aberdeen                               i Hamilton Academical
           Airdrieonians                          P Heart of Midlothian
 -z, Albion Rovers                                    Hibernian
     X     Alloa                                  1 Kilmarnock
     'L Arbroath                                   !Meadowbank Thistle
         1 Ayr United                             ? Motherwell
      ? Celtic                                    I   Partick Thistle
      x Cowdenbeath                               •2 Queen of the South
         "2- Dumbarton                            7 Queen's Park
         1 Dundee                                 1 Raith Rovers
     P Dundee United                          f       Rangers
     ? Dunfermline Athletic                       f St Johnstone
      ■z East Fife                                f St Mirren
      ■2.East Stirlingshire                       T Stenhousemuir
      r Falkirk                                   Z Stirling Albion
         | Greenock Morton


P R O M O T I O N A N D RELEG AT IO N IMPLICATIONS


9.         As stated in paragraph 6 above, Premier League clubs should be
all-seated by            August   1994   so ^ & r      as is practicable.      However,     the
Secretary of            State recognises that it would be unreasonable to expect
clubs newly promoted after the date of this Circular to become all-seated
by August 1994 or, clubs promoted after August 1994 to become all-seated
immediately.            Clubs promoted to the Premier League            up to and including
the        end     of   the   1993-94    season will       therefore    have   a   period    of



A2800642.021                                      4.
D RAFT


5 y ears to become all-seated eg a club promoted at the end of the 1991-92
season should be all-seated by A ugust 1997. A club promoted to the
Premier League from season 1994-95 should be all seated b y no late r than
A ugust 1999. A club relegated to th e F irst Division would of course be
expected, if it were not already a ll-se ate d , to be all-seated b y A ugust
1999.


A N N U A L STANDING CAPACITY REDUCTIONS


10.     While standin g capacities should be reduced in line with individual
plans and timetables for completion of work to introduce all-seated
accommodation, the S ecretary of State accepts th a t, depending on how
individual clubs opt to proceed, annual reductions in stan ding capacity
may not always be practicable. For some clubs it may be ap p ro p riate to
phase work as financial resources dictate and th is may not be consistent
with annual fixed percentage reductions in stan d in g capacity. At the
same time, some clubs in the Second Division in p a rtic u la r may need to
c a rry out comparatively little work in o rd e r to become all-seated , as th eir
average crowds may alread y be less th an ex istin g seating capacities.
Those clubs will have to consider w hether th ey wish to u n d e rta k e work to
extend seating capacities or to opt fo r the p ro g ressiv e discontinuation of
the use of ex istin g te rra c in g a re a s. O verall, the S ecretary of State
considers th a t w henever it is practicable in the view of individiiaL_clufes,
annual standin g capacity reduction s of 20% O r 10%~as~ appropriate
(Recommendations 3 and 4) should be made, b u t it is left to individual
clubs to decide how b e st to achieve the ultimate objective, taking
guidance as app ro p riate from the Scottish Stadia Committee.


REDUNDANT TERRACING AREAS


11. As already sta te d , for some clubs in the Second Division in
p a rtic u la r, conversion to all-seated accommodation may involve closing
down perm anently access to sta n d in g areas on te rra c in g s . Where such
red u n d a n t te rra c in g forms an area to be used fo r em ergency pu rp oses as
agreed in term s of p a ra g ra p h 34 of the 1990 Green Guide, the terra cin g
area concerned must be maintained in sound condition and free from
obstruction to Green Guide sta n d a rd s . O therw ise, the S ecretary of State
considers th a t any te rra c in g area no longer used fo r viewing purposes



A 2 8 0 0 6 4 2 .021                    5.
D RAFT


and not included in Emergency Plans need not be maintained to Green
Guide sta n d a rd s.


CO -O PE RA TI ON B E T W E E N C L U B S A N D CERTIFICATION AUTHORITIES


12. Whilst it will be fo r the Scottish Stadia Committee to monitor
p ro g ress tow ards the construction of all-seated g ro u n d s, the S ecretary of
State wishes to encourage g re a te r co-operation between the individual
ground m anagers and th e ir certification au th o rities. The S ecretary of
State considers th a t all owners of designated grounds should seek the
advice of th e ir local safety teams in the p rep aratio n of construction and
timetable proposals for complying with all-seated recommendations. The
S ecretary of State also wishes to encourage individual clubs to keep th e ir
certification a u th o rity and safety team rep re se n tativ es fully informed of
th e ir all-seated accommodation proposals and of p ro g re ss generally on
safety m a tte rs. The S ecretary of State considers th a t this could be
achieved th ro u g h more reg u la r contact and he wishes to encourage
meetings betw een ground owners and safety teams on at least a q u a rte rly
basis to discuss safety issu es in general and on work in p ro g re ss tow ards
implementing Lord Justice T aylor's recommendations, including those on
all- seated accommodation.


REVISED G R O U N D C A P A C I T Y


13. The S ecretary of State recognises th at th e capacity of individual
grounds will be affected b y Lord Justice T aylor's recommendations,
particu larly those relatin g to maximum stan d in g capacities. In o rd er th a t
the practical effects of these recommendations can be a sse sse d , I would
be g ratefu l if Regional Councils with certification responsibilities u n d e r
the 1975 Act would submit to the Departm ent revised ground capacity
fig u res for all grounds (including M urrayfield) in th e ir areas designated
u n d e r the 1975 Act. Calculations should be based on guidance on the
assessm ent of safe ground capacity at C hapter 19 in th e 1990 Green
Guide. Figures should be subm itted by 31 May 1991 to Mr A McPherson,
Room 608,      Scottish   Office      Education   Departm ent,   43 Je ffrey   S tre e t,
E dinburgh, EH1 1DN.




A2800642.021                                6.
DRAFT


MU R R A Y F I E L D


14.     Lord Justice Taylor's Report was primarily about safety at football
matches but he recognised that the risks to spectators are similar at
other    sports        events.      Apart   from     the    31 football grounds    listed at
paragraph 8 above,               Murrayfield   is the       only other   sports   ground    in
Scotland     which is designated            under     the    1975 Act.    Accordingly,     the
Secretary of State takes the view that it should become all-seated as soon
as is practicable, recognising that, as an amateur sport, rugby union in
Scotland has limited financial resources and does not qualify for grant
assistance from the Football Trust.                  The Scottish Rugby Union agrees
that all-seated accommodation at Murrayfield is highly desirable on safety
grounds and the Union,                at a meeting in April 1990 with Mr Forsyth,
declared its intention to convert Murrayfield to an all-seated stadium by
2000.     Ministers have accepted the SRU's willingness to adhere to that
timetable and they are content for the SR U to phase conversion work as
financial resources permit.            It is for the SRU to determine whether annual
fixed percentage reductions in standing capacity are appropriate, but
until such times as conversion works are complete, the remaining standing
areas at Murrayfield must comply with the safety guidelines set by the
1990 Green Guide.


A D V I S O R Y DESIGN COUNCI L


15.     Recommendation 5 on the creation of an Advisory Design Council is
for the football authorities to consider,                    and   the   Secretary of State
welcomes the establishment of the Scottish Stadia Committee which inter
alia will liaise with the Football Stadia Advisory Design Council in England
and with other organisations, and will provide an advisory service to
Scottish clubs and certification authorities on stadia design matters.


N A T I O N A L I N S P E C T O R A T E A N D REVIEW B O D Y


16.     The statutory powers of the Football Licensing Authority, including
those relating to safety matters in Section 13 of the Football Spectators
Act 1989, do not extend to Scotland.                 The Secretary of State is satisfied
that the existing certification functions carried out by local authorities
under the Safety at Sports Grounds Act 1975 and the Fire Safety and
Safety at Places of Sport Act 1987 are satisfactory and he has at present


A 2800642.021                                   7.
D RAFT


no plans to extend to Scotland the safety powers of the Football Licensing
A utho rity , nor to create a new Scottish body to oversee the safety work
of local au thorities u n d e r e ith e r Act.


17. However, th e S ecretary of State is concerned th a t safety guidelines
should be applied uniformly thro u g h o u t Scottish sp o rts g ro u n d s, taking
into account the different c h aracteristics of individual gro und s.
Revisions in th e latest edition of the Green Guide a re intended to clarify
good safety p ractices. The S e c re tary of State expects ground managers
to take account of Green Guide advice. He also expects local authorities
to e n su re th a t th e re is, as fa r as possible, a common approach to safety
certification work.


M A X I M U M CAPACITIES F O R T E R R A C E S


18. T here are few if any pens within individual te rra c in g areas at
Scottish sp o rts groun ds: if any do e x ist, local autho rities should en su re
th a t safety certificates reflect Recommendation 7 on maximum num bers for
such pens and Recommendation 9 on closure of pens which are about to
reach capacity.      Likewise, clubs should have an ap p ro p riate means of
"counting in" sp ectato rs e n te rin g individual te rra c in g a re a s. The precise
method of "counting in" may v a ry depending on individual circum stances
and the S ecretary of State does not seek to p re sc rib e any single method.
Where electronic m etering equipment is used it is recommended th a t a
secondary system should be available to provide accu rate in g ress
monitoring in the event of failure of the equipm ent.                 The common
objective of all ground m anagers should be to regulate e n try to the
ground in such a m anner as to p re v e n t the maximum capacity of
individual areas being exceeded.        It is stro n g ly recommended th at all
ground managers should seek ap p ro p riate advice, including advice from
safety team s, before tak in g decisions on reg u latin g equipm ent.


A SS ES S M E N T O F SAFE G R O U N D C A P A C I T Y


19. In making th e ir calculations on maximum capacities as p a rt of an
assessm ent of safe ground capacity local autho rities should, without
exception, base calculations on th e guidance in C hapter 19 of the
1990 Green    Guide,    which      now   reflects    Lord Justice T aylor's
Recommendations 8 and 10.      Local autho rities should take p articu lar

A2800642.021                                 8.
D RAFT


account of all factors with a b e arin g on perm issible d ensity such as the
num ber and capacity of tu rn stile s, the adequacy of exit system s e tc. For
example, the maximum capacity set for a te rra c in g area should be based
on a calculation u sing at most a figure of 47 people p e r 10 sq m etres.
However, the re su lta n t total should be redu ced and the lower figure
taken if the num ber of tu rn stile s multiplied by the calculated flow rates
(maximum 660 p e r hour) or an o th er relevant factor su g g e sts a lower
terra ce capacity. Should a ground manager wish to increase the number
of tu rn stile s in such circum stances, the safety a u th o rity should be
consulted, in p a rticu la r on the adequacy and safety of access outside the
ground to additional tu rn stile s. If they have not already done so, all
local au th orities with certification responsibilities should as soon as
possible recalculate and apply in safety certificates revised ground
capacity fig u res u sin g 1990 Green Guide criteria .        As req u e ste d in
p a ra g ra p h 13 above, fig u res should be subm itted to the Department by
31 May 1991.


FILLING A N D M O NI TO RI NG T E R R A C E S


20. In term s of Recommendation 11, the S ecretary of State encourages
ground managers and local police forces to clarify in w riting, as
app rop riate in individual circum stances in both content and detail, th eir
resp ective responsibilities for crowd safety and control.     This w ritten
agreem ent should extend to cover responsibility for monitoring crowd
conditions in terms of Recommendation 12.

GANGWAYS


21. The 1990 Green Guide now reflects Recommendation 13 and the
S ecretary of State recommends th at safety certificates be revised as
app rop riate in terms of this Recommendation. Gangways should also be
num bered and clearly signposted.

FENCES A N D G A T E S


22. The     Green      Guide  has   been     amended   to   reflect
Recommendations 14-21.    On Recommendation 19,  the police should
determine w hether gates a re to be open or closed in individual
circum stances, tak ing into account the n a tu re of the fix tu re , the expected

A 2800642.021                            9.
DRAFT


te rra c in g den sity and the likely crowd behaviour.     But the gates of a
fenced area should remain unlocked when it is occupied by sp ectato rs.
On Recommendation 20, police operational o rd ers for specific matches
should, without exception, include assignm ent of responsibility to an
individual officer to au th orise access th ro u g h each gate to the pitch and
such o rd ers should also c ater for the possibility th a t those designated
officers may be unavailable in a p a rtic u la r emergency situation.

CRUSH BARRIERS


23. The Green Guide now reflects Recommendations 22 and 23.                  The
S ecretary of State u rg es th a t they be followed.

CERTIFICATES


24. As re g a rd s Recommendation 24, the original Section 2(2) of the
1975 Act has been revised by Section 19(2)(a) of the Fire Safety and
Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987. Guidance on the effects of this
change was given in SED C ircular No 1661^ of 25 November 1987. Copies
of th at C ircular are available from the Departm ent b u t, for ease of
refe ren c e , the relevant guidance on the contents of safety certificates is
as follows


     "Safety certificates should continue to specify maximum num bers of
     sp e cta to rs; include term s and conditions as to size and situation of
     e n tra n c e s/e x its to and from the ground and p a rts of it (including
     means of escape in case of fire or o th er emergency) plus means of
     access to any such en trances and ex its; terms and conditions should
     continue to req u ire those e n tra n c e s, exits and means of access to be
     p ro p erly maintained and kept free from o bstru ction; and terms and
     conditions should continue to deal with the num ber, s tre n g th and
     situation of any c ru s h b a r r ie r s ."


25. T hat November 1987 guidance remains valid.          In addition, safety
certificates should contain such additional conditions as the certifying




1Also num bered as SHHD Fire Services C ircular No 8/87;           SHHD Police
C ircular No 9/87; SHHD Police (cc) C ircular No 11/87.

A 2800642.021                         10.
D RAFT


au th o rity      considers     a re  rele v an t, taking   into      account     Lord
Justice T aylor's recommendations and the circum stances at individual
g ro u n d s. However, certify in g au th orities should not make reference in
safety certificates to Recommendations 1-4.              As p a ra g ra p h s 7 and 12
above make clear, the certify ing a u th o rity should be kept fully advised of
p ro g re s s , b u t the formal monitoring of work towards all-seated stadia will
be for the Scottish Stadia Committee and the S ecretary of State.

26. The Scottish Office Education D epartm ent, in conjunction with the
Home Office, is considering an O rd er u n d e r Section 15A of the 1975 Act
in relation to the content of safety certificates.

27. The sta n d a rd s set in safety certificates should follow the 1990 Green
Guide c rite ria . Any variations from the certificate conditions should be
made only b y means of formal revision.            Local certifying authorities
should review , as soon as possible, the terms of existing safety^
certificates in the light of Recommendations 25-30 and the 1990 Green
Guide.

28. As re g a rd s Recommendation 31, the S ecretary of State considers th at
adv isory groups have a valid role to play in general safety m atters and
he wishes to encourage the development of such links. Responsibility for
th e ir operation should r e s t with th e certify in g a u th o rity . The S ecretary
of State considers th at advisory groups should include a rep re se n tativ e of
the local Health Board. As mentioned at p a ra g ra p h 12, the S ecretary of
State also wishes to encourage g re a te r co-operation between safety teams
and ground m anagers.


DUTIES OF EACH FOOTBALL CLUB

29. T u rn stile flow ra te measurements as req u ire d b y Recommendations 32
and 33 should be c arried out by clubs in consultation with safety teams
as   p a rt    of    ground    inspections   made       in   accordance   with
Recommendation 27.       As sta te d at p a ra g ra p h 19 above, revised capacity
fig u res should reflect the num bers admissible th ro u g h tu rn stile s in
one hour and o th er factors and the safety certificate limit should be
adjusted accordingly.




A 2800642.021                             11.
D RAFT


30.     As    re g a rd s        Recommendation 34,         which   should       be   read    with
Recommendation 9,      ground m anagers should maintain an effective
"counting in" p ro ced u re, capable of e n su rin g th at tu rn stile s can be closed
as recommended.       This should, as stated a t p a ra g ra p h 18, include a
secondary system where electronic m etering is used as a prim ary system .
T urn stile arrangem ents should be covered in safety certificates.

31. The S ecretary of State re g a rd s the provision of closed circuit
television (see Recommendation 35) as app ro p riate for all Premier League
grounds and the national football stadium , b u t considers th at for oth er
designated grounds the provision of CCTV is a m atter fo r the certifying
au th o rity to determine on the basis of police advice and any oth er
relevant fac to rs. CCTV may not be n ecessary where average crowds are
f a r below ground capacity and th e re is a record of good behaviour by
s p e c ta to rs .


32. On Recommendations 36-38, the S ecretary of State recommends that
the Scottish football auth orities should establish a minimum sta n d a rd of
match ticket in resp ec t of clarity of information, specification of viewing
a rea a n d , in p a rtic u la r, m easures to counter fo rg e ry . The S ecretary of
State    is   aware         of    efforts   by   football    autho rities   to   improve     ticket
sta n d ard s and he u rg e s continuation of those e ffo rts.

33. It is for individual ground m anagers to determine the ex ten t of
records which can be kep t of ticket sales in term s of Recommendation 39
and the S ecretary of State accepts th at a complete record of all ticket
sales may not be possible. However, he considers th at ground m anagers
should notify the police as to how many tickets have been p rin te d for
each section of the ground and how many have been d istrib u te d for sale,
p e r section of the g rou nd.  At a reasonable time before the match,
ground m anagers should also re p o rt how many tickets have been sold.


34. On Recommendation 40, the S ecretary of State considers th at football
ground managers should accept police advice on w hether individual
matches should be all-ticket and th a t the police should take public o rd er
and safety risk s into account when form ulating such advice.            The
S ecretary of State recognises Lord Ju stice T aylor's concern th at tickets
should not be sold on the day of football matches and he considers th at
this should apply to :-


A 2800642.021                                     12.
DRAFT


      a. all-ticket matches betw een Scottish Football League clubs in eith er
      League or Cup competitions;


      b . all-ticket home matches played in European club competitions;

      c. all-ticket    friendly   club    matches      played   at   Scottish     League
      g ro u n d s .

35. The S ecretary of State feels th a t it may be a p p ro p riate for tickets to
be sold on match days for all-tick et international matches where few
"away" su p p o rte rs a re likely to a tte n d . In su ch circum stances, the
football authorities should take police advice on the location of ticket sales
p o in ts. T heir location will inevitably depend on local circum stances, bu t
the general ru le should be th a t sales should be remote from match venues
if the football au thorities or the police th ink it likely th at demand for
tickets will exceed supply (leading to risk s of excessive congestion
around the ground) or if arrangem ents cannot be made fo r tickets to be
sold off at the match venue no late r th an 3 hours before the match is due
to s ta r t. However, if the police consider th at sale to the public on the
match day would constitute a significant public o rd e r or safety r is k , the
football autho rities should accept police advice against such a sale.

36. Recognising th at R angers and Celtic have p articu la rly large numbers
of su p p o rte rs resid en t throu gho ut Scotland, the S ecretary of State
recommends th at a Scottish League club hosting a match where R angers or
Celtic is the visiting club should consider selling locally a proportion of
"away end" match tic k e ts.      This view reflects police advice th at Old Firm
su p p o rte rs resid en t outside Glasgow can occasionally breach segregation
requirem ents b y th e ir p u rch ase locally of "home" end tick ets.

37. It is fo r ground managers to make decisions on pre-m atch
entertainm ent (Recommendation 41) b u t Lord Ju stice Taylor saw such
entertainm ent as having a valuable role in red u cin g the risk of congestion
outside g ro u n d s.


38.   Clubs      should     review       stew arding      policy     in    line     with
Recommendation 42 and Annex E to the 1990 Green Guide.




A 2800642.021                             13.
D RAFT


39. As with Recommendation 35 on CCTV, it may not always be
n ecessary fo r designated gro und s to have a police control room in terms
of Recommendation 43. Facilities in accordance with Recommendation 43
should be provided a t all Prem ier League grounds and at the national
football stadium , b u t it is fo r the certify in g authorities to determine on
the basis of police advice w hether such facilities a re n ecessary a t other
designated g ro u n d s. The costs of providing basic police accommodation
and equipment to the satisfaction of the police should be met by the
ground m anager.  Where    electronic means a re used to relay tu rn stile
inflow information, this should be relayed automatically to the           police
control accommodation at the ground m anager's expense.


POLICE PLANNING

40. The S ecretary of State wishes police forces in Scotland to implement
Recommendations 44-52 as soon as is practicable.

41. As fa r as police charges a re concerned, all Scottish police forces
levy charges for the policing of football matches in accordance with
detailed guidance issued by The Scottish Office     Home     and Health
Department in 1980. The basic principle of this guidance is th at charges
should be based on the full economic costs of providing police serv ices,
on the grounds th at it       would not be rig h t for those costs to be
subsidised by community charge p a y e rs or tax p a y e rs. Whilst clubs are
expected to pay fo r the actual num bers of police officers deployed within
g ro u n d s, they do not pay fo r officers deployed on the approaches to
grounds in o rd er to control traffic and crow ds, even if it becomes
n ecessary fo r these officers to be redeployed       inside g ro u n d s. The
o v er-rid in g concern of the police a t any football match is the safety of
sp ectators and the prevention of crowd d iso rd e r.     The level of policing
req u ire d to achieve this is a m atter for Chief C onstables, taking account
of various factors relevant to individual m atches.            While the basic
principle un d erly in g the ex isting guidelines on police charges continues to
be satisfactory in the view of the S ecretary of S tate, in the light of Lord
Justice T aylor's recommendations The Scottish Office Home and Health
Department proposes to review the consistency of p ractice between police
forces in Scotland.         T h ere after the Home and Health Departm ent will
consider w hether any amendments a re re q u ire d .



A2800642.021                          14.
DRAFT


COMMUNICATIONS


42. Recommendations 54-58 on communications contain useful advice and
should be implemented as a p p ro p ria te , recognising th at d ifferen t system s
may be req u ire d depending on local circum stances. Public ad d re ss
system s should be sufficient to be h e a rd b y those e n te rin g and outside
the ground as well as those inside the g ro u n d .


C O O R D I N A T I O N O F E M E R G E N C Y SERVICES


43. The auth orities responsible for th e em ergency services should e n su re
th a t Recommendations 59-63 have been fully implemented.

FIRST AID, M E D I C A L FACILITIES A N D A M B U L A N C E S


44.   Recommendations        64-69    should      be     implemented,   with   p a rticu la r
reference to Annex B of the Green Guide.             To reflect different
responsibilities in Scotland, reference in th a t Annex to ”local Health
A u th o rity ’s Chief Ambulance O fficer” should be in te rp re te d as ’’local
Health Board” in re sp e c t of f irs t aid and medical requirem ents for the
g ro u n d , and ’’local Chief Ambulance O fficer, Scottish Ambulance Service” ,
in re sp e c t of ambulance requirem ents. Clubs should also take advice as
relevant from the V oluntary Aid societies.

45. Whilst stew ards may be trained in f ir s t aid a t the discretion of
grou nd ow ners, u n d e r no circum stances should th e y be expected to c a rr y
out f ir s t aid as p a rt of th e ir stew arding d u tie s, as this could re s u lt in
stew arding positions being tem porarily unm anned. Similarly, f ir s t aiders
should not u n d e rta k e a n y o th er duties which could conflict with th e ir
f ir s t aid fu n c tio n s. Ground owners will be aware of th e valuable
contribution made b y the V oluntary Aid Societies (B ritish Red Cross
Society and St Andrews Ambulance A ssociation), both in p rov iding fir s t
aid train in g and in p roviding uniform ed, train ed and p ro p e rly equipped
f ir s t a id e rs. The deployment and control of th ese f ir s t aid ers will be
u n d e rta k en b y th e senior VAS officer, who should work in concert with
th e senior Scottish Ambulance Service Officer p re se n t and with th e
medical p rac titio n er.




A 2800642.021                               15.
DRAFT


46. Recommendations 67-69 should be implemented.         The S ecretary of
State considers th a t th e general guidance in Annex B of th e Green Guide
on ambulance service provision should be adjusted as follows:-



Expected A ttendance                       Ambulance Provision

a.       5000 - 25000                      1 Accident and Emergency Ambulance
                                            (with its crew of 2)
                                           1 D istrict Ambulance Officer

b.       25000 - 45000                     2 Accident and Emergency
                                            Ambulances (with crews)
                                           2 D istrict Ambulance Officers
                                           1 Control A ssistant with a Mobile
                                            Ambulance Control Unit
                                           1 Major Incident Equipment
                                            Vehicle

c.       45000 +                           As in b above plus 1 additional
                                            Accident and Emergency Ambulance

Should ground owners wish to make u se of p riv a te o r voluntary ambulance
services to meet all o r some of these levels of provision, su ch services
should be approved b y th e local Chief Ambulance Officer.


OFFENC ES A N D PENALTIES


47. On Recommendations 70 and 71 th e Home S ecretary has announced
his intention to introdu ce legislation fo r England an d Wales. New offences
(of throw ing a missile, ch anting obscene o r racialist abuse an d going onto
a football p itch without reasonable excuse) being proposed b y the Home
S e c re tary a re alread y provided fo r in Scotland b y the common law o r b y
s ta tu te . T here a re a t p re s e n t no plans to in trod uce parallel offences in
Scotland. Ticket to u tin g a fte r a police w arning is an offence u n d e r th e
Civic Government Scotland Act 1982 an d th e S ecretary of State is
c u rre n tly considering th e adequacy of th a t provision.




A 2 8 0 0 6 4 2 .021                     16.
DRAFT


48. The    S ecretary   of   State   is    still   considering   Recommendations 72
and 73.


CONCLUSION


49. The S ecretary of State wishes to see p ro g re ss made on the
implementation of Lord Justice T aylor's recommendations so th a t the safety
and comfort of those a tte n d in g sp o rtin g ev en ts can be improved.
Extensive co-operation will be req u ire d between ground owners and the
various agencies with a concern fo r safety m atters and the S ecretary of
State wishes all p arties to act as app ro p riate on th e Taylor Report and
the advice set out in this C ircular, in o rd e r to make rapid p ro g re ss with
action initiated on earlier guidance


50. Any enquiries about the contents of this C ircular should be directed
to   Mr A McPherson,    The   Scottish   Office   Education   Departm ent,
Division 8/2 Room 608, 43 Je ffrey S tre e t, E dinburgh EH1 1DN (Tel
031-244-4484, Fax 031-244-5387).




Miss M MacLean




A2800642.021                              17.
                                                          ANNEX A




INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM INQUIRY


Initial response by the Government to the recommendations in the
final  report of Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry into the
Hillsborough stadium diaster.


In his statement on 29 January, the Home Secretary indicated that
he would place in the Library a schedule setting out the
Government's initial response to the recommendations of Lord
Justice Taylor's final report.   The schedule is annexed.




29 January 1990
Initial response by the Government to recommendations contained
in the Taylor report. (As presented to Parliam ent on 29 January 1990.)


ALL SEATED ACCOMMODATION (Recommendation 1-4)

1.   General recommendation in respect of all sports grounds
     designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.

2.   To apply to all UEFA "high risk" matches from Autumn 1993.

3.   To apply by 20% stages between now and Autumn 1994 to
          Football league, Divisions 1 and 2
          Scottish football league, Premier Division
          National stadia.

4.   To apply by 10% stages between now and Autumn 19 9 9 to all
     other matches played at designated grounds.

The Government accepts this recommendation in principle and
expects to apply it in the case of UEFA high risk matches, the
4 Divisions of the football league, and the national stadia as
recommended.


The application of the recommendation to Scotland and to other
sports cannot be achieved under the Football Spectators Act 1989
but the Government will in any case wish to discuss it with the
sporting authorities concerned. Designated sports grounds under
the 1975 Act include cricket, rugby union and ru g b y league
grounds which are not all enclosed grounds and which it may not
be practicable to deal with in this way.



ADVISORY DESIGN COUNCIL (Recommendation 5)

The Government supports Lord Justice Taylor's recommendation
that the football    league and Football Association should
establish an Advisory Design Council on stadium design.




NATIONAL INSPECTORATE AND REVIEW BODY (Recommendation 6)

     (a)   The Football Licensing Authority should be created to
           review the discharge of functions by local authorities.

     (b)   The powers of the Authority should be extended to other
           sports and other sports venues.

The   Government   supports  the   recommendation   that   safety
certification of designated grounds should be centrally reviewed
and proposes to bring into force relevant provisions of Part I
of the Football Spectators Act to create and empower the Football
Licensing Authority to carry out these responsibilities in
England and Wales in relation to grounds used by football league
clubs and the international football grounds. Consideration will
be given to introduction of legislation extending the role of the
new authority to Scotland and in relation to other sports grounds
and sporting venues after consultation with the representative
sporting organisations, the local authority associations and
other interested bodies.    Consideration will also be given to
extending the Authority's responsibilities in the meantime on a
voluntary basis.

MAXIMUM CAPACITIES FOR TERRACES (Recommendations 7-10)

7.    Safety certificates to specify maximum number of spectators
      in pens or areas (interim recommendation 1).

8.    Calculations of crowd density:      revised figures    (interin(0
      recommendation 2, revised).

9.    Arrangements to prevent   further   access   to pens   (interim
      recommendation 3).

10.   Turnstile flow rates.

The Government supports these recommendations. Local authorities
with responsibilities under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
(the 1975 Act) have already been urged to review and amend safety
certificates   to reflect   reductions   in terrace capacities
recommended in the Interim Report.      The adjusted figures in
recommendations 8 and 10 will be drawn to local authorities'
attention.   The next edition of the 'Green Guide' will reflect
the new figures.

FILLING AND MONITORING OF TERRACES (Recommendations 11-12)

11.   Statements of intent (interim recommendation 4, revised.

12.   Stewarding or policing of pens (interim recommendation 5).

The Government have already urged police and clubs to enter into
non-contractual statements of intent with the aim of ensuring
that no doubt exists as to the respective responsibilities of
each; and to provide monitoring of terraces accordingly.      The
relaxation in recommendation 12(b) will be drawn to the attention
of local authorities and clubs.

GANGWAYS (Recommendation 13)

Local authorities will be urged to include in safety certificates
terms and conditions to give effect to this recommendation.

FENCES AND GATES (Recommendations 14-21)

14.   Removal of spikes.

15.   Reduction in height.

16.   Training of stewards (interim recommendation 6).
17.   Emergency gates in perimeter fences.

18.   Marking of emergency gates     (interim recommendation 7).

19.   Gates normally to be kept open          during matches    (interim
      recommendation 8, revised).

20.   Manning    of    emergency       gates      (replaces     interim
      recommendation 9).

21.   Cutting equipment (interim recommendation 10).

The Government supports the recommendations on perimeter fencing.
Local authorities will be urged to amend safety certificates to
include requirements so as to implement recommendations 14, 15,
17   and  to  note   recommendation   19 which   varies   interim
recommendation 8.   The revised recommendations on closure and
manning of gates in perimeter fences at football grounds will be
drawn to the attention of local authorities, clubs and police.

CRUSH BARRIERS (Recommendations 22, 23)

22.   Inspection (interim recommendation 11).

23.   Review of layout (interim recommendation 12).

These are repeated from the Interim Report.         They have already
been commended to local authorities.

SAFETY CERTIFICATES (Recommendations 24-31)

24.   Mandatory conditions in safety certificates.

25.   Variation from terms of safety certificates.

26.   Terms of safety certificates.

27.   Review of safety certificates (interim recommendation 13).

28.Issue of certificates       to   grounds    without   them   (interim
recommendation 14).

29.   Annual   review  of   certificates;  annual          renewal    of
      certificates (interim recommendation 15).

30.   Review of arrangements    for issuing     certificates    (interim
      recommendation 16).

31.   Local authority advisory groups (interim recommendation 17,
      revised).

The Government agrees with the aims of these recommendations.
An order under S.15A of the 1975 Act will be made to implement
recommendation 24. Consideration will also be given to including
within the scope of such an Order provisions which will require
terms and conditions addressing other aspects of safety to be
included in safety certificates.
Local authorities will be urged to ensure the terms/conditions
in safety certificates are clear and unequivocal: they will be
reminded of the need to have an effective review system, the
desirability  of a properly constituted team      approach to
certification and the desirability of consulting club and
supporters association representatives.

Annual review of safety certificates already exists in effect
because annual inspections of designated grounds in connection
with safety certificates is already required by law.       The
Government will consider whether any change in the law should
be made to make annual renewal of certificates compulsory.

DUTIES OF FOOTBALL CLUBS (Recommendations 32-43)

32.   Measurement of turnstile flow (interim recommendation 18).

33.   Correlation  of turnstile     flow    and    capacity    (interim
      recommendation 19).

34.   Closure of turnstiles (interim recommendation 20).

35.   Closed circuit   television   (interim       recommendation   21/
      extended).

36.   Signposting (interim recommendation 22, extended).

37.   Information on tickets   (interim recommendation 23).

38.   Co-ordination with the police (interim recommendation 24).

39.   Computer records of ticket sales.

40.   Restriction of all ticket matches to capacity attendances.

41.   Pre match entertainment (interim recommendation 25).

42.   Recruitment of stewards.

43.   Police control rooms.

These recommendations are aimed primarily at football clubs and
are supported by the Government.       Where appropriate, local
authorities will be asked to amend safety certificates to enforce
these recommendations.

POLICE PLANNING (Recommendations 44-53)

44.   Nomination  of a Chief      Officer    for     liaison   (interim
      recommendation 26).

45.   Pre match briefing (interim recommendation 27).

46.   Operational orders (interim recommendation 28).

47.   Police action on ticketless fans.
48.   Review of arrest procedures.

49.   Postponement of kick-offs (interim     recommendation 29).

50.   Early kick-offs and Sunday fixtures.

51.   Control room facilities.

52.   Training of senior officers.

53.   Charges for police services.

These recommendations, some of which are repeated from the
Interim Report are directed primarily to Chief Police Officers
and police authorities. The Government supports the proposal for
senior   officer   training  and   the   objective    to  improve
effectiveness of policing at football matches.     The Government
agrees that the cost of policing inside grounds should be met in
full by clubs and will consider providing guidance to police
authorities after consultation with relevant representative
associations, to ensure consistency of practice.

COMMUNICATIONS   (Recommendations 54-58)

54.   Radio communications (interim recommendation 31, amended).

55.   Provision of a command channel.

56.   Land lines (interim recommendation 32).

57.   Public address   (interim recommendation 33).

58.   Illuminated advertising (interim recommendation 34:     advice
       on hand signals withdrawn).

These are largely repeated from the Interim Report which the
Government has already urged clubs, local authorities and police
to implement.  Chief Officers will also be encouraged to use an
additional, discrete channel of communications for police match
commanders.

CO-ORDINATION OF EMERGENCY SERVICES (Recommendations 59-63)

59.   Co-ordination (interim recommendation 35).

60.   Pre match briefing (interim recommendation 36).

61.   Communication with emergency services.

62.   Arrival of emergency vehicles (interim recommendation 37).

63.   Briefing of police officers (interim recommendation 38).

These recommendations are intended to ensure full co-ordination
and co-operation of the emergency services and are substantially
those covered in the Interim Report which the Government has
already endorsed.  The Government will urge all those concerned
to comply with the further recoijunendation        devised     to ensure
immediate summons of emergency services.

FIRST AID/ MEDICAL FACILITIES AND AMBULANCES
(Recommendations   64-69)

64.   First aiders (interim recommendation 39).

65.   First aid rooms (interim recommendation 40).

66.   Medical practitioners (interim recommendation 41, revised).

67.   Ambulances   (interim recommendation 42/ revised).

68.   Ambulances, larger matches (interim recommendation 43).

69.   Major incident vehicles.

The   Government will draw attention to variations from  the
relevant Interim Report recommendations and will discuss the
provision of major incident vehicles with the authorities
concerned.

OFFENCES AND PENALTIES    (Recommendations 70-73)

70.   Selling tickets.

71.   Other specific offences.

72.   Attendance centres.

73.   Electronic tagging.

The Government will      look carefully   and   quickly   at   all   these
suggestions.

GREEN GUIDE (Recommendations 74-76)

74.   Revision of the Green Guide.

75.   Crush barrier tests.

76.   Inspections for corrosion.

The Government accepts these recommendations and will act on them
with urgency.
