h s .8.1/cctv.peb


From:     P E Bolton                     cc   Ms Dent
          G2 Division                         Mr Gorman
          X3322                               Mr Spencer
                                              Mr Moriarty
          1 August 1990                       Mr Turney
                                              Mr Wasserman
                                              HMCIFS
                                              Mr Moorey
                                              Mr Cane, F7
                                              Mr Goddard, F8 , " f e
                                              Dr Young} PSKS"
                                              Mr Ford } Sandridge
                                              Mr Cole, F3
                                              Mr Haugh
                                              Mr Taylor


Miss Nicholson
Private Office



SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS: CCTV AND FOLLOW-UP ACTION - INFORMATION
TO LOCAL AUTHORITIES

Introduction

This submission seeks the authority of Ministers to issue a
further circular (copy of draft attached) to local authorities
on matters arising from some of the recommendations in the Final
Report of the Hillsborough Inquiry and also to provide copies of
guidance on Close Circuit Television (CCTV) at sports grounds.

Content

The circular is primarily to provide local authorities with
copies of technical guidance on procurement, standards and
maintenance of CCTV for public safety purposes at sports grounds.
It also brings local authorities up to date on (i) action urged
on football clubs to make plans to convert their grounds to
all-seated accommodation, (ii) the setting up of the Football
Licensing Authority (FLA) and (iii) the revision of the "Green
Guide” . The circular also serves as a timely reminder before the
start of the 1990/91 season for the need for continuing
vigilance.

Discussion

The guidance on CCTV was drawn up by Home Office Police
Scientific Development Branch in conjunction with the Association
of Chief Police Officers (ACPO) for England and Wales.     It has
been distributed by ACPO to police forces and the Football Trust
is circulating it to football league clubs.     The guidance has
application to other sports grounds and it is highly desirable
that local authorities with safety certification responsibilities
should also have the benefit of it.

Informal contacts with local authorities suggest that they are
keen to be kept informed of developments on all seated
accommodation and the formation of the FLA.      We consider it
desirable to do so and to include such information within the
circular which also provides an opportunity to thank authorities
for their response to the Final Report and remind them of the
need for continuing vigilance.

Resource implications

There are no resource implications for local authorities arising
from the contents of the circular.

Recommendation

Ministers are asked     to   agree   to   the   issue   of   the   attached

•
circular which

      a)   covers technical guidance on CCTV

      b)   informs local authorities of the continuing action on
           all seated accommodation, FLA and revision of the Green
           Guide

      c)   reminds of the need for continuing vigilance and
           expresses appreciation for local authorities response
           to the Final Report.




                                                P E BOLTON



FEP/90 35/48/89



Enc
                                      DRAFT


To:

                                                           FEP/90 35/48/89
The Chief Executive

County Councils
Metropolitan District Councils
London Borough Councils
Common Council of the City of London
Fire and Civil Defence Authorities


Dear Sir/Madam


HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR             /1990



SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS: FOLLOW-UP ACTION



Introduction



1.     The   purpose    of    this   circular        is    first,   to    thank      local

authorities with safety certification responsibilities for their

co-operation      in    responding       to    the        recommendations       of    the

Hillsborough Inquiry; and secondly, to inform them of action on

some of the longer term recommendations of the Inquiry.                        With the

approach     of   the   new    football       season       local    authorities       are

reminded of the need for continuing vigilance to ensure safety

standards imposed as a result of the Final Report are maintained.



CCTV



2.     The Home Office Police Scientific Development Branch has,

in conjunction with the Association of Chief Police Officers,

recently     prepared    guidance     on      the    procurement         of   CCTV    for
spectator safety purposes.             That guidance has been distributed

to police forces in England and Wales and is also available to

football league clubs from the Football Trust.                    A copy of the

guidance which may be of benefit to both ground operators and

local      authorities    when     considering      whether    CCTV    should     be

installed at sports grounds,            including grounds used for sports

other than football,         is enclosed.



All seated accommodation



3.      The Minister of State recently wrote to the Secretary of

the Football League reminding them that it was for football clubs

to reduce standing accommodation.              A copy of that letter, which

has been circulated to football league clubs by the League,                       is

enclosed at Annex A together with a copy of a Home Office News

Release.     Local authorities are reminded that safety certificates

should     not   be   used   to    bring   about     reductions       in    standing

accommodation solely to comply with recommendations 2 to 4 of the

Inquiry's final report.           Local authorities should of course react

to   any    proposals    made     by   clubs   to   ensure    that    any   changes

continue to provide reasonable standards of safety.



Football Licensing Authority



4.    The Home Secretary announced on 12 July the appointment of

Mr Nonaan Jacobs as Chairman of the Football Licensing Authority

(FLA).      A copy of the News Release is enclosed for information

at Annex B to this circular.            The names of other members of the
FLA,    its   location      and   other   arrangements     will   be   made    known

shortly.



Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds             (the Green Guide)



5.      The Home Office has undertaken a review of the Green Guide

with the assistance of an informal expert working group.                  A draft

revised Guide has been prepared and is being issued to the local

authority associations and others for consultation.                    The revised

Guide should be available in the early autumn.                Local authorities

are reminded that in the meantime the present Guide may continue

to     be   used,   together      with    relevant   recommendations       of    the

Hillsborough        Final   Report which,      it    is   anticipated,    will    be

incorporated into the new edition.



Resource Implications



6.      There   are    no    resource     implications      arising     from    this

circular.



Other



7.      Any enquiries about the contents of this circular should

be addressed to Mr A Brown or Ms M Sharp (071-273-2765) .                     Copies

of this circular also go to the organisations named below.

                                                      Yours faithfully



                                                      P E BOLTON
                                                      (Fire and Emergency
                                                      Planning Department)
Association of County Councils

Association of Metropolitan Authorities

London Boroughs Association

Association of London Authorities

Association of District Councils

Sports Councils for England and Wales     with

Rugby Football Union                      enclosures

Welsh Rugby Football Union

Rugby Football League

Cricket Council

Racecourse Association

National Greyhound Racing Club




Association of Chief Police Officers

Football Association

Football Association of Wales             without

Football League                           enclosures

Football Trust 1990
