                                                              fU .
FROM : Baden, A                                 s-3 2 !1?
TO:    ^cewart Miss A J   /PS                                DATE:   19-06-92
                                                             TIME:   21:15
CC:    Ellingford T

SUBJECT:   All seating at football grounds
PRIORITY:
ATTACHMENTS:



You recently asked me how the respective English and Scottish positions on
all-seating had been resolved. Holgate phoned Lang's office to say that
Mellor was not prepared to delay announcement until the Scottish
date of end August at the earliest. The Scottish Office had a copy of our
submission setting out the terms of the review and it is up to us to keep
them informed and vica versa. I will make sure that David Webb knows this.
Tony
FROM   '    EC.   SPORTS   BR.   ED   4   JEFFREY   STREET
                                                             6 .2 2 . 19?     031 244 5501
 ■'    .V                  v./




                   THE SCOTTISH OFFICE                                                                         J
                    Education Department                                          New St. Andrew's House
                                                                                  Edinburgh EH I 3SY




                                                                                  Telephone 0 3 1 -2 4 4 R1
                                                                                  Fax 0 3 1-2 4 4 4785 D IZb

           Regional Islands and District Councils
           Clerk to the Joint Police Committee/Board
           Association of the, Joint Fire Committee/Board
           Convention of Scottish Local Authorities
           Association of Chief Police Officers (Scotland)
           Association of Scottish Police Superintendents          18 June 1992
           The Scottish Football Association
           The Scottish Football League
           The Highland Football League
           The Scottish Rugby Union
           Scottish and Highland League Football Clubs
           Other Interested Parties


            Dear Sir/Madam
           REVIEW OF ALL-SEATED REQUIREMENTS FOR FOOTBALL GROUNDS
           You will be aware that the Secretary of State for Scotland recently
           announced to Parliament that a review of the all-seated requirement
           arising from the Taylor Report is to be undertaken in respect of
           designated grounds within the First and Second Divisions of the Scottish
           Football League. A copy of the text of the Secretary of State’s
           announcement is enclosed for ease of reference.
           The Secretary of State remains committed to the principle of all seated
           grounds for all clubs in the Scottish Premier League and for the two
           national Btadia at Hampden and Murrayfield. The decision to undertake a
           review is in response to representations which have been made,
           particularly but not exclusively in England, for the possible retention of
           standing accommodation in certain circumstances. The Secretary of State
           will therefore consider whether there could be arrangements under which
           standing accommodation should be continued especially in relation to
           certain designated grounds where average attendances fall well below the
           ground capacity.
           The Secretary of State is concerned however to canvass views from all
           those with an interest in the proposals. Recipients of this letter are
           therefore asked to consider the possible consequences of retaining
           standing accommodation for First and Second division clubs in Scotland.
           Such consideration should include the position of clubs gaining promotion
           to the Premier League and what transitional arrangements might be
           appropriate in those circumstances. Views are also Bought on the
           arrangements that might be made in respect of any club opting to retain
           standing accommodation which has a home tie with a major club in a cup
           competition.




           CMS001J8.082
FROM   0 E [i   SPORTS   BR.   ED   4   JEFFREY   STREET
                                                           0 6 . 2 2 . 19?   031 £44 5501




       Your comments are invited also on the proposal that, if standing
       accommodation Is to be retained, a lower standing density maximum should
       be applied to the remaining terracing from the maximum density at
       present laid down in the Green Guide.
       Finally, you may wish to offer views on the proposition that it would be
       appropriate to consider as part of the review the crowd capacity of
       grounds at which designation under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act
       1975 is triggered. As you will know, the present threshold is a 10,000
       capacity.
       The outcome of the review will have a direct effect on the future plans of
       many football clubs in Scotland as they strive to meet the requirements
       and timetable of the implementation of Taylor as previously prescribed.
       For this reason it is important that the review by the Secretary of State
       should be carried out as speedily as possible. It would therefore be
       helpful if your views on the issues raised in this letter could be
       submitted by Friday 31 July to Mr Alan McPherson, Scottish Office
       Education Department, Room 608, 43 Jeffrey Street, Edinburgh EH1 1DW.
       Yours sincerely




       GERALD McHUGH
       Head of Teachers, Community Education and Sport Division




        CMS00118.062
