                   THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION A N D SCIENCE
                                                                   RAPS/4273/1106
                    ELIZABETH HOUSE YORK ROAD LO N D O N SEI 7PH
                               TELEPHONE 071-934 9000

                                 ROBERT ATKINS      mp
                                  Minister fo r Sport

D Bradshaw Esq
Commercial Manager
Wigan Rugby League Club
Central Park
Wigan
WN1 1XF




Your letter of 18 November to the Prime Minister about funding for
safety improvements to sports grounds has been passed to the Minister .
for Sport who has asked me to reply.

It may be helpful if I first explain the position on the funds
available to the Football Trust. In his Budget statement of March 1990
the then Chancellor of the Exchequer announced a cut in the rate of
Pool Betting Duty from 42%% to 40%. This reduction is conditional upon
the amount saved, around £20m per year, being passed onto the Football
Trust and used for the purpose of capital works at Football League and
Scottish League grounds and the national stadia aimed at meeting the
requirements of the Taylor report particularly the installation of all
seating. There is no such requirement for other sports grounds and in
making this concession the Government has acknowledged the special
position of football.

The money that the Football Trust receives from the Pools Promoters
Association from the proceeds of their.Spotting-the-Ball Competition
is a donation made entirely on the initiative of the Association and
upon which the Government has no locus.

You may be aware of the recent establishment of the Foundation for
Sport and the Arts. The Foundation is funded by the Pools Promoters
Association at around £60m per year of which £20m has become available
as the result of a further cut in the rate of Pool Betting Duty from
40% to 37%%. Professional football is specifically excluded from
applying for grant to the Foundation because of the benefit it already
receives through the Football Trust.       If you wish to make an
application for grant to the Foundation this should be addressed to
the Secretary, Mr Grattan Endicott, PO Box 666, Liverpool L69 7JN.

So far as a National Lottery is concerned the Government has received
a considerable number of representations on this matter over the last
few months and there are clearly arguments on both sides. However,

                                                                                1/

                                                                             m
there are no plans to introduce a National Lottery at the present
time, though the Home Office, who have responsibility for the matter,
keep it under constant review.

A copy of this letter goes to the Home Office so that they are aware
of the points raised in favour of a national lottery.




MELA WATTS
Private Secretary
