From : Miss V Pugh
       F8 Division
       Ext. 2698
       3 July 1991


Mr Bilbe
G2 Division
HILLSBOROUGH INQUEST

You asked for a contribution to Mr Popper's letter of 1 May.
I am sorry that you have not had an earlier response. Your
note was unfortunately mislaid and has only just surfaced.
You may wish to use some of the following:

     In Schedule B of your letter you raise the issue of the
     role of the police at football matches and whether they
     should be carrying tasks that are more appropriate to
     stewards.

    As you suggest the role of the police is to’ preserve the
    peace, up-hold the law and prevent the commission of
    criminal offences. Football has unfortunately become the
    focus for a minority of hooligans who see the game as an
    opportunity to confront rival groups of fans. As long as
    this potential for violence and disorder continues, the
    police will have a role to play in preventing serious
    public disorder at matches.

    Where the police have become engaged in duties more
    fitted to stewards it is because the level and standard
    of stewarding at Football Clubs is inadequate. Justice
    Popplewell and Lord Justice Taylor both criticised the
    standard of stewarding, commenting that stewards are
    often insufficiently young, fit, trained and rewarded.

    The responsibility for the safety of spectators lies at
    all times with the ground management. This includes the
    responsibility for providing effective stewarding.
   The Government considers that better stewarding is the
   key to reducing the current dependence on the police. As
   well as being more appropriate to have club employees
   rather than policeman conducting stewarding tasks, such a
   change would help to reduce the considerable burden on
   police resources. The Government is therefore
   encouraging Football Clubs to recruit fit young stewards
   and to train them effectively.

   One of the areas which is being explored is the
   possibility of a national standard for approved training
   courses. The Home Secretary has asked officials at the
   Home Office to meet with the Football League, the
   Football trust and the Association of Chief Police
   Officers to see how best this might be taken forward.

    It is too early to predict the extent to which the
    improvement in stewarding will enable the police presence
    inside football grounds to be reduced, but we hope it
    will have a significant impact. The commitment of the
    clubs themselves will be crucial to the success of the
    initiative. We hope that they will become more
    enthusiastic than they have been hitherto about providing
    effective stewarding.

Please let me know if you require any additional information.




                         V PUGH
