  SOUTH CAMBRIDGESHIRE                                          South Cambridgeshire Hall
|^ 1 T R IC T COUNCIL                                           9-11 Hills Road
                                                                Cambridge
 PLANNING                                                       CB2 1PB
 DEPARTMENT




 This matter is being dealt with by:   Michael Monk             Telephone: Cambridge (0223) 351795

 Our Ref:     B/3/9     MGM/LH                                  Fax: Cambridge (0223) 60416

 Your Ref:                                                      DX 5848 Cambridge


        Mr Robert Adkins MP                                      15 January 1992
        Minister for Sport
        Department of Education and Science
        Sanctuary Buildings
        Great Smith Street                                    A-Z6
        LONDON SW1P 3BT

         Dear Mr Adkins
         Relocation of Cambridge United Football Club
         British Rail Land at Chesterton Sidings
         I am writing to you upon the instruction of my Council who wish to express
         concern over the implications of British Rail's ownership of Chesterton
         Railway Sidings off the main Cambridge/Ely railway just north of Cambridge.
         This site, which I understand will ultimately be released by British Rail,
         is considered by both my Council and Cambridge City Council as the most
         appropriate site for the relocation of the Football Stadium for Cambridge
         United Football Club. The Club needs to relocate in order to provide an
         all-seater stadium to comply with the requirements of the Taylor Report
         which have to be implemented by 1994.
         The British Rail Property Board has emphasised that the land "remains in
         use as an operational engineering department and that there is no certainty
         that it can be released from this use, at least within the timetable
         envisaged for the relocation of the Football Club."
         The Chesterton Sidings site has come forward as a result of joint working
         between Cambridge City and South Cambridgeshire on the "Cambridge Northern
         Fringe", a study which is now adopted by South Cambridgeshire as
         Supplementary Planning Guidance. The issue has been heightened by a
         proposal from the Football Club to consider a site in the Cambridge Green
         Belt. I enclose a copy of the Committee Agenda Item, which was considered
         by my Planning^Committee on 11 December 1991; the recommendation that the
         Club be a dvised^hat the Committee could not support the proposal in the
         green Belt was accepted unanimously.
         The matter has now been considered by a meeting of the Full Council which
         took place on 9 January 1992. I have been instructed to write to yourself,
         the Secretaries of State for the Environment an Transport and the Chairman
         of British Rail to investigate the matter, and in particular the conflict
         between the Government's requirement for an all-seater stadium and its
         advice that such a development should not take place in the Green Belt.
         The Council, as well as seeking the early release of the British Rail land
         wish you to consider the following points:
                                     - 2 -




(i)   Any stadium with a capacity of under 15,000 and where there is no
      record of any significant problem of crowd control or injury should
      be exempt from the need to provide an all-seater stadium. Cambridge
      United's ground, which I believe holds approximately 9,700 people
      would fall well below this figure.
(ii) Cambridge United faces exceptional difficulties. The Club is located
     in an environmentally sensitive and relatively small University City
     surrounded by a Green Belt. There are therefore few opportunities to
     site substantial developments such as this. There are therefore good
     reasons to make an exception to the timescale in this case to allow
     the planning system to achieve the best solution for both the Club,
     its supporters and the wider public.
I hope that this information and these suggestions are helpful to you in
your consideration of the matter.




D B HUSSELL
Planning Director

Enel.
                                                              Agenda Item No. 1


CAMBRIDGE UNITED FOOTBALL CLUB RELOCATION
PROPOSALS FOR A NEW STADIUM AT TEVERSHAM

                                                               FOR DECISION


1.       PURPOSE
1.1      To consider this Council's    view on the enquiry, from the Agent for
          Cambridge United Football Club, seeking to develop a new stadium and
          other leisure/sport facilities at a site near Teversham.


2.       THE PROPOSAL
2.1      The proposal is in the form of a letter requesting the District
          Council's consideration.   The letter, from David T Ward Associates
          as agents for the Football Club, is attached as Appendix 1 , and
          includes a location map.     There is, as yet, no formal planning
          application and I have been given no indication that one is being
          prepared at least until this Council's views have been given.
2.2      The need for a ne w stadium   is driven by the need for an all seater
          stadium to comply with the recommendations of the Taylor Report.

2.3      The enquiry seeks two alt ernative developments:
           (i)     Replacement of the Abbey Stadium on 15 acres with an all
                    seater 15,000 capacity, together with as-sociated facilities,
                    or
           (ii)    Multi-pu rpose sp orts/leisure complex, on 50-75 acres to
                    include a range of other facilities as well as the Football
                    Stadium;    the letter gives a long list of possibilities,
                    including squash courts, sports hall, ten-pin bowling, ice-
                    skating, roller skating, swimming pool and Park and Ride.

 2.4      The Football Club's Agent claims that the Club has investigated all
           alternatives but that none has proved satisfactory.


 3.       THE PLANNING POLICY FRAMEWORK
 3.1      The proposed site lies within the Cambridge    Green B e l t , to the south
           of the A1303, Cambridge Newmarket Road,      just to the west of the
           A1303/A45 Quy Interchange.    It is close    to the previous Park and
           Ride scheme's site for a large car park at   the junction of the A1303
           and Airport Way.

                                        - 1 -
       The site lies mid-w ay between Teversham and Stow-cum-Quy. The Quy
       Water runs to the east of the site. The Area of Best Landscape is
       defined in the South Cambridgeshir e Local Plan and whilst it
       excludes the site and the Quy Interchange, it does so designate land
       to the north-west, north and east. The site is on a major approach
       to Cambridge and is highly visible from that approach road and the
       A45 w hich is on embankment as it crosses the Quy Water.


4.     ASSESSMENT AND CONCLUSIONS
4.1    Governm ent guidance on appropriate development is given in Planning
       Policy Guidance Note No. 2 on Green Belts. This notes that "Green
       Belts also have a positive role in providing access to open
       countryside for the urban population. Such access may be for active
       outdoor sports or for passive recreation (Paragraph 5). As well as
       stating the general presumption against inappropriate development,
        it states clearly that, except in very special circumstances,
       approval should not be given for new buildings or change of use
       apart f r o m the "agriculture and forestry, outd oor #sport, cemeteries,
        institutions standing      in extensive grounds,        or other uses
        appropriate to a rural areas" (Paragraph 13).
4 2     Guidance is also given   in the Cambridge Green Belt Local Plan. This
        plan is at an advanced   stage, and G overnment Inspector's at Section
        78 Appeals have given    considerable weight to its policies an the
        boundaries set by it.     Policy GB4/1 states:
        "DEVELOPMENT FOR SPORT AND RECREATION WHICH REQUIRES SUBSTANTIAL
        BUILDINGS AND CAR PARKS, OR WHICH FREQUENTLY ATTRACT LARGE NUMBERS
        OF PEOPLE WILL NOT NORMALLY BE PERMITTED IN THE GREEN BELT."

        Further, Policy GB4/2 states:
        "PERMISSION WILL NOT NORMALLY BE GIVEN FOR RECREATIONAL BUILDINGS
        WHICH RE NOT DIRECTLY RELATED TO A RECRE ATIONAL USE APPROPRIATE TO
        THE GREEN BELT".
 4.2    I would also draw the Committees attention to the contents of the
        recent Planning Policy Guidance Note No. 17 (PPG) "Sport and
        Recreation". Paragraph 50 of the PPG states:
         "Because of the size of the structures involved, major football
         stadia cannpt be regarded as appropriate development within an
         approved Green Belt..      As PPG2 makes clear, very specia
         circumstances would be needed to justify setting aside the general
         presumption against inappropriate development in the Green Belts.
         It would be most unusual for a stadium proposal to meet those very
         special circumstances unless all other practicable options for
         location had been exhausted and other considerations had been fully


                                     - 2 -
              addressed.       A site for development as large as a major football
              stadium should normally be identified in a local plan. It could be
              considered alonqside any proposal for the adjustment of Green Belt
              boundaries.       Such boundaries should be altered only in exceptional
              circumstances after consideration of development opportunities
              w thin urban areas. The procedures for m aking and reviewing local
              plans p r o v i d e opportunities for full public consultation o»
              proposals to alter boundaries.
4    l        The PPG makes it clear that only exceptional circumstances will
               ov e rride Green Belt policy. I consider that such circumstances do
               n o f exist when a site at Chesterton        Sidings is identified
               appropriate for such a facility in the C a m b r i d g e Northern Fringe
               Study.
4 4           It is my considered view that neither of t.he P ^ P 0/.^1S t        -J®
               Stadium above nor the Sports/Leisure complex) fulfil the policy
               requirements of either Government policy or the Cambridge Green Belt
                Local Plan    because of the scale of       building proposed, the
                associated infrastructure in the form     of lighting ancI car pa.rking
                and the numbers of people who would be    attracted to the site.

    4.5        I have also consiaereu wneuici                                                               t
               I accept that there may be a need for such facilities close to
               Cambridge I cannot agree with the Agent that these override the
               need to maintain the integrity of the Green Belt.                                 The Approve
               Structure Plan in Policy P20/4             ^   l   e   a   a_ substantial sector of the
                                                                          s   e   d


               Green Belt at t h e Cambridge Northern Fringe as a reserve of land
                          FOR DEVELOPMENT WHICH HAS AN ESSENTIAL NEED TO BE LOCATED IN
               CAMBRIDGE AND WHICH CANNOT BE ACCOMMODATED ELSEWHERE . The District
                Council having worked jointly with the City Council, has recently
                adopted as supplementary Planning G u i d a n c e , proposals for the
                Cambridge Northern Fringe.                This study sets out criteria f or the
                a c c e D t a b i 1 itv of development one of which is b)                    it makes good
                Q u a n t i t a t i v e shortfall in a s e r v i c e or f a c i l i t y for t h e residents of
                the       Cambridge Sub-Area".          The Study identifies the Histon Road
                allotments as, in part, suitable for "recreational uses requiring
                 large buildings such as a leisure centre, incorporating facilities
                 such as ice-skating or ten-pin bowling together with community
                 rooms          qvm etc".        The Chesterton Railway Sidings are seen as
                 s u i t a b l e for the relocation of Cambridge United and c o u l d be
                 c o m p l e m e n t e d "by providing s o m e form of sports/leisure use., e.g.
                 ice-skating risk/indoor bowls".
     a    r      There are * therefore opportunities for this development on land
                 already released from the Green Belt; As a result I cannot accept
                 that the need is such that it justifies the re!ease ^   “^ h e r ^ r e e n
                 Belt   I am also concerned that the release of up to 75 acres to the
                 east'of the built-up area and significantly detached from it would
                 compromise a vast tract of land in this direction.


         5.      RECOMMENDATION
                                                      - 3 -
As the proposal is contrary to both national and local policy and
w o u l d cause material harm, and because there are opportunities for
the development to take place elsewhere, it is recommended that
C a m b ridge United Football Club be advised that this Committee cannot
support the proposals for a new stadium either alone or in
c o njunction with other sports/leisure facilities on a Green Belt
site at Teversham.
