h s .9.6./rugby.dm



Mr Rhodes
F8



POLICING OF RUGBY UNION GROUNDS:   AYLESTONE ROAD LEICESTER

I enclose a copy of a letter from Leicestershire police about
implementing the Hillsborough Inquiry's Final Report at Leicester
RFU ground together with a copy of my proposed reply.

My draft, rather long perhaps, adds little to that stated in HOC
11/90 except to provide some encouragement for what seems to have
been the common sense approach adopted by the Leicester police
in relation to the Aylestone Road ground.     However, since the
enquiry is about policing of the ground (which is designated
under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975) would you let me
know if you agree with the line taken and/or any amendments
please.   Should the reply be copied to ACPO (Mr George) for
information?   (Telephone will do if it easier.)




                                         D J MOULD
                                         G2 Division
                                         X3099


6 September 1990


Enc


FEP/89 35/40/2
h s .9.6/rugby.dm


To:   D C Blakey Esq                   Your ref:   GAGB/TAM/GB232
      Deputy Chief Constable           Our ref:    FEP/89 35/40/2
      Leicestershire Constabulary
      PO Box 999
      Leicester    LE99 1AZ



Dear Mr Blakey


IMPLEMENTATION OF THE FINAL REPORT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY:
POLICING OF RFU GROUNDS


Thank you for your letter of 29 August about the application of
the Final Report recommendations by the Hillsborough Inquiry to
rugby grounds such as the Aylestone Road ground Leicester.


As we see it, the standard of safety for spectators under the
Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) applies to all
sports grounds irrespective of the type of ground, the activities
for which it is used or whether it is designated under the 1975
Act as requiring a safety certificate.    In our view?therefore,
the Final Report recommendations apply,    in principle,   to all
sports grounds, especially to those which are used for activities
which attract large crowds.   The measures needed, and which may
be specified within any safety certificate, in order to achieve
"reasonable safety at the ground" as envisaged under section 2
of the 1975 Act may however differ because of the different
circumstances which obtain at each individual ground.


Since the recommendations of the Final Report are "essentially
directed to designated grounds" with emphasis on those used for
soccer, we believe it is necessary to apply them sensibly to
other types of grounds.   As stated in HO Circular 11/90 we feel
this is consistent with the Report.   It is also, we believe, in
keeping with the requirement for "reasonable" safety set down in
section 2 of the 1975 Act.      We would therefore expect,    for
example,   a reduction at all grounds in the maximum permitted
occupancy of standing areas in line with the Final Report and
improved      medical/first         aid   provision.           ,However,. - athose
recommendations relating to "pens"                   apply, ifeatdail, either
 , ,,        ..                  55\           ....................
wholly or partially dopcTroa-wwr                     individual arrangements
at a particular ground.             Since designation also covers rugby
league and cricket grounds, where arrangements may differ to
those at rugby union grounds,             I hope you will understand our
reluctance to attempt detailed guidance on implementation of the
Final Report on a "sport by sport" basis.


In   the   context of policing Aylestone Road we would not,                         of
course,     seek to influence or interfere with the operational
decisions taken by the Leicestershire Constabulary.                     Generally,
we do not envisage that any special police presence at rugby
grounds should automatically increase (with associated increases
in police facilities and costs to clubs) where it is judged to
be operationally unnecessary.             In other words, we do not think
the Inquiry intended to draw into such grounds an additional,
special police presence where it was not needed in order to
secure "the orderly and lawful behaviour of the spectators".                        To
do   so    could    have   the   effect   of     shifting      onto    the   police,
responsibility which at the present time properly faly^fto the
holder of the safety certificate or ground occupier.                    This is not
something we would wish to encourage although we do support the
concept     of     recommendation    11   that    there     should     be    a   clear
understanding by both the             police      and    the    club    as   to    the
responsibilities of each.


I hope the above provides some general assistance but do come
back if there is anything further on which you feel we might be
able to help.

                                                        Yours sincerely




                                                        D J MOULD
                                                        (Fire and Emergency
                                                        Planning Department)
