COUNCIL OF EUROPE

STANDING COMMITTEE ON THE EUROPEAN CONVENTION ON SPECTATOR
VIOLENCE AND MISBEHAVIOUR AT SPORTS EVENTS AND IN PARTICULAR AT
FOOTBALL MATCHES


1.     The Convention, designed to ensure common and co-operative
action is taken to prevent and control the problem of spectator
violence, was drawn up and adopted by the Council of Europe on 23
July 1985 following the Heysel Stadium tragedy.   It entered into
force on 1 November 1985.   The UK was the first country to sign
and ratify the Convention and has chaired its Standing Committee
since its inception.   There are now 15 contracting parties and 5
signatory states.    The Union of European Football Federations,
UEFA, ■has observer status on the Committee and regards the
Convention as a good safeguard.


2.      The Standing Committee monitors the application of the
Convention,    reviewing' its provisions and receiving progress
reports    from    member   states   on   national  priorities   and
initiatives.     The Committee has adopted recommendations to the
contracting parties on restrictions on alcohol sales, increasing
police co-operation and guidelines for the control of ticket
sales.      It   has   also  produced , a comprehensive   report  on
anti-hooliganism measures.


3.     Priority tasks for the coming year will be p r e p a r a t o r y
work for the World Cup tournament in Italy in 1990 and a r e s e a r c h
project into football hooliganism based on the tournament.         The
Standing Committee will also consider the provisions of t h e
Convention in respect of safety issues and will work with t h e
Council of Europe's steering committee on the development of
sport (C D D S ) in preparing a text on the principles of spectator
safety and the measures which can be" taken to ensure that they
are fulfilled.


Annexes


4.   (1)   the   Convention

     (2)   the report by the Chairman of the Standing Committee to
            the Conference of European Sports Ministers in Reykjavik
            30 May - 1 June 1989

     (3)   the   resolution on spectator     violence     agreed   at   the
            Reykjavik Conference

     (4)   the   resolution   on   safety   agreed   at   the   Reykjavik
            Conference
                           ★ **
                     ★                     ★


                 ★                             ★


  COUNCIL   ★                              *           CONSEIL
  OF EUROPE   ★                  *     ★           DE L’EUROPE
                                                          N° 120




              EUROPEAN CONVENTION
     ON SPECTATOR VIOLENCE AND MISBEHAVIOUR
                 AT SPORTS EVENTS
      AND IN PARTICULAR AT FOOTBALL MATCHES




               CONVENTION EUROPEENNE
SUR LA VIOLENCE ET LES DEBORDEMENTS DE SPECTATEURS
          LORS DE MANIFESTATIONS SPORTIVES
       ET NOTAMMENT DE MATCHES DE FOOTBALL




                         STRASBOURG, 19.Vm.1985
               European Treaty Series                     Serie des Traites europeens
                        No. 120                                     N° 120




                 EUROPEAN CONVENTION
       ON SPECTATOR VIOLENCE AND MISBEHAVIOUR
                   AT SPORTS EVENTS
        AND IN PARTICULAR AT FOOTBALL MATCHES



              CONVENTION EUROPEENNE
SUR LA VIOLENCE ET LES DEBORDEMENTS DE SPECTATEURS
          LORS DE MANIFESTATIONS SPORTIVES
       ET NOTAMMENT DE MATCHES DE FOOTBALL




    Strasbourg, Council of Europe, Publications Section
    ISBN 92-871-0796-3
    Printed in France
                                                                         Edition April/Avnl 1987
    I 21 214
                                               — 2 —




        The member States of the Council of Europe and the other States party to the European
 Cultural Convention, signatory hereto,
      Considering th at the aim of the Council of Europe is to achieve a greater unity between its
 members ;
       Concerned by violence and misbehaviour amongst spectators at sports events, and in
particular at football matches, and the consequences thereof ;
       Aware that this problem is likely to put at risk the principles embodied in Resolution (76) 41
of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe known as the “ European Sport for All
C harter” ;
       Emphasising the im portant contribution made to international understanding by sport,
and especially, because of their frequency, by football matches between national and club teams
from European states ;
       Considering that both public authorities and the independent sports organisations have
separate but complementary responsibilities to combat violence and misbehaviour by spectators,
bearing in mind that the sports organisations also have responsibilities in matters of safety and
that more generally they should ensure the orderly conduct of the events they organise; considering
moreover that these authorities and organisations should work together for this purpose at all
appropriate levels ;
       Considering that violence is a current social phenomenon with wide repercussions, whose
origins lie mainly outside sport, and that sport is often the scene for outbreaks of violence ;


      Being resolved to take common and co-operative action to prevent and control the
problem of violence and misbehaviour by spectators at sports events,
       Have agreed as follows :

                                             Article 1
                                      A im o f the Convention
1.     The Parties, with a view to preventing and controlling violence and misbehaviour by
spectators at football matches, undertake, within the limits of their respective constitutional
provisions, to take the necessary steps to give effect to the provisions of this Convention.


2.     The Parties shall apply the provisions of this Convention to other sports and sports events
in which violence or misbehaviour by spectators is to be feared, as appropriate to the specific
requirements of such sports and sports events.

                                             Article 2
                                     Domestic co-ordination
      The Parties shall co-ordinate the policies and actions of their government departm ents and
other public agencies against violence and misbehaviour by spectators, where appropriate
through setting up co-ordinating bodies.
                                               — 2 —




       Les Etats membres du Conseil de l’Europe et les autres Etats parties & la Convention
culturelle europeenne, signataires de la presente Convention,
      Considerant que le but du Conseil de l’Europe est de realiser une union plus etroite entre
ses membres ;
        Preoccupes par la violence et les debordements de spectateurs lors de manifestations spor-
tives et notam m ent de matches de football, et par les consequences qui en decoulent ;
       Conscients du fait que ce probl&me menace les principes consacres par la Resolution (76) 41
du Comite des Ministres du Conseil de 1’Europe, connue comme la «Charte europeenne du sport
pour tous » ;
       Soulignant l’im portante contribution apportee k la comprehension intemationale par le
sport et, particulierement, en raison de leur frequence, par les matches de football entre les
equipes nationales et locales des Etats europeens ;
       Considerant que tant les autorites publiques que les organisations sportives independantes
ont des responsabilites distinctes mais complementaires dans la lutte contre la violence et les
debordements de spectateurs, compte tenu du fait que les organisations sportives ont aussi des
responsabilites en matiere de security et que, plus generalement, elles doivent assurer le bon
deroulement des manifestations qu’elles organisent ; considerant par ailleurs que ces autorites et '
organisations doivent a cet effet unir leurs efforts a tous les niveaux concernes ;
        Considerant que la violence est un phenom&ne social actuel de vaste envergure, dont les
origines sont essentiellement exterieures au sport, et que le sport est souvent le terrain
d ’explosions de violence ;
       Resolus a cooperer et k entreprendre des actions communes afin de prevenir et de
maitriser la violence et les debordements de spectateurs lors de manifestations sportives,
       Sont convenus de ce qui suit :

                                              Article 1
                                        B ut de la Convention
1.     Les Parties, en vue de prevenir et de maitriser la violence et les debordements de
spectateurs lors de matches de football, s’engagent k prendre, dans les limites de leurs
dispositions constitutionnelles respectives, les mesures necessaires pour donner effet aux disposi­
tions de la presente Convention.
2.     Les Parties appliquent les dispositions de la presente Convention k d ’autres sports et
manifestations sportives, compte tenu des exigences particuli&res de ces derniers, dans lesquels
des violences ou des debordements de spectateurs sont a craindre.

                                              Article 2
                                  Coordination au plan interieur
       Les Parties coordonnent les politiques et les actions entreprises par leurs ministeres et
autres organismes publics contre la violence et les debordements de spectateurs, par la mise en
place, lorsque necessaire, d’organes de coordination.
                                               — 3 —



                                              Article 3
                                              Measures
1.     The Parties undertake to ensure the formulation and implementation of measures
designed to prevent and control violence and misbehaviour by spectators, including in particular :

       a. to secure that adequate public order resources are employed to counter outbreaks of
violence and misbehaviour, both within the immediate vicinity of and inside stadia and along
the transit routes used by spectators ;
       b. to facilitate close co-operation and exchange of appropriate information between the
police forces of the different localities involved or likely to be involved ;

       c. to apply or, if need be, to adopt legislation which provides for those found guilty of
offences related to violence or misbehaviour by spectators to receive appropriate penalties or, as
the case may be, appropriate administrative measures.

2.     The Parties undertake to encourage the responsible organisation and good conduct of
supporters’ clubs and the appointm ent of stewards from within their membership to help
manage and inform spectators at matches and to accompany parties of supporters travelling to
away fixtures.
3.     The Parties shall encourage the co-ordination, insofar as legally possible, of the organis­
ation of travel arrangements from the place of departure, with the co-operation of clubs,
organised supporters, and travel agencies, so as to inhibit potential trouble-makers from leaving
to attend matches.
4.     The Parties shall seek to ensure, where necessary by introducing appropriate legislation
which contains sanctions for non-compliance or by any other appropriate means, that, where
outbreaks of violence and misbehaviour by spectators are to be feared, sports organisations and
clubs, together with, where appropriate, stadium owners and public authorities, in accordance
with responsibilities defined in domestic law, take practical measures at and within stadia to
prevent or control such violence or misbehaviour, including :


       a. to secure that the design and physical fabric of stadia provide for the safety of
spectators, do not readily facilitate violence between spectators, allow effective crowd control,
contain appropriate barriers or fencing, and allow security and police forces to operate ;

      b. to segregate effectively groups of rival supporters, by allocating to groups of visiting
supporters, when they are adm itted, specific terraces ;
      c. to ensure this segregation by strictly controlling the sale of tickets and to take particular
precautions in the period immediately preceding the match ;
       d. to exclude from or forbid access to matches and stadia, insofar as it is legally
possible, known or potential trouble-makers, or people who are under the influence of alcohol
or drugs ;
        e. to provide stadia with an effective public address system and to see that full use is made
of this, of the match programme and of other publicity outlets to encourage spectators to behave
correctly ;
       f to prohibit the introduction of alcoholic drinks by spectators into stadia; to restrict,
and preferably ban, the sale and any distribution of alcoholic drinks at stadia, and to ensure
that all beverages available are in safe containers ;
                                              Article 3
                                              Mesures
1.     Les Parties s'engagent k assurer l’elaboration et la mise en oeuvre de mesures destinees k
prevenir et maitriser la violence et les debordements de spectateurs, en particulier k :

      a. s’assurer que des services d ’ordre suffisants soient mobilises pour faire face aux
manifestations de violence et aux d£bordements tant dans les stades que dans leur voisinage
immediat et ie long des routes de passage empruntees par les spectateurs ;

       b. faciliter une cooperation etroite et un echange d ’informations appropriees entre les
forces de police des differentes localites concemees ou susceptibles de l’etre ;

        c. appliquer ou, le cas echeant, adopter une legislation pr6voyant que les personnes
reconnues coupables d’infractions liees k la violence ou aux debordements de spectateurs se voient
infliger des peines appropriees ou, le cas echeant, des mesures administratives appropriees.

2.      Les Parties s’engagent k encourager l’organisation responsable et le bon comportement des
clubs de supporters et la nomination en leur sein d ’agents charges de faciliter le controle et
l’information des spectateurs a l’occasion des matches et d ’accompagner les groupes de
supporters se rendant k des matches joues k l'exterieur.
3.     Les Parties encouragent la coordination, dans la mesure oik cela est juridiquem ent
possible, de l’organisation des deplacements k partir du lieu d ’origine avec la collaboration des
clubs, des supporters organises et des agences de voyage, afin d’empecher le depart des fauteurs
potentiels de troubles pour assister aux matches.
4.     Lorsque des explosions de violence et des debordements de spectateurs sont k craindre, les
Parties veillent, si necessaire en introduisant une legislation appropriee contenant des sanctions
pour inobservation ou d ’autres mesures appropriees, k ce que les organisations sportives et les
clubs ainsi que, le cas echeant, les proprietaires de stades et les autorites publiques, sur la base
des competences definies par la legislation interne, prennent des dispositions concretes aux
abords des stades et k l’interieur de ces derniers, pour prevenir ou mattriser cette violence ou ces
debordements, et notamment :

       a. faire en sorte que la conception et la structure des stades garantissent la securite des
spectateurs, ne favorisent pas la violence parmi eux, permettent un contrdle efficace de la foule,
comportent des barrieres ou cldtures adequates et permettent l’intervention des services de
secours et des forces de l’ordre ;
      b. separer efficacement les groupes de supporters rivaux en reservant aux groupes de
supporters visiteurs, lorsqu’ils sont admis, des tribunes distinctes ;
      c. assurer cette separation en contrdlant rigoureusement la vente des billets et prendre des
precautions particulieres pendant la periode precedant immediatement le match ;
        d. exclure des stades et des matches ou leur en interdire l’acces, dans la mesure oil cela
est juridiquem ent possible, les fauteurs de troubles connus ou potentiels et les personnes sous
l’influence d'alcool ou de drogues ;
       e. doter les stades d ’un systeme efficace de communication avec le public et veiller k en
faire pleinement usage, ainsi que des programmes des matches et autres prospectus, pour inciter
les spectateurs a se conduire correctement ;
       / . interdire l’introduction, par les spectateurs, de boissons alcoolisees dans les stad es;
restreindre et, de preference, interdire la vente et toute distribution de boissons alcoolisees dans
les stades et s’assurer que toutes les boissons disponibles soient contenues dans des recipients non
dangereux ;
       g. to provide controls so as to ensure that spectators do not bring into stadia objects
that are likely to be used in acts of violence, or fireworks or similar devices ;

       h. to ensure that liaison officers co-operate with the authorities concerned before matches
on arrangements to be taken for crowd control so that the relevant rules are enforced through
concerted action.
S.     The Parties shall take appropriate social and educational measures, bearing in mind the
potential importance of the mass media, to prevent violence in and associated with sport, in
particular by promoting the sporting ideal through educational and other campaigns, by giving
support to the notion of fair play, especially among young people, so as to enhance m utual
respect both amongst spectators and between sports players and also by encouraging increased
active participation in sport.




                                             Article 4
                                    International co-operation
1.    The Parties shall co-operate closely on the m atters covered by this Convention and
encourage similar co-operation as appropriate between national sports authorities involved.


2.    In advance of international club and representative matches or tournaments, the Parties
concerned shall invite their competent authorities, especially the sports organisations, to identify
those matches at which violence or misbehaviour by spectators is to be feared. Where such a
match is identified, the competent authorities of the host country shall arrange consultations
between those concerned. Such consultations shall take place as soon as possible and should not
be later than two weeks before the match is due to take place, and shall encompass arrange­
ments, measures and precautions to be taken before, during, and after the match, including,
where necessary, measures additional to those included in this Convention.




                                             Article 5
                            Identification and treatm ent o f offenders
1.    The Parties, respecting existing legal procedures and the principle of the independence of
the judiciary, shall seek to ensure that spectators committing acts of violence or other criminal
behaviour are identified and prosecuted in accordance with the due process of the law.
2.    Where appropriate, particularly in the case of visiting spectators, and in accordance with
the applicable international agreements, the Parties shall consider :
       a. transferring proceedings against persons apprehended in connection with violence or
other criminal behaviour committed at sports events to their country of residence ;

     b. seeking the extradition of persons suspected of violence or other criminal behaviour
committed at sports events ;
     c. transferring persons convicted of offences of violence or other criminal behaviour
committed at sports events to serve their sentences iir the relevant country.
                                              _ 4 —                                                   «
        g. assurer des contrdles dans le but d ’empecher les spectateurs d ’introduire dans
l’enceinte des stades des objets susceptibles de servir a des actes de violence, ou des feux
d’artifice ou objets similaires ;
      h. assurer que des agents de liaison collaborent avec les autorites concernees avant les
matches, quant aux dispositions a prendre pour contrdler la foule, de telle sorte que les
reglements pertinents soient appliques grace a une action concertee.
5.      Les Parties prennent les mesures adequates dans les domaines social et educatif, ayant a
l’esprit l’importance potentieile des moyens de communication de masse, pour prevenir la
violence dans le sport ou lors de manifestations sportives, notamment en promouvant 1’ideal
sportif par des campagnes educatives et autres, en soutenant la notion de fair-play specialement
chez les jeunes, afin de favoriser le respect mutuel k la fois parmi les spectateurs et entre les
sportifs et aussi en encourageant une plus importante participation active dans le sport.




                                             Article 4
                                    Cooperation internationale
1.    Les Parties cooperent etroitement sur les sujets couverts par cette Convention et
encouragent une cooperation analogue, lorsqu’elle est appropriee, entre les autorites sportives
nationales concernees.
2.     Avant les matches ou toumois intem ationaux entre clubs ou equipes representatives, les
Parties concernees invitent leurs autorites competentes, notamment les organisations sportives, k
identifier les matches a 1’occasion desquels des actes de violence ou des debordements de
spectateurs sont a craindre. Si un match de ce type est identifie, les autorites competentes du
pays hote prennent des dispositions pour une concertation entre les autorites concernees. Cette
concertation se tiendra des que possible ; elle devrait avoir lieu au plus tard deux semaines avant
la date prevue pour le match et englobera les dispositions, mesures et precautions k prendre
avant, pendant et apr£s le match, y compris, s’il y a lieu, des mesures complementaires k celles
prevues par la presente Convention.




                                             Article 5
                          Identification et traitem ent des contrevenants
1.     Les Parties, dans le respect des procedures existant en droit et du principe de l’indepen-
dance du pouvoir judiciaire, veillent k s’assurer que les spectateurs qui commettent des actes de
violence ou d ’autres actes reprehensibles soient identifies et poursuivis conformement k la loi.
2.    Le cas echeant, notam m ent dans le cas de spectateurs-visiteurs, et conformement aux
accords intem ationaux applicables, les Parties envisagent :
       a. de transm ettre les procedures intentees contre des personnes apprehendees a la suite
d’actes de violence ou d ’autres actes reprehensibles commis lors de manifestations sportives, au
pays de residence de ces personnes ;
       b. de dem ander l’extradition de personnes soupconnees d ’actes de violence ou d ’autres
actes reprehensibles commis lors de manifestations sportives ;
       c. de transferer les personnes reconnues coupables d ’infractions violentes ou d ’autres
actes reprehensibles commis lors de manifestations sportives, dans le pays approprie, pour y
purger leur peine.
                                            Article 6
                                      Additional measures
 1.    The Parties undertake to co-operate closely with their appropriate national sports organis­
ations and clubs and where appropriate, stadium owners, on arrangements regarding the
planning and execution of alterations to the physical fabric of stadia or other alterations,
including access to and egress from stadia, necessary to improve safety and to prevent violence.


2.     The Parties undertake to promote, where necessary and in appropriate cases, a system
laying down requirements for the selection of stadia which take into account the safety of
spectators and the prevention of violence amongst them, especially for those stadia used for
matches likely to attract large or unruly crowds.
3.     The Parties undertake to encourage their national sports organisations to review their
regulations continuously in order to control factors which may lead to outbreaks of violence by
players or spectators.




                                             Article 7
                                     Provision o f information
        Each Party shall forward to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe, in one of the
official languages of the Council of Europe, all relevant information concerning legislative and
other measures taken by it for the purpose of complying with the terms of this Convention,
whether with regard to football or to other sports.




                                             Article 8
                                       Standing Committee
1.     For the purposes of this Convention, a Standing Committee is hereby established.
2.     Any Party may be represented on the Standing Committee by one or more delegates. Each
Party shall have one vote.
3.     Any member State of the Council of Europe or other State party to the European Cultural
Convention which is not a Party to this Convention may be represented on the Committee as an
observer.
4.    The Standing Committee may, by unanimous decision, invite any non-member State of
the Council o f Europe which is not a Party to the Convention and any sports organisation
concerned to be represented by an observer at one or more of its meetings.
5.     The Standing Committee shall be convened by the Secretary General of the Council of
Europe. Its first meeting shall be held within one year of the date of the entry into force of the
Convention. It shall subsequently meet at least every year. In addition it shall meet whenever a
majority of the Parties so request.
6.  A majority of the Parties shall constitute a quorum for holding a meeting of the Standing
Committee.
7.    Subject to the provisions of this Convention, the Standing Committee shall draw up and
adopt by consensus its own Rules of Procedure.
                                             Article 6
                                    Mesures complementaires
1.     Les Parties s'engagent a cooperer etroitement avec leurs organisations sportives nationales
et clubs competents ainsi que, eventuellement, avec les proprietaires de stades, en ce qui concerne
les dispositions visant la planification et l'execution des modifications de la structure materielle
des stades, ou d'autres changements necessaires, y compris l’acces et la sortie des stades, afin
d ’ameliorer la securite et de prevenir la violence.
2.     Les Parties s'engagent 4 promouvoir, s’il y a lieu et dans les cas appropries, un systeme
etablissant des criteres pour la selection des stades qui tiennent compte de la securite des
spectateurs et de la prevention de la violence parmi eux, surtout en ce qui concerne les stades ou
les matches peuvent attirer des foules nombreuses ou agitees.
3.    Les Parties s'engagent a encourager leurs organisations sportives nationales 4 reviser d'une
maniere permanente leurs reglements afm de controler les facteurs de nature 4 engendrer des
explosions de violence de la part de sportifs ou de spectateurs.




                                             Article 7
                                  Communication (inform ations
        Chaque Partie transm et au Secretaire General du Conseil de l’Europe, dans l'une des
langues officielles du Conseil de l’Europe, toutes les informations pertinentes relatives 4 la
legislation et aux autres mesures qu’elle aura prises dans le but de se conformer aux dispositions
de la pr6sente Convention, que ces mesures concernent le football ou d’autres sports.




                                              Article 8
                                         Comite perm anent
1.     II est constitue, aux fins de la presente Convention, un Comite permanent.
2.    Toute Partie peut se faire representer au sein du Comite permanent par un ou plusieurs
delegues. Chaque Partie a droit k une voix.
3.     Tout Etat membre du Conseil de l’Europe ou partie a la Convention culturelle europeenne,
qui n ’est pas partie a la presente Convention, peut se faire representer au Comite par un
observateur.
4.    Le Comite permanent peut, 4 l’unanimite, inviter tout E tat non membre du Conseil de
l’Europe qui n’est pas partie a la Convention et toute organisation sportive interessee 4 se faire
representer par un observateur a une ou plusieurs de ses reunions.
5.     Le Comite permanent est convoque par le Secretaire General du Conseil de 1’Europe. II
tient sa premiere reunion dans le delai d ’un an 4 compter de la date d’entree en vigueur de la
Convention. II se reunit par la suite au moins une fois par an. II se reunit, en outre, chaque fois
que la majorite des Parties en formule la demande.
6.    La majorite des Parties constitue le quorum n6cessaire pour tenir une reunion du Comite
permanent.
7.    Sous reserve des dispositions de la presente Convention, le Comite permanent etablit son
reglement interieur et l’adopte par consensus.
                                            Article 9
1.   The Standing Committee shall be responsible for monitoring the application of this
Convention. It may in particular :
       a. keep under review the provisions of this Convention and examine anymodifications,
necessary ;
      b. hold consultations with relevant sports organisations ;
      c. make recommendations to the Parties concerning measures to be taken for the
purposes of this Convention ;
      d. recommend the appropriate measures to keep the public informed about the activities,
undertaken within the framework of this Convention ;
       e. make recommendations to the Committee of Ministersconcerning non-member        States
of the Council of Europe to be invited to accede to this Convention ;
      /.   make any proposal for improving the effectiveness of this Convention.
2.    In order to discharge its functions, the Standing Committee may, on its own initiative,
arrange for meetings of groups of experts.




                                            Article 10
       After each meeting, the Standing Committee shall forward to the Committee of Ministers
of the Council of Europe a report on its work and on the functioning of the Convention.




                                            Article 11
                                          Am endm ents
1.     Amendments to this Convention may be proposed by a Party, the Committee of Ministers
of the Council of Europe or the Standing Committee.
2.     Any proposal for amendment shall be communicated by the Secretary General of the
Council of Europe to the member States of the Council of Europe, to the other States party to
the European Cultural Convention, and to every non-member State which has acceded to or has
been invited to accede to this Convention in accordance with the provisions of Article 14.
3.      Any amendment proposed by a Party or the Committee of Ministers shall be communi­
cated to the Standing Committee at least two months before the meeting at which it is to be
considered. The Standing Committee shall submit to the Committee of Ministers its opinion on
the proposed amendment, where appropriate after consultation with the relevant sports organis­
ations.
4.     The Committee of Ministers shall consider the proposed am endment and any opinion
subm itted by the Standing Committee and may adopt the amendment.
5.    The text of any amendment adopted by the Committee of Ministers in accordance with
paragraph 4 of this Article shall be forwarded to the Parties for acceptance.
6.     Any amendment adopted in accordance with paragraph 4 of this Article shall come into
force on the first day of the month following the expiration of a period of one month after all
Parties have informed the Secretary General of their acceptance thereof.
                                             Article 9
1.     Le Comite permanent est charge de suivre l’application de la presente Convention. II peut
en particulier :
      a. revoir de maniere permanente les dispositions de la presente Convention et examiner
les modifications qui pourraient etre necessaires ;
       b. engager des consultations avec les organisations sportives concernees ;
       c. adresser des recommandations aux Parties sur les mesures a prendre pour la mise en
oeuvre de la presente Convention ;
       d. recommander les mesures appropriees pour assurer 1'information du public sur les
travaux entrepris dans le cadre de la presente Convention ;
     e. adresser au Comite des Ministres des recommandations relatives a l’invitation d’Etats
non membres du Conseil de l’Europe a adherer k la presente Convention ;
      /.   formuler toute proposition visant a ameliorer l’efficacite de la presente Convention.
2.     Pour faccomplissement de sa mission, le Comite permanent peut, de sa propre initiative,
prevoir des reunions de groupes d ’experts.




                                            Article 10
       Apres chacune de ses reunions, le Comite permanent transm et au Comite des Ministres du
Conseil de 1'Europe un rapport sur ses travaux et sur le fonctionnement de la Convention.




                                             Article 11
                                          A m endem ents
1.   Des amendements a la presente Convention peuvent etre proposes par une Partie, par le
Comite des Ministres du Conseil de l’Europe ou par le omite permanent.
2.     Toute proposition d’amendement est communiquee par le Secretaire General du Conseil
de I’Europe aux Etats membres du Conseil de l’Europe, aux autres Etats parties 4 la Convention
culturelle europeenne et k tout Etat non membre qui a adhere ou qui a ete invite a adherer 4 la
presente Convention conformement aux dispositions de l’article 14.
3.    Tout amendement propose par une Partie ou par le Comite des Ministres est communique
au Comite .permanent au moins deux mois avant la reunion k laquelle l’amendement doit etre
etudie. Le Comite permanent soumet au Comite des Ministres son avis concernant l’amendement
propose, le cas echeant, apres consultation des organisations sportives competentes.


4.   Le Comite des Ministres etudie l’amendement propose ainsi que tout avis soumis par le
Comite permanent et il peut adopter l’amendement.
5.    Le texte de tout amendement adopte par ie Comite des Ministres conformement au
paragraphe 4 du present article est transmis aux Parties en vue de son acceptation.
6.     Tout amendement adopte conformement au paragraphe 4 du present article entre en
vigueur le premier jour du mois qui suit l’expiration d’un delai d’un mois apres la date k laquelle
toutes les Parties ont informe le Secretaire General de leur acceptation dudit amendement.
                                        FINAL CLAUSES


                                            Article 12
1.    This Convention shall be open for signature by member States of the Council of Europe
and other States party to the European Cultural Convention, which may express their consent to
be bound by :
      a. signature without reservation as to ratification, acceptance or approval, or
       b. signature subject to ratification, acceptance or approval, followed by ratification,
acceptance or approval.
2.   Instruments of ratification, acceptance or approval shall be deposited with the Secretary
General of the Council of Europe.

                                            Article 13
1.    The    Convention shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the
expiration   of a period of one month after the date on which three member States of the Council
of Europe    have expressed their consent to be bound by the Convention in accordance with the
provisions   of Article 12.
2.     In respect of any signatory State which subsequently expresses its consent to be bound by
it, the Convention shall enter into force on the first day of the month following the expiration of
a period of one month after the date of signature or of the deposit of the instrument of
ratification, acceptance or approval.

                                            Article 14
1.    After the entry into force of this Convention, the Committee of Ministers of the Council of
Europe, after consulting the Parties, may invite to accede to the Convention any non-member
State of the Council of Europe by a decision taken by the majority provided for in Article 20.d of
the Statute of the Council of Europe and by the unanimous vote of the representatives of the
Contracting States entitled to sit on the Committee of Ministers.
2.    In respect of any acceding State, the Convention shall enter into force on the first day of
the month following the expiration of a period of one month after the date of the deposit of the
instrument of accession with the Secretary General of the Council of Europe.


                                             Article 15
1.     Any State may, at the time of signature or when depositing’ its instrument of ratification,
acceptance, approval or accession, specify the territory or territories to which this Convention
shall apply.
2.     Any Party may, at any later date, by declaration addressed to the Secretary General of the
Council of Europe, extend the application of this Convention to any other territory specified in
the declaration. In respect of such territory the Convention shall enter into force on the first day
of the month following the expiration of a period of one month after the date of receipt of such
declaration by the Secretary General.
3.     Any declaration made under the two preceding paragraphs may, in respect of any territory
mentioned- in such declaration, be withdrawn by a notification addressed to the Secretary
General. Such withdrawal shall become effective on the first day of the month following the
expiration of a period of six months after the date of receipt of the notification by the Secretary
General.
                                       CLAUSES FINALES


                                             Article 12
1.    La presente Convention est ouverte a la signature des Etats membres du Conseil de
l'Europe et des autres Etats parties a la Convention culturelle europeenne, qui peuvent exprimer
leur consentement 4 etre lies par :
       a. la signature sans reserve de ratification, d’acceptation ou d’approbation, ou
       b. la signature sous reserve de ratification, d’acceptation ou d ’approbation, suivip de rati-
cation, d'acceptation ou d’approbation.
2.    Les instruments de ratification, d’acceptation ou d’approbation seront deposes pres le
Secretaire General du Conseil de l’Europe.

                                             Article 13
1.    La Convention entrera en vigueur le premier jour du mois suivant l’expiration d’un delai
de un mois apr&s la date k laquelle trois Etats membres du Conseil de l’Europe auront exprime
leur consentement a etre lies par la Convention conformement aux dispositions de l’article 12.


2.    Pour tout Etat signataire qui exprimera ulterieurement son consentement 4 etre lie par la
Convention, celle-ci entrera en vigueur le premier jour du mois suivant l’expiration d’un delai
de un mois apres la date de la signature ou du depot de l’instrum ent de ratification, d’acceptation
ou d'approbation.

                                             Article 14
1.     Apres l’entree en vigueur de la presente Convention, le Comite des Ministres du Conseil
de l’Europe, apres consultation des Parties, pourra inviter tout Etat non membre du Conseil de
l’Europe 4 .adherer 4 la Convention, par une decision prise 4 la majorite prevue 4 1'article 20.d
du Statut du Conseil de l’Europe et a 1’unanimite des representants des Etats contractants ayant
le droit de sieger au Comite des Ministres.
2.     Pour tout Etat adherent, la Convention entrera en vigueur le premier jour du mois suivant
l’expiration d’un delai de un mois apres la date de depot de l’instrument d’adhesion pres le
Secretaire General du Conseil de 1'Europe.


                                             Article 15
1.      Tout E tat peut, au moment de la signature ou au moment du depot de son instrum ent de
ratification, d'acceptation, d ’approbation ou d’adhesion, designer le ou les territoires auxquels
s'appliquera la presente Convention.
2.      Toute Partie peut, k tout moment ulterieur, par une declaration adressee au Secretaire
General du Conseil de l’Europe, etendre l’application de la presente Convention a tout autre
territoire designe dans la declaration. La Convention entrera en vigueur 4 regard de ce territoire
le premier jour du mois suivant l’expiration d’un delai de un mois apres la date de reception de
ladite declaration par le Secretaire General.
3.     Toute declaration formuiee en vertu des deux paragraphes precedents pourra etre retiree,
en ce qui concerne tout territoire designe dans cette declaration, par notification adressee au
Secretaire General. Le retrait prendra effet le premier jour du mois suivant l’expiration d’un
delai de six mois apres la date de reception de la notification par le Secretaire General.
                                             Article 16
1.     Any Party may, at any time, denounce this Convention by means of a notification addressed
to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe.
2.     Such denunciation shall become effective on the first day of the month following the
expiration of a period of six months after the date of receipt of the notification by the Secretary
General.

                                             Article 17
      The Secretary General of the Council of Europe shall notify the member States of the
Council of Europe, the other States party to the European Cultural Convention and any State
which has acceded to this Convention, of :
       a. any signature in accordance with Article 12 ;
      b. the deposit of any instrument of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession in
accordance with Article 12 or 14 ;
       c.   any date of entry into force of this Convention in accordance withArticles 13 and 14   ;

       d. any information forwarded under the provisions of Article 7 ;
       e. any report established in pursuance of the provisions of Article 10 ;
      / . any proposal for amendment or any amendment adopted in accordance with Article 11
and the date on which the amendment comes into force ;
      g. any declaration made under the provisions of Article IS ;
      h. any notification made under the provisions of Article 16 and the date on which the
denunciation takes effect.
                                                Article 16
1.      Toute Partie peut, a tout moment, denoncer la presente Convention en adressant une
notification au Secretaire General du Conseil de l'Europe.
2.    La denonciation prend effet le premier jour du mois suivant l’expiration d’un delai de six
mois apres la date de reception de la notification par le Secretaire General.


                                                Article 17
       Le Secretaire General du Conseil de 1'Europe notifie aux Etats membres du Conseil de
l’Europe, aux autres Etats parties 4 la Convention culturelle europeenne et k tout Etat ayant
adhere 4 la presente Convention :
          a. toute signature conformement k l’article 12 ;
      b. le depot de tout instrument de ratification, d’acceptation, d’approbation ou d’adhesion,
conformement aux articles 12 ou 14 ;
          c. toute date d’entree en vigueur de la presente Convention conformement aux articles 13
et 14 ;
          d. toute information transmise en vertu des dispositions de 1’article 7 ;
          e. tout rapport etabli eh application des dispositions de l’article 10 ;
       / . toute proposition d’amendement et tout amendement adopte conformement k 1’article 11,
et la date d’entree en vigueur de cet amendement ;
          g. toute declaration formulee en vertu des dispositions de 1’article 15 ;
       h. toute notification adressee en application des dispositions de l’article 16 et la date de
prise d’effet de la denonciation.
                                                    - 9 -



    In witness whereof the undersigned, being                     En foi de quoi, les soussignes, dument auto­
duly authorised thereto, have signed this                   rises k cet effet, ont signe la presente Convention.
Convention.
     Done at Strasbourg, this 19th day of                        Fait a Strasbourg, le 19 aoflt 1985, en
August 1985, in English and French, both texts              fran^ais et en anglais, les deux textes faisant dga-
being equally authentic, in a single copy which             lement foi, en un seul exemplaire qui sera deposd
shall be deposited in the archives of the Council           dans les archives du Conseil de l’Europe. Le
of Europe. The Secretary General of the Council             Secretaire General du Conseil de l’Europe en
of Europe shall transmit certified copies to each           communiquera copie certifiee conforme a chaque
member State of the Council of Europe, to each              Etat membre du Conseil de l’Europe, k chaque
State party to the European Cultural Convention,            Etat partie k la Convention culturelle europeenne,
and any State invited to accede to this                     et k tout Etat invite k adherer k la presente
Convention.                                                 Convention.



              For the Government                                         Pour le Gouvemement
          of die Republic of Austria:                                 de la Republique d ’Autriche:
                                        sous reserve de ratification
                                             ou d ’acceptation

                                            Hans G. KNITEL




               For the Government                                         Pour le Gouvemement
          of the Kingdom of Belgium:                                    du Royaume de Belgique:
                                        sous reserve de ratification
                                             ou d ’acceptation

                                        J.R. VANDEN BLOOCK




              For the Government                                         Pour le Gouvemement
          of the Republic of Cyprus:                                  de la Republique de Chypre:
                                    Strasbourg, 19 December 1986
                                       with reservation in respect
                                      o f ratification or acceptance

                                         Andreas POUYOUROS



              For the Government                                         Pour le Gouvemement
         of the Kingdom of Denmark:                                    du Royaume de Danemark:




                                           Julie RECHNAGEL
        For the Government                                         Pour le Gouvemement
      of the French Republic:                                    de la Republique frangaise:
                                    Paris, le 12 mars 1986
                                  sous reserve de ratification
                                       ou d ’acceptation

                                        Alain CALMAT




         For the Government                                      Pour le Gouvemement
of the Federal Republic of Germany:                     de la Republique Federate d ’Allemagne




        For the Government                                       Pour le Gouvemement
     of the Hellenic Republic:                                de la Republique hellenique:
                                  sous reserve de ratification
                                       ou d ’acceptation

                                     D. CONSTANTINOU




        For the Government                                       Pour le Gouvemement
     of the Icelandic Republic:                               de la Republique islandaise:
                             Strasbourg, 20 November 1985
                                   with reservation in respect
                                  o f ratification or acceptance

                                    Geir HALLGRIMSSON




        For the Government                                         Pour le Gouvemement
            of Ireland:                                                  d'Irlande:
                              Strasbourg, 3 November 1986
                                   with reservation in respect
                                  o f ratification or acceptance

                                       Aidan MULLOY
                                           -1 1 -



       For the Government                                         Pour le Gouvemement
      of the Italian Republic:                                  de la Republique italienne:
                             Strasbourg, le 23 septembre 1985
                                 sous reserve de ratification
                                      ou d ’acceptation

                                   Paolo Massimo ANTICI




        For the Government                                      Pour le Gouvemement
of the Principality of Liechtenstein:                     de la Principaute de Liechtenstein




        For the Government                                      Pour le Gouvemement
of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg:                          du Grand-Duche de Luxembourg
                             Strasbourg, le 19 septembre 1985
                                 sous reserve de ratification
                                      ou d ’acceptation

                                        Jean HOSTERT




        For the Government                                        Pour le Gouvemement
             of M alta:                                                 de Malte:




        For the Government                                        Pour le Gouvemement
of the Kingdom of the Netherlands:                              du Royaume des Pays-Bas:
                                  with reservation in respect
                                 o f ratification or acceptance

                                     V.J.J.M . BRUYNS
                                     -   12



     For the Government                                      Pour le Gouvernement
of the Kingdom of Norway:                                  du Royaume de Norvege:




    For the Government                                    Pour le Gouvernement
of the Portuguese Republic:                            de la Republique portugaise:
                        Strasbourg, le 4 septembre 1985
                            sous reserve de ratification
                                 ou d ’acceptation

                              JoSo PEREIRA BASTOS




    For the Government                                       Pour le Gouvemement
 of the Kingdom of Spain:                                  du Royaume de l’Espagne:
                         Strasbourg, le 3 fevrier 1986
                            sous reserve de ratification
                                 ou d ’acceptation

                                Fernando BAEZA




    For the Government                                      Pour le Gouvernement
of the Kingdom of Sweden:                                   du Royaume de Suede:
                       Strasbourg, le 13 septembre 1985

                                Fredrik SVEDANG




    For the Government                                       Pour le Gouvernement
of the Swiss Confederation:                                de la Confederation suisse:
                                            -   13 -



         For the Government                                         Pour le Gouvernement
       of the Turkish Republic:                                    de la Republique turque:
                               Strasbourg, 25 September 1986
                                   with reservation in respect
                                  o f ratification or acceptance

                                        Filiz DINQMEN




         For the Government                                     Pour le Gouvemement
of the United Kingdom of Great Britain                    du Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne
        and Northern Ireland:                                   et d ’Irlande du Nord:




                                          C.D. LUSH




         For the Government                                         Pour le Gouvemement
             of Finland:                                                de Finlande:
                                  Strasbourg, le 7 juillet 1986
                                  sous reserve de ratification
                                       ou d'acceptation

                                     Henry SODERHOLM




          For the Holy See :                                         Pour le Saint-Sifcge:
6TH CONFERENCE OF EUROPEAN MINISTERS         RESPONSIBLE    FOR   SPORT
REYKJAVIK, 30 MAY - 1 JUNE 1989


SPECTATOR VIOLENCE

Introductory report by P A Lee, Chairman of the Standing
Committee of the European Convention on Spectator Violence


Contracting Parties

1.      It is customary to begin these reports on the      work of the
Standing Committee with an account of progress in           respect of
ratification of the Convention.     I am pleased to        be able to
report that there are now 15 contracting parties and        5 signatory
states.    We look forward to other member states          signing and
ratifying the Convention.


The work of the Standing Committee

2.    Since the 5th Ministers' Conference in Dublin in 1986
there have been four full meetings of the Standing Committee and
three meetings of its research working party.   The Committee has
continued to monitor the application of the Convention, reviewing
its provisions and receiving progress reports from member states
and UEFA on national priorities and initiatives.           UEFA's
Secretary General attends the Standing Committee's meetings as an
observer and UEFA regards the Convention as a good safeguard.


3.    The Standing Committee has not proposed any amendments to
the Convention but has adopted      5 recommendations    to the
contracting parties concerning:-


(1)   restrictions on alcohol sales during travel to matches;

(2)   restrictions on alcohol sales around grounds before, during
      and after matches;

(3)   increasing police co-operation including the use of
      "spotters";

(4)   increasing police co-operation by organising international
      seminars;

and most recently -

(5)    guidelines for the control of ticket sales - which are set
      out in the papers before this Conference.


4.     The Standing Committee's findings      may be summarised by
saying that hooliganism remains a problem    inside stadia - though
the success of existing measures including   effective policing has
resulted in a decline in major incidents      - and outside stadia.
There is no room for complacency.
5.     The Committee received reports on domestic developments,
notably on membership scheme proposals in the UK and the
Netherlands.  Work in the last year has been largely taken up by
the European Championships; both preparatory and follow up work
have been priority issues.   National preparations, international
co-operation and co-operation with UEFA all worked successfully.
The Standing Committee was grateful for the major role played by
the Federal Republic of Germany in this regard.    The tournament
was marred only by the regrettable behaviour of a small number of
so-called supporters in city centres.


Report on anti-hooliganism measures

6.     As part of the follow up work, theStanding Committee was
invited, at the informal meeting of Ministers in Athens, in June
last year, to produce a report on anti-hooligan measures.   This
report has been completed and is included in the Conference
papers. It represents a comprehensive list of measures, drawing
heavily on domestic experience in the member states and on the
European  Championships in West Germany.     Member states are
invited to consider the various measures in the context of their
hooliganism problems.     With that purpose in mind I invite
Ministers to approve the report.


Research project

7.     The Athens meeting also invited the Standing Committee to
plan for a co-ordinated research project into hooliganism in 1990
or 1992. This work too has been completed and detailed proposals
for a possible project are contained in the Conference papers.
The project, as proposed, would evaluate development in the
member states of short term policies on management and control of
spectators and of long term policies on education and community
development.  It would look at the behaviour of fans particularly
at the 1990 World Cup and the 1992 European Championships and
draw international comparisons in attempting to explain the roots
of hooliganism and the effectiveness of the various measures
taken to counter it.


8.     I need not dwell on the detail of the project here.  It is
described in full in the papers before you.         But I should
emphasise that the proposal is an ambitious one with considerable
resource implications for participating member states for whom
the estimated cost is of the order of 400,000 FF each year for 4
years. Ministers may feel that it is too ambitious and it would
be more appropriate for the Committee to commission a more modest
project, perhaps focussing on the World Cup or the European
Championships and possibly covering community and education
initiatives.   If the project is to proceed and centre on the
World Cup tournament, and the dimension of immediacy which this
would bring has its attractions, Ministers will need to take a
decision at this Conference - or very soon afterwards.     I hope
therefore that Ministers can turn to this subject in the
discussion which is to follow this report.
Future work

9.     I turn now to a more general look at the future work of
the Committee and invite Ministers to agree to the following work
plan for the coming year.


10.    The immediate priority task, I hope you will agree, must
be national and international preparatory work for the World Cup
tournament next year in Italy.   Exhaustive planning and maximum
international co-operation will be vital.


11.    It is important that the Standing Committee and the
European Community forum on police co-operation known as the
TREVI Group should develop their relationship: they have separate
but complementary roles and it is important that they should work
together.  It was a welcome development that the Secretary of the
Committee attended the TREVI de-briefing seminar on the European
Championships held in Munster in March and that a TREVI
representative   attended the last meeting      of  the Standing
Committee.  I understand that the lessons from the experience in
Germany are being incorporated in draft TREVI guidelines for
international co-operation on the policing of international
football matches.   Once they have been agreed it is the Standing
Committee's intention to adopt similar guidelines to ensure our
policies are consistent.


12.    Some member states have said that they wish to discuss in
the context of the Standing Committee the implications of the
readmission of English clubs to Europe.   The Committee therefore
intends to consider this at the appropriate time.


13.    The Committee will, in concert with the CDDS, pursue any
research project agreed by Ministers.


14.    The disaster at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April in
Sheffield has, tragically, thrown the importance of spectator
safety at sports stadia into high relief.


15.    The Federal Republic of Germany has written to me to
suggest that it would be appropriate to convene a special meeting
of the Standing Committee to consider the provisions of the
Convention in respect of safety issues.   Athough the work of the
Committee has necessarily been devoted thus far to the matter of
hooliganism, we should not lose sight of the fact that the
Convention is also concerned with spectator safety. Following any
such meeting on safety issues the Committee would assist the CDDS
in preparing a text on the principles of spectator safety and the
measures which can be taken to ensure that they are fulfilled.
If Ministers agree, the Standing Committee will put this work in
hand and pursue the important issue of safety in co-operation
with the CDDS.
                                              ★ * ★
                                          ★                 ★
                                         ★                   ★
                         C O U N C IL     ★                  ★       CONSBIL
                         OF EUROPE            ★    *    ★        DE L’EUROPE

                           6° CONFERENCE DES MINISTRES EUROPEENS
                                   RESPONSABLES DU SPORT
                                   REYKJAVIK, 30 M A I-1 '' JUIN 1989




         Strasbourg, 10 May 1989                                               MSL-6 (8 9 ) DR 3
         MSL6.DR3



                              FRAMEWORK FOR A DRAFT RESOLUTION
                     submitted by the Chairman of the Standing Committee
                                     and the Secretariat


                                         SPECTATOR VIOLENCE




                                                                                                   IRESOLUTION
                                                                                                   ON
                                                                                                   SPECTATOR
                                                                                                   VIOLENCE




20.897
                                             Quarante ans
04.8                                       Conseil de I Europe
      Note with pleasure that 15 member States are Contracting
Parties to the European Convention on Spectator Violence and
Misbehaviour at Sports Events and in particular at Football Matches
and urge as many other member States as possible to sign and/or ratify
the Convention rapidly;

      Note that the problems of spectator violence remain a cause
for serious concern, particularly in the aftermath of important
matches and that public and football authorities must continue to be
vigilant and to act together in the closest possible co-operation;

      Thank the Standing Committee of the European Convention for
the work it has undertaken and for the report presented to this
Conference;

      Note*with pleasure, subject only to the regrettable
behaviour of a small number of supporters, the successful outcome of
the work of the responsible authorities of the Federal Republic of
Germany, UEFA and the national authorities concerned for the European
Football Championships in 1 9 8 8 ;

      Approve the guidelines for the control of ticket sales
prepared by the Standing Committee;

      Approve the Comprehensive Report on Measures to combat
Hooliganism prepared by the Standing Committee at the request of the
Sports Ministers at their 13th Informal Meeting at Athens;

      Agree to work for the implementation of the controls and of
such measures which are or may be appropriate at national level and to
bring them to the attention of the relevant national authorities and
organisations;

      Consider that the following subjects merit particular
attention and further study, and that the Standing Committee would be
the most appropriate forum for this work:

         the continuation of close co-ordination with the bodies
      concerned with the preparation of the World Cup in 1990 and
      the next European Football Championships in 1992, and to pay
      particular attention to the problems posed by spectators
      travelling through or staying in countries other than their
      own;

         the evaluation of the behaviour of spectators at the European
      Football Championships in 1988 and during international matches
      during the 1989-90 season;

         the evaluation of social, cultural and educational projects
      carried out in member States of the CDDS in order to develop
      practical preventative measures aimed at hooligans and potential
      hooligans;

         the further development of practical working relationships
      with the group of permanent correspondents on football
      hooliganism in the European Community, bearing in mind the
      separate but complementary nature and responsibilities of the
      two bodies;

      INSTRUCT the Secretary General to inform the Standing
Committee of this Resolution.
Reykjavik 31 May 1989                  MSL-6 (89) DR 4 Rev
MSL6.DR4




                 DRAFT RESOLUTION ON SAFETY

              as amended by the Drafting Group



     The European Ministers responsible for sport, meeting
at their 6th Conference from 30 May to 1 June 1989 in
Reykjavik,

     Express their heartfelt sympathy for the victims of and
  to those bereaved by the tragic events on 15 April 1989;

      Reaffirm their belief that sports events should be the
occasion for friendly, peaceful and enjoyable meetings for
spectators and participants;

      Recall that the European Convention on Spectator
violence did not ignore the importance of measures for
spectator safety;

      Note that national and international sports events are
constantly increasing in number and size;

     Noting the statement on Safety in Sports Grounds
adopted by the committee on Culture and Education of the
Parliamentary Assembly on 11 May 1989;

      RESOLVE that a necessary complement to the European
Convention on Spectator Violence is the preparation of a
text incorporating the principles and appropriate measures
to guarantee spectator safety at sports grounds and events;

      Consider that the standing Committee should be able to
make proposals for such a text;

      Instruct the Secretary General to inform the Standing
Committee of this Resolution;

      Invite the Committee of Ministers of the Council of
Europe to instruct the CDDS to prepare, in conjunction with
the standing Committee, the draft of such a text.
