      i
          I i                               Cl-e      C<wo*tJ
      *i
      t




1. Miss Eustace
2.- PS/Mr Moynihan



LUNCH MEETING WITH THOMAS L WELLS, AGENT GENERAL FOR ONTARIO
9 NOVEMBER 1989

1.     The Minister has agreed to meet Mr Thomas L Wells, Agent
General for Ontario, for lunch on Thursday 9 November at 12.45pm
at the Barclay Hotel SW1, to discuss the provision of new sports
stadia in the UK.   Mr Wells is likely to mention in particular a
newly opened stadium in Toronto called Sky Dome (home of the
Toronto Blue Jays Baseball team), which is the world's first
major stadium featuring a fully retractable roof.
2.    I attach at flag A some biographical details on Mr Wells.
Also attached is a copy of a brochure on the Toronto Sky Dome
(flag B) and a copy of an article in Monday’s Evening Standard
(flag C) about the first cricket international to be held indoors
which took place at the Sky Dome.


Background

3.(i) There are currently no covered stadia in the UK, although
there are of course numerous uncovered stadia.   The main reason
for this is that our major pitch sports are mainly played on
grass which necessitates the need for open stadia.   The building
and design of major covered stadia is concentrated in the United
States where all the major pitch sports such as American football
and baseball are played on artificial surfaces.      The Minister
will be aware that •the initial interest shown in installing
artificial surfaces at English football grounds is now declining.

(ii)    In addition to running five National Centres, the Sports
Council funds major sports facilities such as indoor arenas, but
does not currently fund the building or improvement of uncovered
stadia..   However the Football Grounds Improvement Trust does
grant’’aid football clubs towards improvements of their stadia.

(iii) The Sports Council's Technical Unit offers advice on the
planning and design of stadia.      In February 1990 the Sports
Council, along with the Royal Institute of British Architects, is
planning to hold a seminar on the safe design of modern stadia,
as well as looking at the American and Italian experiences of
stadia.

(iv)   The British born Canadian based architect who designed the
Toronto Sky Dome stadium is Roderick Robbie and we understand
that he has had various discussions with sporting groups about
adapting the Sky Dome concept for the UK. The Sports Council met
with representatives from the Sky Dome project earlier in the
year. The Council believe that the concept is an exciting one
with its retractable roof which can open and close depending on
weather conditions and its design is in line with the Council's
recommendations.   However, ^t would obviously be very- expensive
and it may struggle to find a foot-hold in the UK unless our
major pitch sports show any sign of shifting away from the
current grass based culture.

(v)     I attach at flag D a note from the Home Office on Lord
Justice Taylor’s Interim report following the Hillsborough
disaster. This gives details of the safety recommendations for
football grounds. ' As the Minister knows the Government shares
the view expressed by the football authorities and others that
there should be a move towards all-seater stadiums for the major
football clubs.    To this end the Football Spectators Bill has
been amended to enable its licensing provisions to provide for
more seated accommodation at designated football grounds.

Line to take                         ., :v »

4.     Mr Wells may ask the Minister if he can help to promote
the Sky Dome concept in the UK.    The Minister could offer what
support he can but will need to stress that a development of this
type would require substantial private sector funding.        The
Minister could point Mr Wells in the direction of      Bob Scott,
Chairman of the Manchester Olympic Bid, although it is possible
that Mr Scott may already have discussed this with Sky Dome
representatives.   Mr Scott's address is the Manchester Olympic
Bid, The Olympic Suite, Bridgewater House, 60 Whitworth Street,
Manchester Ml 6LT, Tel: 061 228 1996.




K A FLANAGAN
SARD A

7 November 1989



cc   Mrs Shand
     Mr Algacs
