                                          lC r ,o U > * < /(o K ^   lV   ^    ^ ’cl \ \

       (WliL.                   K          <TC    H -O Q S                                j

                     w cl } 3 L)p
                 .   2 * 1 /J
                     AcJ*(■I    ^
PS/Mr Moynihan                                                               •Vs

SPORTS ISSUES                                                                   I <3          I
Mr Moynihan met the Secretary of State on 21 December for a very
brief run through the issues listed in the note attached to your
minute of 13 December. Mr Owen, Mr MacDonald, Mr Fletcher,
Mr Kinghan, Mr Lee and Mr Newsom were present.

Football

The Secretary of State said that he was happy for Mr Moynihan to
sound out Owen Rout and Norman Jacobs as potential Chairman of,
respectively, the FMA and the F L A .

Mr Moynihan said that the FLA would need to give major consideration
to the question of all-seater stadia in the light of Lord Justice
Taylor's final report. H o w e v e r , the FA and the League hacA. been
asked to look separately at this question and it should form an item
on the agenda at their next meeting with Ministers.

The Secretary of State agreed to write to the Home Secretary about
the implementation of Part II of the Football Spectators Act. I
should be grateful if SARD could provide a draft via your office.

Mr Moynihan outlined the preparations that w e r t be*w^made to minimise
the opportunities for hooliganism during the World-'Xup Finals. He
emphasised the need for the Government to be seen to be pro-active
here and for Cabinet colleagues, particularly the Prime Minister,
the Foreign Secretary and the Home Secretary, to be kept properly
briefed.

The Secretary of State noted that Lord Justice Taylor's final report
was expected during the week beginning 22 January.    !

Sports Council

The poor publicity which had followed the announcement of the Sports
Council's grant for the next financial year was unfortunate,
particularly as the Sports Council had received more than they had
actually bid for. Mr Moynihan considered that what was needed was a
3 year programme of f u n ding. However, the Sports Council's position
here would need to be considered alongside that of other quangos.

The Department's response to the PAC report should cover the Sports
Council's response. The CCPR would respond in tandem.

Inner City Report

Mr Moynihan said that the report had received good press coverage.
He and Mr Hunt would now be monitoring the implementation of the
report's recommendations.
                                                                >


Commonwealth Games

Mr Moynihan reported that it had now been agr eed that there would
be   a meeting of Commonwealth Ministers of Sport after the Games.
Likely agenda items were anti-doping measures; the role of Sports
Ministers; future funding of the Commonwealth Games.

PPG

Competitive Tendering

Mr Moynihan reported on the current state of play on the preparation
of these two guidance notes, both of which he hoped would be issued
early   in the year.

Drug Initiatives

Mr Moynihan said that he proposed to invite Sebastian Coe to issue a
follow-up to his earlier report on drug testing following the
Commonwealth Games.

School Sport

Mr Moynihan said that he would shortly be inviting the Secretary of
State to write to DES drawing attention to the need for competitive
school sport to have a place in the national curriculum.

Sheffield World Games

Tax Considerations in Sport

Mr Moynihan said that he wanted to put papers to the Secretary of
State on both these issues.




A D RING
APS/Secretary of State

>3      January 1990

cc       PS/Sir T Heiser
         Mr Owen
         Mr MacDonald
         Mr Fletcher
      ^ M r Kinghan
         Mr Newsom
