                                                                                          37-
                HOME OFFICE
                Queen Anne's Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                              Direct line 01-273   2582
                                             Sw itchboard 01-273 3000



                                                                    Your reference


                                                                    Our reference

                                                                    FEP/9035/48/139
                                                                    Date

                                                                    /7 May 1990




         Dear

         Thank you for your recent letter to Mr Moynihan
         which has been passed to this department in view of our
         responsibilities for the Safety of Sports Grounds Act.  I
         apologise for the delay in replying to you.

         You expressed concern that if football stadia provided seated
         accommodation only, the resulting capacity reductions would
         result in many stadia not being large enough to accommodate
         all who wish to attend certain matches. However,
         Lord Justipe Taylor points out, in his Final Report on the
         Hillsborough Stadium disaster, that of all the teams in
         Divisions One and Two of the Football League in the 1988/89
         season only at Liverpool did the average attendance exceed the
         projected all seated capacity of the ground.  In fact, at 21
         of these 44 clubs the projected all seated capacity was not
         exceeded at all throughout the season.  Consequently the
         problem of over demand for tickets may not be as serious a
         problem as you envisage.

                                                                    Yours sincerely




                                                                   MR S BILBE
                                                                   (Fire and Emergency
                                                                   Planning Department)




00.8 S 363
                                'TO ill



R t . Hon. C o l i \ Moy^ahaiv, MP
House of Commoi
Westminster
London.                                  tSt   a

                                     ufe
                               FILE th             January 31,   1990
Dear Sir


With     the   recent  publication of the Taylor report   into the
Hi 11 s bor ough disaster, I feel that it is important that as you
Minister of Sport are made aware of the feelings of ordinary
football fans towards the proposals.    As such, I humbly offer you
my personal opinions.

First,  may  I congratulate your government    on its extremely
prudent decision not to push ahead with the identity card section
of the Football Spectators Act.   However, I still feel that the
government  has  not  fully  come  to  terms  with  the  problems
affecting football, particularly in relation to the proposal to
move to all-seater stadia.

Somewhat reluctantly I accept the need for all-seater grounds,
and it is much to the discredit of the football authorities that
ground   improvements   were  not made  long ago.   However,  the
desirablity of all-seater stadiums must be balanced against the
practicalities   of   implementing such  a move.   The  financial
problems, especially for smaller clubs (and that includes First
division sides such as Wimbledon and Charlton) are obvious.     I
believe that in the same way government pumps money into the
arts, which I wholeheartedly appprove of, the government has a
responsibility to ensure that football is not decimated by the
costs of ground and other safety improvements.    Like the arts,
football is part of the essential fabric of British life; the
government would do itself a great deal of good if it were seen
to be defending this.

I also   envisage another major problem concerning a l l— seater
grounds.  Big clubs such as Tottenham, Arsenal, Manchester United
and  Liverpool   regularly have  attendences  that  approach   the
current capacities of their grounds.      If they are forced to
remove all their terracing within two to three years then clearly
there will be massive over demand for tickets to many games. As
an example,    the  recent Arsenal  v  Spurs  match  attracted   a
capacity crowd of 4 7 , 0 0 0 , and still some 5 , 0 0 0 spectators failed
to gain admitance to the match.        An all-seater      Highbury, it has
been estimated, would have a capacity of approximately 2 9 , 0 0 0 .
The prospect of 2 0 , 0 0 0 fans locked out of a match appears to
raise new safety implications, this time outside grounds.              One
answer is to make all matches all-ticket, but this still leaves
the problem of ticket touts, and the fact that many football fans
will hardly ever get the chance to see their favourite side.

The solution to this problem is, I believe, reasonably straigh-
forward.     Terracing   is  not     intrinsically      dangerous.    The
restricted capacities that have been introduced over the past few
seasons, combined with other safety measures, makes standing on
the terraces perfectly safe.         Therefore I believe that clubs
ought  to be   allowed to    retain terrraced         sections   in their
grounds. (The much   lauded Ibrox stadium still has 9 , 0 0 0 standing
places).  Meanwhile new, all-seater, multi-purpose stadia should
be built on the outskirts of at least three major British cities
eg. Birmingham, Manchester/Liverpool, London.          These should have
a capacity in the region of 6 0 - 7 5 , 0 0 0 and should be used for big
league fixtures, FA cup matches, semi-finals, internationals and
other sporting occasions, such as rugby league and athletics.

Government investment in combination with local authority and
private money is essential. Governments onthe continent have
invested in such   facilities, and in countries such as Spain and
11 Z       rewards wil1 be reaped through the
the World Cup and the Olympic Games.
                                                money generated by


I hope that you will take into accounts the points        I have   raised
when considering the future of our most popular
national game.

Yours sincerely




       XU
