1.   Mr Vaughan
2.   PS/Mr Atkins                           \


TAYLOR REPORT: HOME OFFICE CONSIDERATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS FOR
NEW FOOTBALL RELATED OFFENCES


1.   My minute of 20 July to Mr Moynihan (flag A) outlined the/
outcome of Home Office officials consideration, provisionally
agreed by the Home Secretary,of LordJustice Taylor's re­
commendations, in his final report on the Hillsborough Stadium
disaster, for new offences and penalties concerning football
hooliganism.We now have a note  from the  Home Office confirming
the outcome     of the Home Secretary's consideration of these
proposals (at flag B).
     ;   •                  i           '

2.   The Home Secretary has agreed that there should be an
offence of selling tickets for and on the day of a football match
without authority from the home club to do so (para 2). He has
also agreed that there should be three new criminal offences
relating to    missile throwing, chanting   obscene or racialist
abuse and running onto the pitch (para 3-6). The second of these
proposed new offences was recognised to be the most arguable but
it would be presentationally difficult to exclude it from the
package and the Home Secretary's initial doubts about the
enforceability of the proposed offence have been removed as a
result of his discussions with Lord Justice Taylor and the
Metropolitan Police.

3.   The Home Secretary is not in favour of electronic tagging of
football hooligans and agrees that it would be inappropriate to
extend the court's power to make attendance centre orders (paras
7-9). Home Office officials, however, have been asked to provide
further advice for the Ministers on how to make the enforcement
of exclusion orders more effective.    The Minister may wish to
know that under the Public Order Act 1986 the courts can made an
exclusion order against any person convicted of a football
related offence, prohibiting that person from attendance at any
designated match.    The power has not been often used by the
courts as pointed out by Lord Justice Taylor.    A major weakness
is the difficulty of discovering whether it is being obeyed or
not. Requiring those subject to exclusion orders to report to a
police station at the time of a match would, however, carry
considerable resource implications for the police as the attached
minute records (at paragraph 8).                                 1
4.   It will be some time before these proposed new, offences are
put to H Committee since the earliest opportunity for Government
legislation would appear to be the Criminal Law Bill planned for
the 1991/92 Parliamentary session (paragraph 10).




A R BADEN
SARD C
P3/165
276 0675

 /    August 1990

cc.   Mr McDonald
      Mr Ellingford
      Mr Newsom




             v

                                                                    l
