                                                     )   H   -




CPPU




BRIEFING FOR QUESTION TIME: THE FOOTBALL MEMBERSHIP SCHEME AND
LORD JUSTICE  TAYLOR'S FINAL REPORT
1.   I attach an update on the briefing previously supplied      for
question time.

2.   The key    line to take on the football membership scheme and
Lord Justice   Taylor's final  report is attached first, followed by
briefing on the Football Spectators Act and bull points on the
need for a scheme.




A R BADEN
SARD
Rm P3/165
Extn 0675

25 January 1990


cc    Mr Kinghan
     utfr Lee (o/r)
      Mr Ellingford
Is the Government going to drop the football membership scheme in
the light of Lord Justice Taylor's final report?




The Home Secretary will be making a statement on Lord Justice
Taylor's final report when the report is published on Monday.
THE FOOTBALL SPECTATORS ACT



1.   The Act provides:
     - the statutory framework for a national membership scheme
       for football supporters; and
     - the Courts with power to impose restriction hooligans to
       prevent them travelling abroad.
2.   The  Act requires   that everyone who attends a designated
football match in England and Wales should be a member of the
membership scheme, or otherwise authorised by the scheme, and
that designated matches can be played only on licensed football
grounds.   Trouble makers inside and outside the ground will be
banned from membership and thereby prevented from attending
games.
3.   The  Act does not prescribe the contents of the membership
scheme.    It will be    for the Football Membership Authority
(established by the Act to administer the scheme) to draft the
scheme and submit it to the Secretary of State for approval. The
Football Association and Football League have been given "first
refusal" to set up a joint body to form the FMA and to this end
have established a joint working group to consider the proposed
scheme in detail.
4.   The  Act also establishes a Football Licensing Authority
(FLA) to licence grounds for the purposes of the scheme and to
advise the Secretary of State on the possible replacement of
terracing by seated accommodation at grounds.         Subject to
parliamentary approval the FLA is also empowered to monitor the
performance of local authorities in exercising their powers under
the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.
5.   There is also no question of the scheme being put into place
without full Parliamentary consideration in the light of Lord
Justice Taylor's Final Report of the Hillsborough tragedy.    The
Act provides Parliament with 2 opportunities to debate the scheme
after Lord Justice Taylor's Final Report - before the FMA is
appointed and after it has submitted the scheme to the Secretary
of State for approval. The Government has always made clear that
it will not introduce the scheme until it is satisfied that the
technology is workable, effective and safe.
6.   The Government is looking to introduce the restriction order
provisions of the Act shortly.       These can make a valuable
contribution to preventing known trouble-makers from attending
the World Cup in Italy in June.
       FOOTBALL MEMBERSHIP SCHEME



       BULL POINTS



       1.   Public opinion polls have consistently shown majorities in
       favour of the national membership scheme. On 17 January, the
       Daily Star reported an opinion poll showing 61% in favour, 31%
       against; seven out of ten women in favour.
                                                *

       2.   Football hooliganism remains serious enough to require 5,000
       police on duty every weekend to contain the problem.

       3.    6,185 arrests and 7,607 ejections from grounds in 1988/89
       season. On the final Saturday of that season alone (13 May 1989)
       - one month after Hillsborough - 300 were arrested inside and
       outside grounds.

       4.   Opposition has no answer; no alternatives to membership
       scheme. Rt Hon member for Birmingham Small Heath (Denis Howell)
       last night advocated reducing police prssence at football
       matches I

       5.    We must have adequate measures to protect law     abiding
       football spectators and people living and trading near football
       grounds.

       6.   The Football Spectators Act provides a framework for the
       national membership scheme and two opportunities for Parliament
       to debate the scheme, after Taylor, before implementation. It
       also provides firm action against hooligans who disgrace England
       by their behaviour overseas.




100%
