i                                                                              (-olcS-S^
                       THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION & SCIENCE
                      ELIZABETH HOUSE YORK ROAD LONDON SEI 7PH
                  SWITCHBOARD 071-934 9000 FAX 071-934 9082 GTN No. 3914




J L Goddard Esq
F8 Division                                                    J(q July 1991
The Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London
SW1H 9AT




            PREPARATIONS FOR EUROPEAN CHAMPIONSHIP FINALS

I know that Tony Baden has had some preliminary discussions with Keir
Hopley of your Division on who should take the lead in chairing any
working party preparing for the European Football Championship Finals
in Sweden next year. I understand that at a meeting recently with the
Football Association, and attended by Brian Mennell, it was agreed
that it would be helpful to set up a first meeting of the working
party for September in order to define roles and establish the key
sub-groups who would do much of the work. It is therefore necessary in
advance of this meeting to settle who should chair the main working
group and form some preliminary views on who should chair the various
sub-groups.

A major change from last year is that Mr Atkins is unlikely to take
the high profile position in relation to the European Championship
Finals that Mr Moynihan did in relation to the World Cup. Given this
and since while any Working Party will need to consider a wide range
of matters safety and security remain at the heart of the Government's
concerns, it seems appropriate for the Home Office to chair the main
working party.

However, I suggest that rather than a repeat of the all too frequent
meetings of the World Cup working party we might rely on fewer
meetings of the main working party and establish several key working
groups to deal with the particular topics where the main working party
would be too unwieldy. The main working party might concentrate on the
core inter-related areas of policing, segregation and ticketing. Sub­
groups might be established on press liaison (perhaps to be chaired by
the FCO) supporters welfare covering such questions as accommodation,
advance information and leaflets, and the organisation at events out
in Sweden for supporters (to be chaired by ourselves) and liaison
with the ferry and air operators (perhaps to be chaired by DTp). To
ensure consistency of approach in these sub-groups it would no doubt

                                                                                   1
*be advisable that whichever Department chaired the main working party
 should ensure that it was represented on each of these sub-groups. The
 sub-groups would report back to the main working party.

While writing I would also be grateful for your advice on where tjie
Home Office    stands   in  implementing the proposed offence of
introducing legislation against ticket touting at football matches in
England and Wales, our line has been that it will be introduced ak
soon as Parliamentary time allows but I now understand following Sft
recent meeting between the Minister and the Chief Executive of the
Football League that legislation is several years away on this matter,^
I understand this is because there are arguments against extending the
scope of any Criminal Law Bill in the session after next to include a
specific ticket touting offence and that a single clause bill to deal
only with this matter is a low priority. The delay came as some
surprise to us and I would be grateful if you could confirm that there
is likely to be a lengthy delay in implementing this aspect of the
Taylor report.   If there is I think there is a presentational
difficulty here which I would also welcome your advice on given that
the Football League will publicly argue that a long delay is
inconsistent with Taylor and damaging to security.

Yours sincerely




\3X}HN VAUGHAN




                                                                     2
