          EM JOY YOUR LIFE      CYCLE




 15 May 1990
                      f, P
v.
   • Colin Moyninaxf, M*P#*
   nister for Sport,        I flifcHT           I
 Hotwe of Commons,          §           4
 LonXon.   SW1A OAA

     ear Sir,
          The enclosed copy of a ret^er^RTtfle General
Secretary, Wembley Stadium is self-explanatory and
concerns the matter of the Union Jack being flown
upside-down at ltst Saturday^ P.A. Cup Pinal.
          I wrote to my Member of Parliament recently,
 (Mr. Henry Bellingham, N.W. Norfolk) giving him my
personal views on th® Government’s proposals for all-
seater stadiums in this country. I can give you one
example (there are many others 1 ) of what took place
at a soccer match I attended and when I purchased a
stand ticket at Elland Road, Leeds.
           My seat was in the cent»» stand, and all
through the match, sometimes at short intervals, the
spectators in the stand would rise from their seats
to cheer, or seek to see various incidents on the pitch,
or to hurl abuse, taunt and use hand gestures towards
the visiting team's supporters, down below in their
police-patrolled corral. These standing spectators did
not appear to be interested in the match as much as
seeking to let the visitors know, vociferously, what
theynt thought about them J
             Needless to aay, that was my last visit to
Elland Road, I shall not go there again.
             If, and when, all-seater stadiums come into
force, what steps can be taken to ensure that spectators
do sit ©n their seats ? will it be the task allotted
to the police ? or the stadium stewards ? or whom ?
              I fear that there is only one solutions
that is for spectators to use
                    SEAT BELTS .».»

             One other point in connection with sport in
this country m how much longer are we going to allow
tobacco companies to sponsor sport and for BBC TV to
allow such coverage in their programmes ?

                             Yours sincerely.
14 May 1990

The General Secretary,
Wembley Stadium,
Wembley,
London.

Dear Sir»
               P.A.Cup : Wembley:
               Saturday 12 May 1990


         This, possibly our greatest national event,
televised to all parts of the world - and what do we
see - nothing less than our UNION FLA0 - flying
               UPSIDE DOWN .’ }
        / A pity that we do not take a leaf, dare I
suggest!t ? from the Americans, who have definate
regulations as to the use of the ‘Stars and Stripes’
how it is to be flown, where it can be flown or used
and the strict attention which is made throughout
that country to see that their flag is honoured in
great respect. The indoctrination on the correct
and proper respect for the *Stars and Stripes1 starts
early in school, perhaps we ought to follow their
example, so that on all future national occasions,
OUR FLAG     will fly in the correct manner? viz;
            WHEN placed on the cross of St.Andrew, the
            red of the cross of St.Patrick is narrowed
            in order to leave a white edging (fimbriation.)
          ' In the UNION JACK the WHITE EDGING IS
            BRQABER-.UPPERMOST ON THE STAgR_SIDEL

         Would ymu be good enough to advise your
•flag flyer* as to how the Union Jack should be flown,
I suggest that h® takes along with him the enclosed
diagram.
        Oltherwise, congratulations on the super
arrangements which you made for this year’s FoAo
Cup Final. I shall look out on this coming Thursday,
to see that flag flying correctly Ji

                           Yours sincerely,




pQEt-tg   ,/
          "Mr. Colin Moynihan, M.P.,
           Minister for Sport,
           House of Comirioflg London. SW1A OAA
                                     THE            BRITISH                   UNION                 FLAG
\ T h e o r i‘S 1in
             >   «




                          T h e national flag of the U nited Kingdom, which has become universally known as


 1° f t h e
                          the Union Jack, is a combination of the banners of the patron saints of England,
                          Scotland and Ireland.
                                St. George, a Christian m artyr, had long been patron saint of England, but the
                          first reference to the adoption of his arms (red cross on white ground) as the English
                          national emblem came in 1277. To this the banner of St. Andrew (blue, with a
                          white saltire cross) was united, in pursuance of a Royal Proclamation, dated 12 April,
                           1606, of which the following is an extract :
                                     “ W hereas some difference hath arisen between O ur Subjects of South and
                                     N orth Britain, travelling by seas, about the bearing of their flags : for the
                                     avoiding of all such contentions hereafter, We have, with the advice of O ur
                                     Couticil, ordered that from henceforth, all O ur subjects of this Isle and
                                     Kingdom of Great Britain, and the members thereof, shall bear in their
                                     maintops the Red Cross, commonly called Saint George’s Cross, and the
                                     W hite Cross, commonly called Saint Andrew’s Cross, joined together.”
                                In the seventeenth century the flag went through several changes; on the death
                          of Charles I the ships of the parliament reverted to the use of St. George’s flag; when
                          Cromwell became Lord Protector, he restored the union flag, adding the Irish harp ;
                          then Charles II removed the harp.


                                                     U N IO N      W ITH       SCOTLAND

                               In the next century came the final acts of union with Scotland.
                              O n 17 April, 1707, Queen Anne, upon a report from the Lords o f the Privy
                          Council, following the Act for uniting the two kingdoms of England and Scotland,


IB r i t i s h
                          approved the flag, as: shown in the drawing (c), in which the crosses of St. George (a)
                          an3 St. Andrew (b) are conjoined. It will be seen that a white edging (fimbriation)
                          has been added to 'th e Cross of St. George-, '^hich, in the conjoined flag, retains
                          exactly the same size and positioning. "




 U ni o n
                                                       U N IO N      W ITH       IR ELA N D

                                  On 5 November, 1800, George III approved the final changes to the flag following
                             the union of Great Britain and Ireland. T he Cross of St. George is conjoined with
                             thVcrosses of St. Andrew and St. Patrick (d), and the flag is thus described in the
                      ■; proclamation issued in January 1801 :




 F
  l ag r
     1
                         f
                           /          “ T he Union Flag shall be azure, the Crosses saltire of St. Andrew and St.
                                      Patrick, quarterly per saltire counterchanged argent and gules j the latter
                                       fimbriated of the second surmounted by the Cross of St. George of the
                                       third fimbriated as the saltire.”
                                  W hen placed on the cross of St. Andrew the red o f t ii e C T O s s o f S ^ P a r f c k is >1
                       ft narrowed in order to leave a white edging (fimbriation). iln J h e U n lo n jack the white j*
                       |                        ljinpermost on the staftside. and in all four quarters of the flag there
                             is both a thick and thin white band. T he narrowing of the Cross of St. Patrick and
                                                                                                                                                                                                          /




                                                                                                                                                                                         Precise
                                                                                                                T he width of the                 Proportion generally in           dimensions in a
                                                                                                                 several crosses                     the Union Flag                  Union Flag of
                                                                                                                                                                                      10 breadths*

                                                                                                                                                                                        ft.    in.
                                                                                                        (1) T he Red of the St. George’s 1/5 the width of the Flag                       1      6
                                                                                                               Cross to be
                                                                                                        (2) T h e W hite Border to the       1/15 the width of the Flag, or 1/3          0      6
                                                                                                               St. George’s Cross to be        the Red of the St. George’s
       (a)   T H E C RO S S O F S T . G E O R G E
                                                                                                                                               Cross
                                                         Q>)   TH E CROSS OF ST . A N D RE W
             (Patron Saint of England)                         (Patron Saint of Scotland)               (3) T he Red of the St. Patrick’s    1/15 the width of the Flag, or 1/3          0      6
                                                                                                               Cross to be                     the Red of the St. George’s
                                                                                                                                               Cross
                                                                                                        (4) T he Narrow W hite Border        1/30 the width of the Flag, or 1/6          0     3
                                                                                                              of the St. Patrick’s Cross       the Red of the St. George’s
                                                                                                              to be                            Cross
                                                                                                       (5) T he Broad W hite of the          1/10 the width of the Flag, or              0     9
                                                                                                              St. Andrew’s Cross to be         half the Red of the St.
                                                                                                                                               George’s Cross, or equal to
                                                                                                                                               the Red of the St. Patrick’s
                                                                                                                                               Cross, together with one of
                                                                                                                                               its Narrow W hite Borders

                                                                                                         *A breadth signifies a breadth of bunting, viz. 9 in., and thus a flag of 10 breadths measures
                                                                                                       15 ft. long by 7 ft. 6 in. broad.
   (c)       ST. ANDREW +          ST. GEORGE           (d)    THE   C RO SS O F S T . P A T R I C K
                          1707                                 (Patron Saint of Ireland)
                                                                                                         Note. A Jack is a flag to be flown only on the “ Jack ” staff, i.e. a staff on the bowsprit
                                                                                                       or forepart of the ship. The word “ Jack” .is probably a diminutive, distinguishing the
                                                                                                       small Union Flag on the bowsprit from the lajjge one formerly flown at the topmast head.
                                                                                                                                                        %




                                                                                                       BRITISH                    INFORMATION                                 SERVICES
                                                                                                       AN      AGENCY             OF      THE        BRITISH              GOVERNMENT

                                                                                                           45 R O C K E F E L L E R P L A Z A , N E W Y O R K 2 0 , N . Y .
                                                                                                       903 N A T I O N A L P R E S S B U I L D I N G , W A S H I N G T O N 4, D . C .
(e )     M O D I F I E D CROSS OF S T . P A T R I C K
                                                                                                          720    N.    M ICH IG A N AVENUE,                 CH ICAGO        11,    ILLIN O IS
                                                                                                       2516     PACIFIC       AVENUE,         SA N      FRANCISCO           15,    CA LIFORNIA
                                                                                                       448    SOUTH       H ILL      STREET,        LOS     ANGELES          13,    C A L IFO R N IA

                                                                                                       This material is filed with the Department of Justice, where the reauired registration statement
