*£8; JAN '91 15:00 HOME OFFICE -FS- 071 273 4284                         ^                          P-1/24


              HQME OFFICE
              Queen Anne's Gate London SW1H 9 AT
                                                                                                    128 -1 .B M
                                             Direct line 01-273
                                            Switchboard 01 -273 3000



     Mr T B a d e n                                                Your      reference
     SARD C
     Department of Education & Science                             .Ourinference
     Elizabeth. House
     York Road;
     SE1 7 PH j                                                   7 -8         J a n u a r y 199'




     Dear Tony


     NEW O FFE N C E S



     I promised to fax over the draft instructions to parliamentary
     c o u n s e l 'o n the bill to create further offence; in connection with
     football
                                                            SO
     However, jit is very much at the drafting stage «*A&, I also enclose
     a copy of Mr Goddards comments on the draft to our legal advisers.

     All this may be rather more complicated than you     ;;e so in
     addition I enclose a brief on the proposed offer      You may find
     this a bit more useful for the purposes of your meeting with the
     Council of Europe Research Working Pax'ty.




     MARY ESPL^LN
     F8 Division




 S 363
28 JAN '91 15:00 HOME OFFICE -F8- 071 273 4284                          P.2/24




 LORD JUSTH CE TAYLORS REPORT: PROPOSED OFFENCES IN CONNECTION WITH
 FOOTBALL N1A1
             TCHES


 Lord Justi ce Taylor in his final report into the Hillsborough
 Stadium Di saster recommended the creation of four new offences at
 football ira t c h e s ;


        (i)           selling tickets for and on the day of a match
                      without the authority of the home club;


        (ii)          throwing a missile;


                      chanting obscene or racialist abuse;


        (iv)          going on the pitch without good reason.


 The Government have considered his proposals and concluded that
 they would provide valuable new measures to help control and deter
 hooliganis m at football m a t c h e s .    It is intended to create
 offences a long the lines recommended by Lord Justice Taylor as
  soon as Pa rliamentary time allows


 GENERAL ACCEPTABILITY OF THE OFFENCES


 Taylors pr1*
            oposals for new offences have been welcomed by the
  football     uthorities and the Government believes that they will
 also be we Icomed by the vast majority of football fans.           The new
 offences w ill provide valuable new measures to curtail the
 unacceptab,le behaviour that can lead to serious disorder.


 WHY WILL THE TOUTING OFFENCE APPLY TO FOOTBALL?


 One of the main purposes of the proposed offence is to reduce the
 potential for disorder resulting from the expectation that tickets
 will be av ailable from touts outside football grounds.           This
  expectatio n attracts large groups of supporters without tickets to
 attend at the vicinity of the ground causing obstruction and, as
  ticket sup ply fails,      frustration, which is all conclusive to
 disorder.      Indiscriminate re-sale of tickets, also undermines the
28 JAN '91 15=00 HOME OFFICE -F8- 071 £73 4284                       P.3/24




  policy of segregating rival fans which may also create public
  order prot l e m s ,


  ARE THE O F FENCES INSIDE THE GROUND ALREADY COVERED BY EXISTING
  LEGISLATIQ]»N?


  No    The throwing of missiles,        obscene and racist chanting and
  running onto the pitch would be an anti-social nuisance anywhere,
  but the behaviour is especially prevalent at association football
 matches an d in that context it is fraught with potential for
  serious di sorder.      Lord Justice Taylor considered that if specific
 offences e xisted and if full publicity were given to the
 legislatio n, hooligans will know precisely what is prohibited and
 will be de terred from carrying out this sort of mischief.  The
 Government agrees and it is intended to create separate offences
  in respect of the three activities.


 PENALTIES


 It is the Governments view that these offences should be dealt
 with by th e magistrates' courts. It is proposed that the offence
 of ticket touting will attract a fine up to level 5 (currently
 £2,000) an d the maximum penalty for the other offences would be a
 fine at le vel 3     (currently £ 4 0 0 ).
JAN '91 15:01 HOME OFFICE -F8- 071 273 4284,.                          P.5/24




    A BIL|j TO CREATE FURTHER OFFENCES IN CONNECTION WITH
    ASSOCIATION FOOTBALL MATCHES


     Draft Instructions to Parliamentary Counsel


                    Part I;     Introduction,      scone and extent


     1.1    These Instructions set out proposals for the creation of
     four new offences which should apply only at or in relation to
     association football matches.              The offences were proposed by
     Lord Justice Taylor in Chapters 7 and 9 of his final report
     into the Hillsborough Stadium disaster.              A copy of that report
      (Cm 9 62) is attached to these Instructions.


     1.2    The proposals for, the offence of ticket touting are set
     out in Part XI of these Instructions.              Proposals for the three
     remaining offences are dealt wit h together in Part III of
     these Instructions,


      1.3   £s noted above, the offences should apply only in
      relation to association football matches, notwithstanding that
      there: may be pressure to extend the offences to other sporting
      event.s. ^ Furthermore it would be^J^p.p-ropr'iat"e"’
                                                          ^ o r the
      offences tb"apply at evej^-a-ssociation football match because
      problems of crowd-<:bn^olr^%o_K3licii the proposed offences are
      directed) .^xsccur only at the better attencierd-^-matches.
      A c c o r d i n g l y ^ t h e Bill should provide that the matches to which
      the proposed offences should apply are those of a description
      or descriptions for the time being designated by order made by
      the Secretary of State:          cf. section 1(2) of the Football
      Spectators Act 1989        (c.37).    This power should be exercisable
      by statutory instrument and any such order should be subject
      to the negative resolution procedure:             cf. section 1(10) of
      the 1989 Act.       It is currently proposed to exercise the power
      in respect of matches where one of the teams is a member o£
      the Football League and in respect of matches involving teams
      representing a country or territory.             The same designation
      should apply for all four proposed offences.

                                                                                    .1
23 JAN '91 15=02 HOME OFFICE -F8- 071 273 4284                            “P.6/24“




       1. 4    The proposed offences should apply in England and Wales
       only.


                                 £a r t _II:     Ticket Tout.S

       2.1
               Counsel is referred, by way of background, to paragraphs
       273 to 278 Of the Taylor Final Report.              These describe the
       problems which can be caused by ticket touts at association
       football matches and        (in paragraph 276) why touting elsewhere
       does not create the same problems.  Paragraph 279 sets out
       three possible offences directed at touts.  This Part of these
       Instructions contains proposals broadly directed at giving
       e f f e c t : to the first of those possible offences: that is, sale
       o f tick;kets on- the day of a football match without due
       authority.


       2,2
                     of     main Purposes ’of the proposed offence         is to
       prever ,t the obstruction caused by touts at the entrances              to
U-     football       grounds and on the highways leading to them. But,              as
       the sale       of tickets by touts potentially^weakens the                   ' .
       segregation of fans, the proposed offence will also help to
       prevent such weakening,         it might also discourage fans without
       +-ickets from going to an all ticket match in the hope of
       buying one from a tout.


       2.3  T he offence should consist of selling or offering for
       sale t ickets for certain association football matches on the
       day of the match in question without the necessary consent to
       do so (as to which see paragraph 2.7 below).   The matches to
       which the offence should apply are those of the description
       design ated under the order-making power proposed in paragraph
       1 . 4 ab o v e .

       2.4   Th,e essential feature of the proposed offence is selling
       tickets or offering or exposing them for sale,    it should not
       be nectp ssary to prove that money actually changed hands (cf.
       section 196(1) of the Licensing Act 1964             (c.26)).   it is


                                                                                      2
         JAN '91 15:02 HOME OFFICE -F8- 071 273 4284                          .. P.7/24"




         recognis      that such an offence may not be wholly effective in
         catching all touts.    An offence of possession of tickets with
         the inte jvtion of selling them would allow the police to act
         against ■ person they believed to be a tout but who is not
         actually displaying any tickets and has not been seen to have
         sold any   However, the disadvantage of such an offence is the
     ^ / - d l f f i c u l y of proving intention and it is therefore not what
            is requir ed*


          2.5   It |Ls not proposed that the offence should be restricted
          to the vicinity of the ground at which the match is played.
         ’If, for example,       it became known that touts operated from a
          particular area in Central London fans might buy tickets there
          prior toj travelling to the ground and the segregation of fans
          would thsreby be disrupted.          The offence is to be committed if
          the selling           offering for sale or display of tickets takes
          place in a public place or a place to which-members of the
                                                    *'v ’
          public'h^ve access; 'so as to ensure that touts cannot operate '
          from places such'as public houses,             cafes or shops    (being
          places ts which the public have a c c e s s ) ,        Even this might not
          be wide enough because* there is a danger that a tout might
          operate from his home address          (which becomes known to fans
          whether by advertisement or by other m e a n s ) .           In such a case,
Hr   ,

          this is not a place to which members of the public have access
          because only those fans who are going to buy tickets will have
          admission.      Subject to C o u n s e l ’s views,   the Bill should
          provide that the offence can be committed anywhere                (whether a
          place to which the public have access or n o t ) ,


          2.6    If (possible, the Bill should provide a defence to cover
          cases such as that of the fan who has become ill                (possibly on
          the day of the match)        and has sold his ticket to someone he
          knows.     It seems unduly cumbersome to require him to obtain
          the necessary written authority              (as to which,   see paragraph
          2.7 below)     and,    in the case of illness on the day of the
          match,    it would not be possible for him to do so.              There
           should be two elements in the proposed defence.                The first is


                                                                                         3
28 JAN '91 15:03 HOME OFFICE -FS- 071 273 4284                            ...P.8/24




        to wh ich the* Sj'°Uld not take place ln a public place or place
                h the public have access.   Pans should not be able to
               outs.de a ground to sell spare t l o k e t s . Ths secon(J ^

               Et I T      “ 1EOlated inoiae»t and the person selling
               hot otherwise deal in tickets. Ihis may not be an ^
                  ?t       to give effect to and any alternative suggestions
       would be gratefully received.


       2*7
               Apparently it is not unusual for football clubs to have
       autho
       of a ^                           8611 tiCketS b°t& bafore an* -   « »   - Y
       the cl u b s themselves6                    ^   *iC*et) ln additi™ to
                               S ' Ifc 13 n e c essary to ensure that such
       agent^
                are not caught by the proposed new offences,
       Accord ingly., the Bill should ensure
       necess'fcarv          •     •      ensure that a person who has the
               *ry consent in writing to sell tickets falls outside the
       offenci
              ».    However, it is not_sufficient to take up the
       sugge St
                ion in paragraph 279 Vf-th.. T a y W r Final Report that
       the a
       finals3 o f rthy T   T he t h a t    th e ho,"a c lu b S in c e th e
               of the FA Cup are played on neutral grounds and the
       final 13 played at Wembley.       The Bill            +-k
              ,U ,        4, p                     should therefore provide


       [2.8       Penalties]       - £ ^

      2.9     ^
                  he Bill should confer a power on a constable to arrest
      without
               warrant a person whom the constable believes, on
      reason
             able grounds,is committing or has committed the proposed
      offenc

      2*10
               -Phe Bill should confer a power on the constable to
      search any person he has arrested           ^
      paragr^,
                  1        2.9 above,   it     r also
                                                  r      t
                                                      confer power
                                                             a     proposed
                                                               power on the ln
      constab
                       e    o confiscate fron any person arrested under that
     power
                  ny        ickets to a match which is designated under the
     proposa,
     on that dav" P ""a3raPh ^    ab°V a ' WhSre the      * * « Pl«.
     motor v ehiri   hS r ~   ° f search shoultJ also extsnd to any
                  ehicle which the constable reasonably believes the



                                                                                      4
£8 JAN '91 1=      HOME OFFICE -F8- W71 £73 4204        F8 DIVISION           P.10/lc




         arrested person is using       (and any tickets found should be
         liable to confisca tio n) .     What is more difficult is the extent
         to which the power of search should extend to premises in
         which the person has been arrested.         Where the person has been

n        arrest«id in a house where he lives or a shop he is using,
         seems reasonable that the power of search should extend to
                                                                                 it


         those premises.      Where, however, he has been arrested in a
         public house or cafe,       it hardly seems fair to the owner of
         such premises that they should be searched.              Any suggestions
         from Counsel as to a means of limiting the search powers would
         be gratefully received.


                                  Part III:   Other offences


         3 .1   Counsel is referred -to Chapter .9 of the Taylor Final
         Report      This Part of -these Instructions attempts to set out
         propos als to create offences in respect of the- three
         activi :i-es' listed in paragraph 2 89 of that Report         (throwing ."
         missi le s; offensive chants and running on the p i t c h ) .


         3,2    The Government accepts that these activities should be
         covered by specific offences rather than by introducing into
         the law of England and Wales an offence equivalent to the
         Scottish common law offence of disorderly conduct or breach of
         the peace    (see paragraph 290 of the R e p o r t ) .    In addition to
         the argument about deterrence which         is set out     in paragraph
         299 of the Report,       the vagueness of an offence       such as
     / "disorderly conduct" is unsatisfactory in that               the potential
ys_//'   offender does not have a clear idea         as to whether or not be is
         breaking the law.


         3.3    Nfe'vertheless,
                             the proposed new offences about missiles
         and chi nting are very much directed at anti-social or
         disorde rly behaviour rather than behaviour which necessarily
         harms fathers.   It is this aspect that differentiates the
         propos <id new offences from the existing offences in sections
         4, 5 a nd 18 of the Public Order Act 1986         (c.64).     For


                                                                                        5
    JAN '91 15:13 HOME OFFICE -F8- 071 273 4284                F8 DIVISION           P.2/12




     instance*, the conduct which it is proposed to cover with the
     new offunce in respect of chanting might not actually stir up
     racial hatred          (see section 18(1)), but it is conduct that is
     liable to give offence.               The various sorts of anti-social
     behaviour at which the proposed new offences are directed are
     especially prevalent at certain association football matches.


      from this view implicit in the Report_(see^paragraphs 290, 291
      and 301) that the offences^hotflci apply at most sports
      grounds,        and to limifc^ttfe place where the offences can be
          committed to^jthose grounds where association football matches
          of the^deslgn^ted-descrtptron'TTee ^ r a g T a p h ^ T r ^ a b o V e ^ - a r e — '
          plag


          3; 4   Th e proposed offences go further than the existing law in
          the typ e of conduct that is made unlawful.                The justification
          for so doing lies in the type of conduct prevalent at certain
          associa tion football matches.           Since that conduct is not
      prevale nt at other sporting events, the justification for-the
     1extends d offences does not exist in relation to them.     The
                     ■                                         A  rfCijx,/
     Ioffence s are not ideally, public order offences'; they are more
     j                   y    jj -             ------ -i-                                        /   v'c-
*    ■concern ed with the bad behaviour of football fans
      i

                                                                                               •„? <r~-.
          Throwir ,cr of missiles
          3.5    Pa ragraphs 293 and 294 of the Report refer to the
          existir g offences in sections 4 and 5 of the Public Order Act
          1986 an d point out briefly why these offences are regarded as
          being t 00 narrow.  Section 4(1) (read with the definition of
          "violen ce" in section 8) would cover the throwing of missiles
          b u t onl y if it is done in the circumstances set out at the end
          of sect ion 4(1).    Those additional elements would make it
          difficu It to prosecute under section 4(1)              someone standing on
          an uppe r terrace who showered persons below with coins.                    It
          might a Iso be difficult to secure a conviction under section
          5(1) of the Public Order Act 1986.   Whilst it might not be as
          difficu It to establish that a person whose head bears the
          brunt c f a torrent of coins has been caused "distress" as


                                                                                                6
          2B JAN '91 15=14 HOME OFFICE -F8- 071 273 4284y     F8 DIVISION         P. 3/12
                                                        'Js


                                        ,r/J"
              paragraph 294 implies        (if the head is unprotected and the


      n       coins/descend with sufficient force the pain would outweigh
              the delight at the unexpected largesse), the recipient might
              be out of sight of the donor and the conditions in section
             ■/5(1) would therefore not be satisfied.


              3.5  The Government therefore agrees with the Report's
              conclusi on that it should be sufficient for a missile to be
              thrown w ithout the need to show that it was directed at a
              particular person or that anyone is likely to be alarmed or
              distressed thereby.         Accordingly, the Bill should make it an
                          for a person to throw a "missile" anywhere within a
              sports cround at which a match of the designated description
              is being played.


               3.7  Whi 1st these Instructions refer to "missiles" the sort of
               objects that should, be covered by the proposed offence are
               probably toidee than one might expect from the dictionary
               definition,      The Concise Oxford Dictionary    (1990 edition)
               defines "missile" as "an object or weapon suitable for
               throwinc    at a target or for discharge from a machine",       it is
               not clesr whether this would cover coin throwing, but         (in
               accordar.ce with paragraph 289 of the Report)        such activity
               should te covered by the proposed offence.   The offence should
               also ccv er the unpleasant practice (which sometimes occurs at
               football matches) of the throwing of plastic bags filled with
               urine, n otwithstanding that such activity would probably
A**            constitu te the indictable offence at common law of committing
              an act outraging public decency in public:   cf. Sidlev's
 -
              ((1663) 1 Sid 168, 15 Digest (Reissue) 1031) where the
              defendan t had relieved himself on the audience at Covent
              Garden,   Once again, the unfortunate recipient might be out of
              the sigh t of the thrower and so the offence in section 5 of
              the Publ ic Order Act 1986 might not be available,  where there
              is a rec ipient, the thrower could presumably be prosecuted for
              the offe nee of criminal damage to the recipient's clothing
              under se ction 1 of the Criminal Damage Act 1971 (c.48).



                                                                                        7
      C'y JAN '91 15= 14 HOME OFFICE -FU- 071 27'd 4^84                    F8 DIVISION                 P. 4-''12




                 However     it ought to be possible to prosecute the thrower,
                 whether or not the bag actually lands on anyone.


                  3.8     It follows from the above that it is not sufficient for
                  the proposed offence to cover only missiles of a kind capable
                  of causing injury (cf. the definition of "violence” in section
                  8 of the Public Order Act 1986)*               It should presumably also
                  cover objects which would cause offence; the test of
                            bleness needs to be incorporated in determining whether:
. ' ^ W             ^ ona
V ^ < K A ^ j p f f e n c e is likely to be caused.            This is a vague concept and
                  introdu ces the element of uncertainty that the Taylor Report
         4       j had hop ed to avoid.      However, those instructing Counsel have
             [ been un able to think of a better test.


                  3.9, ,Th e throwing of items such as lighted fireworks ought to
                  be cov ejred by the reference to articles liable to cause
                   injury     If pellets are discharged by catapult these also
                  ought to be caught by that phrase.


                   [3.10
                   ^j*X\J      ?♦ Tomatoes
                                  XUultt      (rotten or
                                              ^i ULLcll    ot
                                                      \JJL wW he  rwise);
                                                              ilts!
                                                                  •Wldv J/ raspberries
                                                                           £.0o
                                                                              ^JJ
                                                                                v /
                                                                                  C X
                                                                                    .  in
                                                                                       Xll the1
                                                                                           \


   \ \       ]     context of dama g ^ S c ^ l a t h i n g ; ? rolls of loo paper but not
             ,     paper aarts;    leeks at Welsh players etc.]


                   3.11     'he proposed offence should not cover articles of
                   clothi mg that are thrown in the air in celebration.


                   3.12      here is one particular practice that is sadly prevalent
                   at foo ^ball matches which it is hoped to catch either by the
                   mlssi.1* throwing offence or some variant of it.                         This is the
                   practi      of throwing whole or partially eaten bananas at black
                   playerte when they appear on the pitch or at black spectators.
                   -Appa-re' rtiyiyanana skin3— S!'er-alsQ throWH“ brrt7— fromHrh® nature
                   of-, thi :^gs,r -they -arar not""I"ikely t o ‘tifaver"very f a r .            The
                   object Ion to this activity lies in the fact that it is
                   regard d as racially offensive             (presumably those perpetrating
                   it are seeking to draw some comparison with the eating habits
                   of ape     in the jungle) .      H o w e v e s ^ ^ k ^ ^ c t i v t t y is g ' C ^ w e m - l e —


                                                                                                                   3
    £8 JAN '91 15=15 HOME OFFICE -Ft   W71 273 4284         FS DIVISION          P.5/12




         and jus:. plain silly that it could hardly be argu^d""€hat
         racial hatred is liable to be stirred up by i & T                Accordingly,,
         it is not caught by the offence in sect^or^ls of the Publi-d^
         Order Abt 1986.      Indeed, it is not ctfar that the c o u r t / w o u l d
         convict in a s p e c t of an o f f e n c ^ f throwing o b j e c t ^ w h i c h a
f & d    reasona :^le person would rega^dfas offensive,          "offensive'*
         almost pitches the test tpo high for this activity.                Would a
          ■easona.ole person ( t h a ^ i s , one who is noj/unduly sensitive)
         be "off janded" by s u ^ a c t i v i t i e s ? Woulcf tie not instead regard
         them with a c o n t ^ p t at their childishness which almost
          xclude^ offeno^?        Counsel's views would be welcomed.

         3.13    x
                 t is proposed that the penalty for the proposed offence
         of miss Lie throwing and the power of arrest in respect of it,
         together1 with other ancillary provisions should be the same as
         for the other offences proposed by Chapter 9 of the Final
         Taylor Report.  These aspects are dealt with-'together a t ‘the
         end of .his Part of these Instructions.


         Chantin<

         3.14    Paragraph 289 of the Taylor Final Report proposes the
                     of chanting obscene or racialist abuse.              Paragraphs
                  -!98 of that Report explain why such activities could
         not be prosecuted under sections 4, 5 or 18 of the Public
         Order Act 1986.       The next following paragraphs attempt to
                      the offence that the Bill should create.             The only
                     ere the offence can be committed is at a ground where
         an association football match of a description designated by
        order ur.der the power proposed in paragraph 1.3 above is
        played,


        3.15  It should be an essential feature of the proposed
        offence that a number of persons are participating in the
        "chant". An isolated shout is liable to be lost in the din
        created by the crowd and it is not therefore proposed that
        that sho uld be caught.  Nevertheless it should be possible to
        prosecut e a single individual for the proposed offence even



                                                                                          9
               .
               .
               ..mi
                  lIII
                     .
                     ..
                      ..
                       ..
                        ..
                         ..
                          ..
                           ..
                            ..
                             .I
                              IIII
                                 II.I
                                    |
                                    ||   I
                                         I
                                         II
                                          I
                                          III
                                            I
                                            !I|I
                                               II
                                                I
                                                !I!I   I


t28 TAN '91 1 5 :15 HOME OFFICE -F8- 0?1 273 4284               F8 DIVISION      P .b 1?



6
       though
               proceedings are not brought against the other persons
       partici pating in the chant.


       3 .16
                  -j-he Concise Oxford Dictionary            (1990 Edition) defines
       "chant
                       when used as a verb as -talk or repeat monotonously".
      This is;
                 a starting point for the offence that is envisaged,
      althouc"rh
                . there are a number of refinements.   The word "talk"
      may be
               too limiting.   The slogans may be shouted or (after a
      fashior,
              .1 sung.   The word “monotonously*' may imply too long a
      span of
                 time, although some degree of repetition should be an
      essenti al element in the offence.


      3.17        C
                      ne sound which it is h o ^           to catch by the proposed
      offence
                       is the noise intended to resemble that believed to be
      made by
                       apes which sometimes accompanies those moments when a
      black p
                 layer is in possession of the ball.     There may be
      dif f icui
                 lties in describing-this sound i n ,,the B i l l . 'otie word
      that sp
                 rings to mind is "grunt"*.. However* ;this word is * ‘ ’
      defined
                 / a s a noun, by the Concise Oxford Dictionary as "l. a
      low gut
                 tural sound made by a pig.   2 . a sound resembling
      th i s " .
                  The association the word has with pigs is misleading
      in the present context.


      3.18       t:
                  ■He first type of chants or "grunts" to x^hich the
      offence
               should apply are those that are offensive because of
     their r
             'jcialist content or, in the case of "grunts",
     implica
              ■ions.        The second type should be what Taylor refers to
     as "obs
              >ene".        included in this category should be the use of
     the wel
             ^ nown four letter words originally associated with
     sexual
             intercourse and parts of the anatomy.                  However, it is
     for con
             ^ d e r a t i o n whether the courts could convict (in a
    properly
                argued case) if the word "obscene" was used in the
    Bill wit
                  the i n t e n t i o n - c o v e r i n g chanting that uses words
    that are
                  ot used in public;society.                in a legal contaxt the
    test for
                obscenity is -rtfiT tendency to deprave and corrupt"
    (see sec
                   n 1 of tKa ^ B c e n e Publications Act 1259 (c.66)).
    This mea
              11119 ls referr-d to in the Concise Oxford Dictionary


                                                                                      10
, £8 JAN '91 15:18 HOME OFFICE -F8- 071 273 4284                F8 DIVISION      P. 11'-'12




           (1990 Edition) which also defines obscene as "l. offensively
           or repulsively indecent, esp. b y offending accepted sexual
          morality.             2. colloquial highly offensive or repugnant          (a n
           obsc ene accumulation of w e a l t h ^ .M . Clearly the legal
           defi nition is inappropriate in this context.         But even th e
           star.dard definition of the word ''obscene" sets a test which
                                                                                              is
           unli. kely to be met by chanting at football matches.                 The
           chanting is offensive rather tha n "repulsively indecent".


           3.IS     Those instructing Counsel are aware that it ma y well
-A:
           £>rove difficult to bring a successful prosecution in respect
                 this offence.                Where a group of people are m aking a lot of
           no{?'o   c h A t t l * *5 nrt
           noise chanting,                 it may well1 be ^difficult
                                           t 4-              i      t     _
                                                                      for a     . , «
                                                                            constable to
           convince the court that he identified the accused's voice
           amiclst the din in order to rebut the possible line of defence
  L        that the accused was opening his mouth along with his
           comp anions but no sound was coming forth.  Nevertheless, it is
           hop€sd that the'existence of.the offence*may have some efffect
         ^ i n eiltering the way some fans behave at-football matches.


           fGestures
           3 .2    In addition to the offences proposed in the Taylor Final
           Repcj>rt, the Bill should also mak^^it an offence for a person
           to i(iade a gesture which is r u d < o r offensive.]


           Goiter onto the pitch
           3.2      Paragraphs 289 and 300 of the Taylor Final Report set
           out the reasons for recommending an offence of going onto the
           pit<±:!h without reasonable excuse.  The Bill should create this
           Of f£inee which should be capable of being committed only a t a
           gro•und w he re a football match of the sort designated und er the
           pow® r proposed in paragraph 1.3 above is being played^


           3.2     Paragraph 3,29 below sets out proposals for the times
           duri ng which the offences proposed in this Part of the
           Inst, ructions can be committed.  Accordingly, this offence
           coul d be committed not only before and during a match, but



                                                                                              11
        £8 JAN '91 15=19 HOME OFFICE -F8- 071 £'73 4284           F8 DIVISION       P. 12/'It




           f*also afta r it has finished. In practice, spectators at
            associatiion football matches are likely to be prevented by
              perimeter fences from running onto the pitch in jubilation
y\7\)
              once a m;atch has ended and so the problem raised in paragraph
              301 of t|:he Report may not be relevant to such matches.             The
              problem about the traditions at Murrayfield will not arise
              because Rugby football is played there and the Bill will be
AAt       \   limited to association football m at c h e s . (

 ■
 N 5i
i             3.23  In the context of this proposed offence "the pitch"
              means th e pitch itself and any area around the pitch which
               separate s it from the accommodation for spectators.             It should
               accord! iigly include any area of grass around the pitch and,
               for exa:mple, any running track around the edge of the pitch.


               3 .24   Oo viousJLy there are certain persons to whom the proposed
               offence should not apply.         These include the players,
               referee », managers,     coaches,    [linesmen,]     [ba'll boys,] the
               police, any stewards at the ground, members'of the emergency
               service s, disabled spectators sitting in wheelchairs in front
               of the stands and press photographers.             These persons should
               need th e authorisation of       .........    to be on the pitch*
              P However   in the case of the players,         officials involved in the
               game, tjhe police and stewards it is hoped that the
               author! sation could be implied.


               3.25    Emergencies may occur when other persons should be able
               to go c nto the pitch without committing an offence.              Counsel
               will w i[sh to consider whether this end should be achieved by
               providi ng a- defence or by so framing the offence that it does
                not ap;jj>ly in such circumstances.         Broadly speaking, those
                circum:stances should either be an emergency or when persons
                are di rected onto the pitch by the police,            stewards or other
                person^ in charge of the ground.            An "emergency" should cover
                not on’y serious disasters such as the events at Hillsborough
                or a f re in the stands       (as happened at Bradford in 1985) b u t
                also wh en,   for example,    someone has a heart attack and needs


                                                                                                l
,28 JAN '91 15:16 HOME O F fI c e ' V s - *071 273' 4284       F8 DIVISIC:>n           P. T - ' l ' d .


                                 ^      f                  ^
          1/
          Uza be laid flat_ on
                            — the ground.                  Possibly the phrase used.
                                                                    m e pnrase used in
     ✓ ^ I t h e Taylor Final Report "without reasonable excuse" might
          tsufficiently
            S'            cover such events.


           GeneiKflJ. provisions about penalties
           3.26    The Bill should provide that a person guilty of one of
           the offences proposed in this Part of these Instructions
           shou Id be liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding
           leve 1 3 on the standard scale.


           3.27      Some of the offences in this Part of these Instructions
                  directed at offensive racialist conduct and are therefore
           close to the offences contained in Part III of the Public
           Order Act 1986.            Notwithstanding this, the Bill should not
           CQntain a provision similar to section 27(1)                        of that Act
            (which requires the Attorney General's consent for
           prosecutions for offences in Part III of the 1986 A c t ) .


           3*28 -      The Bill should conifer-,-'on a constable a power to arrest
           withb>ut warrant a person whom the 'constable believes, .on
           reas onable grounds, is committing or has committed one of the
           of fen
                ^.ces proposed in this Part.  Unlike subsections (4 ) and
           (5) 'f section 5 of the Public order Act 1986 there should be
           no r (iguirement for the constable to give a warning before
           actually arresting.


           3.29     The Instructions have already mentioned that the
           offences should be committed only at grounds where football
           matches of a designated description are played.    The Bill
           shoui:.d also ensure that the offences can only be committed

           during the period surrounding the match.   Provision equivalent
           to s action 31(6) of the Public Order Act 1986 is required for
           this
                 purpose.  To cover the eventualities of persons being
           admitted to a ground for a game which is postponed or
           abandoned before its start, provision equivalent to section
           31(7) and (8) is also required.




                                                                                                          13
      JAN '91 15:’16 HOME'OFFICE -F8- 071 273 4284
                                                             F8 DIVISION          ‘P. 8,-'12




       3.30      sfotion« 30 to 37 of the Public Order Act w 86 (which
       constitute Part IV of that Act, provide for exclusion orders

       of
       of 'that              “ nVlCted °* ° ffen0es to                              31
                  Act applies from attending football matches of a
       descrip
                     •ion prescribed for the purposes of part iv of that
       Act I      T'
                    iese provisions were p r o t e c t i v e l y repealed b y section
       27(5) o
                       the Football Spectators Act 1989 (c.37); however, the
       repeals
                     have not been brought - into force following
                                                                iuiiovanq the the
                     lent          ^ , ... .
       a b a n d o 4 e " t of football membership scheme provided for in Part
       I
       T of th  thk 1989 Act.                                                        fart
                       1989 Act.   where the offences proposed in this Part
       of the
                    Instructions have been committed at a football match
       Which h
                    as been prescribed under Part IV of the 1986 Act
       section
                     31 . of the 1986 Act will -apply
                                                 n r - *   to
                                                           v-w the    offence
                                                                w iic U iie ,   because
         e condition in section 3i(2 ) will be satisfied.
               I                                           It will
       therefo tre be possible for a
                                             wake an exclusion orde-r

      t h e ^ f f t f 1V ° f thS 1986 AOt followln« conviction for one of
        he o f f ^ ce5 proposed in this Part of the-Instructions.             as
      ^ h i s :a'c
          -    ^ i e v e s the desired effect, no further p r o v i s i o n ne^d be
      made by


      3.31      Exclusion orders under Part IV of the Public Order Act
      1986 ar|a deslgned to prevent convicted persons from a*i-* * •
      matches
      matches in England and Wales that havA k             attending
                                    that have been prescribed for the
      purpose
              • section i5 of the Football Spectators Act 1939
      enables a court to make a restri               j,
      effect tf which i, to                  °rder under that Act the
                 Fr
                 ™ lah ls to prevent a person who has bean convicted
               re evant offence from going to football matches played in
      « country outside England and wales where the match is of a

                  “          haS bee" deSiOTatSd for the P “* P O * ~        ■* Part

     - : i : t ai                                             thr     llsted in

    / of these Instructions.
                 r   duis to ada the °ffenoes
                              rHowpuor  ■;+- u
                                            ,,
/    off»„,J_          _  . tHOWever'   =h°uld not auu
                                                   add the
           proposed in Part II of these instructions.]



     Home Office
                      1991


                                                                                      14
