                                                                                                                              HO EST 85{L)

INSTRUCTIONS TO REPROGRAPHIC AND DISTRIBUTION BRANCH FOR THE
DISTRIBUTION OF HOME OFFICE CIRCULARS
Please arrange for the distribution of the attached Circular * and enclosures in accordance with the
instructions shown below.
Division/Branch ......... ................................................             Signature

Division Reference No.                                                                Date .......



1.      Title of Circular and brief description of any enclosures:                                          2. No of Circular if it is to be
                  j                 £j>exr4'$
                                    5>f>cNr +$                      S -                                        included in HO numbered
                                                                                                               series:
         Aw                     A    * f ' fe                                                                       1 %     R«=lo
3.      Date of Circular (as agreed with Reprographic Branch in advance):                                    21 • S'
4.      Class of mail required for despatch (state 1st or 2nd Class):                                   IS+
5.      No of copies ordered:                       2-00
6.      Addressograph Plates (see Appendix A to HO Notice 79/1974)                                          7. No of copies to be sent to
                                                                                                               each address

Galley Ref.                                              Title of Galley                                      Circulars          Enclosures

     <~A3                                                                                                        3*1            fty*wJ2?02$ T

                                                                                 s                                  S
     L-Al                                                                                                        3 k                    M

     i~/V b                 L c rv^ci-©v\                                                                         33
     LA 1 1                             (S'vcJ                                       d ^ c fiv ^                    1                  ft
                                                                                                                                       M
                                                Ccvvv'«k^ ek'rtoiL C \Jz*( cL                                          \
                                                                                                                                       II
                                               l»sf                                                                f3
                                    --------_ H ------------
                                                                                                                     S'          An^ex^e s


                                                Unabbreviated supplementary list                        1

NOTE This form must be accompanied by Reprographic Order Form HO EST 85{J)
For Reprographic Branch use
M ....................................

..................................................................................... Division/Branch

The above mentioned Circular * and enclosures were despatched in accordance with your
instructions. Spare copies are sent herewith.
Date                                                                                  Signature

                                                               * delete if inapplicable
The Secretary
Association of County Councils
66A Eaton Square
LONDON SW1W 9BH


The Secretary
Association of Metropolitan Authorities
35 Great Smith Street
LONDON SW1P 3BJ


The Secretary
London Borough Associations
Westminster City Hall
Victoria Street
LONDON SW1E 6QP


The Secretary
Association of London Authorities
36 Old Queen Street
LONDON SW1H 9JE


The Secretary
Association of District Councils
9 Buckingham Gate
LONDON SW1E 6LE


The Director General
Sports Council
16 Upper Woburn Place
LONDON WC1H OQP


The Director General
Sports Council for Wales
National Sports Centre for Wales
Sophia Gardens
Cardiff CF1 9SW


The Secretary
Rugby Football Union
Whitton Road
Twickenham
Middlesex TW1 1D2


The Secretary
Welsh Rugby Union
Cardiff Arms Park
Westgate Street
Cardiff CF1 1JL
The Secretary
Rugby Football League
180 Chapeltown Road
Leeds


The Chief Executive
Cricket Council
Lord's Cricket Ground
LONDON NW8 8QN


The Chief Executive
The Racecourse Association
Winkfield Road
Ascot
Berkshire SL5 7HX


The Secretary
National Greyhound Racing Club
24/28 Oval Road
LONDON NW1 7DA
M George Esq
Assistant Chief Constable
Greater Manchester Police
X Department
PO Box 47
Chester House
Boyer Street
Manchester M 1 6 OSD


G Kelly Esq
Chief Executive
Football Association
16 Lancaster Gate
LONDON W2 3LW


A Evans Esq
Secretary
Football Association of Wales
3 Westgate Street
Cardiff CF1 1JF


D Dent Esq
Secretary
Football League
319 Clifton Drive South
Lytham St Anne's
Lancashire FY8 1JG


P Lee Esq
Secretary
Football Trust 1990
Walkden House
10 Melton Street
LONDON NW1 2EJ
                                                    HOME OFFICE
                                            Queen Anne’s Gate London SW 1H 9A T
                                                   D irect line: 01-273
                                                  Switchboard: 01-273 3000




Our reference:    FEP/90 35/48/89                22 August 1990
Your reference:



    To:      The Chief Executive

                  County Councils
                  Metropolitan District Councils
                  London Borough Councils
                  Common Council of the City of London
                  Fire and Civil Defence Authorities




     Dear Sir/Madam

    HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR 75/1990

    SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS: FOLLOW-UP ACTION

    Introduction

    1.   The purpose of this circular is first, to thank local
    authorities with safety certification responsibilities for their
    co-operation in responding to the recommendations of the
    Hillsborough Inquiry; and secondly, to inform them of action on
    some of the longer term recommendations of the Inquiry. With the
    approach of the new football season local authorities are
    reminded of the need for continuing vigilance to ensure safety
    standards imposed as a result of the Final Report are maintained.

    CCTV

    2.   The Home Office Police Scientific Development Branch has,
    in conjunction with the Association of Chief Police Officers,
    recently prepared guidance on the procurement of CCTV for
    spectator safety purposes.   That guidance has been distributed
    to police forces in England and Wales and is also available to
    football league clubs from the Football Trust.    A copy of the
    guidance which may be of benefit to both ground operators and
    local authorities when considering whether CCTV should be
    installed at sports grounds, including grounds used for sports
    other than football, is enclosed.
All seated accommodation

3.   The Minister of State recently wrote to the Secretary of
the Football League reminding them that it was for football clubs
to reduce standing accommodation.   A copy of that letter, which
has been circulated to football league clubs by the League, is
enclosed at Annex A together with a copy of a Home Office News
Release. Local authorities are reminded that safety certificates
should not be used to bring about reductions in standing
accommodation solely to comply with recommendations 2 to 4 of the
Inquiry's final report. Local authorities should of course react
to any proposals made by clubs to ensure that any changes
continue to provide reasonable standards of safety.

Football Licensing Authority

4.   The Home Secretary announced on 12 July the appointment of
Mr Norman Jacobs as Chairman of the Football Licensing Authority
(FLA). A copy of the News Release is enclosed for information
at Annex B to this circular.   The names of other members of the
FLA, its location and other arrangements will be made known
shortly.

Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (the Green Guide)

5.   The Home Office has undertaken a review of the Green Guide
with the assistance of an informal expert working group. A draft
revised Guide has been prepared and is being issued to the local
authority associations and others for consultation. The revised
Guide should be available in the early autumn. Local authorities
are reminded that in the meantime the present Guide may continue
to be used, together with relevant recommendations of the
Hillsborough Final Report which, it is anticipated, will be
incorporated into the new edition.

Resource Implications

6.   There   are   no   resource   implications   arising   from   this
circular.

Other

7.   Any enquiries about the contents of this circular should
be addressed to Mr A Brown or Ms M Sharp (071-273-2765) . Copies
of this circular also go to the organisations named below.

                                             Yours sincerely




                                             P E BOLTON
                                             (Fire and Emergency
                                             Planning Department)
Association of County Councils

Association of Metropolitan Authorities

London Boroughs Association

Association of London Authorities

Association of District Councils

Sports Councils for England and Wales     with

Rugby Football Union                      enclosures

Welsh Rugby Football Union

Rugby Football League

Cricket Council

Racecourse Association

National Greyhound Racing Club




Association of Chief Police Officers

Football Association

Football Association of Wales             without

Football League                           enclosures

Football Trust 1990
                                                             ANNEX A
                                                     H o me O ffi ce
                                                    Q U E E N A N N E ’S GA TE
                                                     L O N D O N SWIH 9 AT




                                                   f Ju ne 1990




      Ay.            ,

When we met on 4 April I told you that the powers to set up
the Football Licensing Authority would come into force on 1
June and that we hoped that it would be operational as soon as
possible after that.    It will be clear to you that the process
has taken longer than we had anticipated.

I hope that we shall be able to make an announcement about
membership of the FLA quite soon although, for entirely
practical reasons, it is unlikely that the new licensing
system will become fully effective for some months.

A considerable amount   of preparatory work   has been completed
in consequence of the   changed emphasis in   the role of the
Authority, but the FLA will be exercising     entirely new
functions and it will take time to recruit    and to train its
staff and inspectors.

I can understand that the football authorities will wish to
discuss a range of issues with the FLA as soon as possible.
It would, be wrong to consider that the football clubs must
wait for the FLA to be set up before making the improvements
to their grounds which were proposed by Lord Justice Taylor.

I thought, therefore, that I should write to you, since both
your President and the Chairman of the Football Association
are in Italy, in order to give you a clearer idea of how we
see the FLA operating in relation to the recommendations in
the Taylor report on all seated accommodation.  I hope that
this will enable you to give clearer guidance to the clubs.

The Government's view has always been that the primary
responsibility for responding to Lord Justice Taylor's



                                         /recommendations.

A Sandford Esq
recommendations on all seated accommodation rests with the
clubs themselves.  The Taylor report is quite clear in
recommending that standing accommodation should be
progressively removed by 1993, 1994 or 1999, depending on the
nature of the matches for which the grounds are used.  In
order to meet that overall timetable, clubs will need to be
planning -indeed should have been planning for the past 6
months - on how they will achieve it.

The FLA will itself have no powers to require all seated
accommodation unless the Home Secretary makes a direction in
respect of a particular football ground.  When the licensing
scheme is in operation, we shall be looking to the FLA to
examine the plans which clubs have made and to advise us on
the progress which is being made towards all seated
accommodation.

Nevertheless, in the first instance at least it will be for
the clubs to decide whether to reduce standing accommodation
or to make proposals for additional seating using their own
funds or those which the Government has made available through
the Football Trust in consequence of the reduction in pools
betting tax.

Only in those cases where progress is unsatisfactory should it
be necessary to resort to a formal direction.  We hope these
will be few.

I have already indicated to you and your colleagues from the
Association and the Football League that we shall not insist
on strict adherence to Lord Justice Taylor's interim timetable
if satisfactory progress is being made.  The interim
timetable, as you know, envisaged reductions of standing
capacity by 20% or 10% a year depending on the type of match
being played but regardless of the amount of seated
accommodation already provided.

This does not mean, though, that the interim timetable need
not be complied with.  It remains as a guide, and it will not
be open to a club to avoid reducing standing accommodation for
no reason other than that it has plans for major redevelopment
at some ill-defined date in the future.

We accept, though, that it may be necessary to place some
priority on the funds which are available.  We also recognise
that it might suit some clubs to make major changes to their
grounds which will exceed the Taylor recommendations but which
cannot be achieved in a single season.  We also want clubs to
make use of the available money in order to improve their
accommodation - and not simply to make piecemeal changes,
especially if they are unlikely to contribute to improvements
in safety or public order.




                                              /I hope.
I hope that this provides a basis for any clubs, who have not
yet applied their thoughts to all seated accommodation, to
start making plans.



                        \19Clv>




                            FERRERS
N EW S RELEASE                       50 Queen A nne's Gate Lo ndon SW1 H 9A T
                                     (N ig h : line 0 7 1 - 2 7 3 45 95 )
                                     Co ntact Number.
 8 June 1990                                                 071 273 4640


                    FOOTBALL GROUND IMPROVEMENTS:
                     CLUBS URGED TO TAKE ACTION


 The Government has today made it clear that it does not expect
 football clubs to use delay in the setting up of the Football
 Licensing Authority as an excuse for not making improvements to
 football grounds as recommended by Lord Justice Taylor.       In a
 letter to Mr Arthur Sandford, the Chief Executive of the Football
 League, Lord Ferrers, Minister of State at the Home Office, said:

 "I can understand that the football authorities will wish to
 discuss a range of issues with the Football Licensing Authority as
 soon as possible.           It would be quite wrong to consider that the
 football clubs must wait for the FLA to be set up before making
 the improvements to their grounds proposed by Lord Justice Taylor.
 The  G ov e rn m e nt ' s    view  has  always  been  that  the primary
 responsibility            for   responding  to  Lord  Justice   Taylor's
 recommendations on all seated accommodation rests with the clubs
 themselves."

 In his letter Lord Ferrers explains that the Government hopes to
 announce the membership of the new Football Licensing Authority
 very soon but he does not expect the football licensing scheme to
 become operational for several months.   He does however give an
 indication of how he expects the new authority to operate.     He
 says:

 "The FLA will itself have no powers to require all seated
 accommodation unless the Home Secretary makes a direction in
 respect of a particular football ground.       When the licensing
 scheme is in operation, we shall be looking to the FLA to examine
 the plans which clubs have made and to advise us on the progress
 which is being made by the clubs towards all seated accommodation.
 Only in those cases where progress is unsatisfactory should it be
 necessary to resort to a formal direction.   We hope these will be
 few."

 Lord Ferrers also indicates that the Governments will not be
 expecting clubs to stick rigidly to Lord Taylor's proposed
 reductions of 20% (for first and second division clubs) and 10%
 (for third and fourth division clubs) of standing accommodation
 each year, provided satisfactory progress is being made to meet
 the final target dates of 1994 and 1999 respectively.
Lord Ferrers makes it clear that there is no question of the
Government backing down on Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations
on all seated accommodation, but he points out that the 10%
reductions were proposed regardless of the amount of seated
accommodation already provided at grounds. In his letter he says:

"We accept that though there may be a need to place some priority
on the funds which are available we also recognise that it might
suit some clubs to make major changes to their grounds which will
exceed the Taylor recommendations but which cannot be achieved in
a single season.  We also want clubs to make use of the available
money to improve their accommodation, not simply to make piecemeal
changes,  particularly if they are unlikely to contribute to
improvements in safety or public order."

But he makes it clear that it will not be open to a club to avoid
reducing standing accommodation for no reason other than that it
has plans for major development at some ill-defined date in the
future.
                                                                    ANNEX B




N EW S RELEASE                    50 Queen Ann e's Gate London SW1 H 9AT
                                  (N ig h t line 071 - 27 3 45 9 5 )
                                  Co ntact Number




 12 July 1990                                                 071 273 4640


      FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY - APPOINTMENT OF CHAIRMAN


 The Home Secretary, the Rt Hon David Waddington QC MP announced
 today that Mr Norman Jacobs is to be appointed as the first
 Chairman of the Football Licensing Authority.

 Mr Jacobs, aged 59, who has recently retired from practice as a
 solicitor   with Messrs   Slaughter  and May,   has   had  a long
 association with sport.    He is a steward of the British Boxing
 Board of Control, was concerned with the setting up of the Sports
 Aid Trust, is a Member of the International Bar Association's
 Committee on Sports Law, and a Member of the Sports Council.    He
 is currently undertaking an enquiry for the British Amateur
 Weightlifting Association into drugs and weightlifting.   He has a
 keen and wide ranging interest in all sports, is a member of the
 MCC and has had many connections with football both as a lawyer
 and as a spectator. He was educated at Christ's Hospital and
 Exeter College, Oxford and is married with four children.

 The Football Licensing Authority     (FLA)  is established under
 Section 8 of the Football Spectators Act 1989, and the statutory
 provisions enabling the appointment of the Chairman and Members of
 the Authority came into force on 1 June.

 The main responsibilities of the FLA will be to operate a
 licensing scheme for grounds at which 'designated matches' (see
 note below) are played; advise the Government on the introduction
 of all-seated accommodation at football league grounds and the
 national stadia; and keep under review the local authorities'
 exercise of their safety functions under the Safety of Sports
 Grounds 1975 at sports grounds at which designated matches are
 played.

 The other Members of the Authority (a maximum of 8) and permanent
 staff will be appointed as soon as possible.

 The location of the permanent offices for the FLA has yet to be
 determined.   In the meantime, correspondence to Mr Jacobs and
 other enquiries about the FLA should be addressed to:
The Football Licensing Authority
c/o The Home Office
G2 Division
Room 917
50 Queen Annes Gate
London SW1H 9AT

Telephone 071 273 3133 or 3099


NOTE TO EDITORS

Under the Football Spectator (Designation of Football Matches in
England and Wales) Order 1990 (SI 1990 No. 731)       'designated
matches' includes matches played by football league clubs and
international matches at football league grounds or other sports
grounds designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975,
including Wembley Stadium.
