Tayconc.SoS
                                    FROM:    MISS A J STEWART
                                             SARD
                                             925 6370

                                   DATE:     7 July 1992

                                    cc:      Parliamentary Secretary
                                             Permanent Secretary
                                             Mr Wright
                                             Mr Pittman
                                             Mr Gunn
                                             Ms O'Mara
                                             Miss Maclean
                                             Mr Baden o/r
                                             Mr Webb
                                             Mr Ellingford
                                             Ms Forsyth
                                             Mr McPherson - SO
                                             Mr Cooper - WO


SECRETARY OF STATE


RE-EXAMINATION OF ALL-SEATING: ANNOUNCEMENT OF YOUR CONCLUSIONS


1.   This submission invites you to agree:


     i.    the conclusions you should draw from the consultation
           exercise launched on 4 June-tabular analysis of
           responses at Flag A:


     ii.   the terms in which those conclusions should be
           announced;


     iii. the timing of an announcement.


Recommendations


2.   Taking each issue in turn, I recommend that you should:


           adopt the line aired at the 29 June football lunch,
           and generally echoed in submissions to the consultation
           exercise. Put at its simplest, this would retain the
           all-seating requirement for the Premier League and the
           new First Division. Standing accommodation could be
           retained in new Divisions 2 and 3 but only if it were
           deemed safe by the FLA;


     ii.   agree that, since in the time available, we have not
           been able to make much progress on issues such as the
           role of and possible extended powers for the FLA in
           helping to implement the revised policy on all-seating,
           officials should continue to work on this with the FLA
           and legal advisers.


     iii. announce this policy by means of an arranged PQ-text at
           Flag B. You would no doubt wish to clear the terms of
           your announcement in advance with the Home Secretary
           and Chief Secretary, and let Scottish and Welsh
           colleagues know of your conclusions. In line with your
           earlier announcement of the re-examination, you will
           probably want to let Mr Pendry know what you are about,
           on the morning of the announcement and to alert Lord
           Justice Taylor, perhaps as before by telephone. An
           early indication to the Chairman of the FLA, Norman
           Jacobs, would also be appropriate probably also by
           telephone. A draft letter to colleagues is at Flag C.


     iv.   an announcement on Friday 10 July would put your
           conclusions into the public domain in advance of DNH
           Oral Questions next Monday. It would also mean an
           absolute minimum delay for football clubs waiting on
           your conclusions to formulate plans.



Timing and Presentation


3.   In order to hit Friday, letters to colleagues should issue
by tomorrow morning at latest, with a request for views by midday
Thursday. Although this is very tight, the outcome of your review
does not differ markedly from your earlier announcement of the
terms of your re-examination. Where there are differences, these
point to a simpler option (splitting by division rather than by
grant- capacity) and should not therefore be controversial.


4.   Since, with the exception of the Premier League, all those
responding to your original invitation have come down on the side
of a simple split by division, and (again excepting the Premier
League) and the Football Supporters Association) support the
retention of all-seating without exception for both the Premier
League and the new first division, it is likely that your
announcement will be widely welcomed. We shall be preparing
briefing for use by the Press Office and for oral questions on
Monday.


Issues arising from consultation


Where to place split between seating and non-seating


5.   Only the Premier League has suggested that average
attendance should be used to devise a cut off line, rather than
divisional status. Their argument is that the? latter would raise
practical difficulties, given the movement between divisions.
However, all other comments are strongly in favour of the
divisional option which we recommend.


Extending timetable for implementation bv Division 1


6.   Both the FLA and the League have argued for an extension of
at least a year to the start of the 1995 season, for clubs in the
new first division to impoement the all-seating requirement. The
FLA argue strongly against a blanket relaxation, although they
agree that special cases might need to be considered. We
recommend that you hold publicly to the present - 1994 - date on
the grounds that to relax it across the board would give the
wrong signal and reward dilatory clubs. Now that clubs know where
they stand, they can make progress.




                                                                    3
Funding of standing accommodation from Football Trust monies


7.   It was proposed at last week's football lunch that Trust
monies might only be made available for the upgrading of terraced
accommodation if this could then provide a   basis for seating at a
later date. This was strongly supported at   yesterday's meeting of
the Trust and is echoed in the Trust's submission (which arrived
too late to figure in the tabular analysis but is on all fours
with our recommended line). It will be important to emphasise to
the Trust that they would have to make such allocations out of
existing monies. Treasury officials have pointed out that any
provision for finance additional to RPBD money would need to be
met from within DNH's existing provision.


8.   At present, the Trust had adopted the Resolution that RPBD
money shall be used on capital works for the safety and comfort
of spectators at football grounds in accordance with the
recommendations contained in Lord Justice Taylor's final Report.
The first Taylor recommendation is that spectators should be
admitted only to seated accommodation. The   second, third and
fourth recommendations set out the timetable for all-seating. The
Trust recognise that they could not extend their activities to
support standing accommodation without specific agreement from
Treasury.


Role of FLA


9.   A number of important issues remain to be resolved on the
role of the FLA in securing the implementation both of all­
seating policy where this still applies and of safer terracing.
We shall also want to look at, for example, any revisions to the
maximum standing density in retained terraces. Ideally, these
issues would have been resolved, or agreement reached on how to
tackle their resolution, before the announcement of the outcome
of your re-consideration. The FLA Chief Executive accepts however
that this cannot be. I shall continue to pursue outstanding
issues with him. In the meantime, I am proposing that a word from
you to Norman Jacons, Chairman of the FLA, in advance of Friday.
would be useful. You will recall that Mr Jacobs played a most
useful role in guiding discussion at last week's lunch.


Role of FSADC


10.   The Football Stadia Advisory Design Council (FSADC) has
proposed an active role for itself in advising on safer standing
accommodation. I recommend that we should support this. The FLA
are enthusiastic to fund a piece of action research by the FSADC,
based on practical examples of how existing terracing can be made
safer, and of how terracing can form a basis for seating. The FLA
has funds at its disposal to commence this at once and would be
prepared to do so.


Proportion of standing accommodation to be retained


11.   At the 29 June football lunch, the Chairman of Lincoln City
Football Club, Mr John Reames, proposed in respect of 2nd and
3rd division grounds, that:


           standing accommodation should only be retained if it
          were capable of conversion to seating; and


           standing should account for no more than 50% of total
          ground capacity.


You asked Mr Reames to write in with his views and he has done
so, confirming these points. He did admit at last week's lunch,
however, that he was not voicing the views of the majority of
League Chairmen. I suggest therefore that we look to discuss
further the question of what proportion of ground capacity
standing might represent. I have included in the draft
announcement the reference to retained standing being capable of
conversion.




MISS A J STEWART
                                                                   5
COMMENTS RECEIVED FROM INVITED PARTIES ON THE DESIRED OUTCOME OF
THE ALL-SEATER REVIEW


    BODY       ISSUES
               Exempt     Give      Apply      Apply      Improve
               PL         Div.1     policy     policy     standard
               and/or     until     on basis   on basis   of
               Div.1      1995      of av.     of         texxaces
                                    crowd      ground
                                               capacity
    FA         NO (PL)    YES                             YES
    PL         YES (PL)             YES
    FL                    YES                             YES
    FLA        NO         NO *      NO         NO         YES
    FSADC                           NO         NO         YES
    FSA        YES                  NO         NO         YES
               (BOTH)
    NFFSC      YES
               (BOTH)


*     Only in exceptional circumstances on a club by club basis




Kev

FA -        Football Association

PL -        Football Association Premier League

FL -        Football League

FLA -       Football Licensing Authority

FSADC - Football Stadia Advisory Design Council

FSA -       Football Supporters Association

NFFSC - National Federation of Football Supporters'
                                                                       3

RE-EXAMINATION OF ALL-SEATING REQUIREMENT: DRAFT ANNOUNCEMENT FOR
FRIDAY 10 JULY


To ask the Secretary of State for National Heritage, whether he
is ready to announce the conclusions of his re-consideration of
the all-seating requirements at Football League clubs.




MR DAVID MELLOR


I am grateful to all those who have so promptly let me have their
views following my announcement on 4 June that I was
reconsidering certain aspects of the all-seating requirements. I
have been struck by the consistency of the views which have
emerged.


I said on 4 June that I was not prepared to review either the
principle of or the timetable for all-seating at First Division
grounds in the Football League (the new Premier League). This
view has been confirmed by the responses I have received and I
have decided furthermore in the light of consultation, to
continue our existing policy for all-seating for clubs in the
present second division (the new first division). Many of these
clubs have recently played in the higher division. All of them
should aspire to do so. I have no doubt that they will want to
prepare themselves to put those aspirations into practice by
pressing ahead vigorously with an all-seating policy.


Having considered the submissions made to me, I can confirm that
I am prepared to allow some standing accommodation to be retained
at grounds in the third and fourth divisions (the new division
two and three), but only on terracing which is safe and capable
of ultimate conversion to seating. Clubs in these divisions
should not see this as an easy option. They will need to ensure
                                                                   7
that such accommodation fully accords with the high standards of
safety which all spectators have a right to expect.


I continue to expect that the vast majority of clubs throughout
the League will see as their ultimate goal the achievement of
substantially seated grounds as part of their commitment to the
principles of improved spectator safety and comfort defined by
Lord Justice Taylor.




                                                                   8
                                                                                        c.

                                                   DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL HERITAGE
                                                   Horse Guards Road, London SW1P 3AL
                                                   Telephone: 071-270 5925
                                                   Facsimile: 071-270 6026

From the Secretary of Statefor National Heritage
THE RT. HON. DAVID MELLOR QC MP
           The Rt Hon Kenneth Clarke QC MP
           Secretary of State for the
            Home Office
           Queen Anne's Gate
           LONDON SW1H 9AT




           RE-EXAMINATION OF ALL-SEATING REQUIREMENT AT FOOTBALL LEAGUE
           GROUNDS

           As you know, I announced on 4 June that I was re-considering
           certain aspects of our policy to require all-seater accommodation
           in grounds in the football league. I set a deadline of 3 July for
           responses from interested parties.

           That deadline has now passed and my consultation has yielded a
           remarkable convergence of opinion. Those consulted, which
           included the Football Association and League ^s well as the
           Football Licensing Authority and the Football Trust, have
           signalled their support for the retention of all-seating at both
           Premier League and the new first division clubs. They agree with
           my judgment that we should relax the requirement in respect of
           Divisions 2 and 3 (the old third and fourth divisions) but that
           clubs which retain standing accommodation should be required to
           improve this where it falls short of acceptable standards of
           safety.

           I propose to announce these conclusions this Friday, 10 July.
           This follows very rapidly on the completion of the consultation
           period but, as I say, the responses I have received have not
           thrown up divergencies of opinion which require long and hard
           consideration. I also want to give clubs as early an indication
           as possible of how they are to proceed. More work needs to be
           done on, for example, the future role of the Football Licensing
           Authority in helping to secure the implementation of this revised
           policy, and on possible revisions to the maximum standing density
           in retained terraces, but this need not hold us up.

            I should be grateful therefore to receive any comments on the
            attached draft announcement by midday on Thursday 9 July.




                                                                                        1
I am copying this letter to Michael Portillo, Ian Lang, David
Hunt, Tony Newton and Sir Robin Butler.




DAVID MELLOR




                                                                2
