                      C   &   A        T   > /4 -   t—
                                                             un
                                                           4- pc,‘2 P >
                                                                      '




PS/Mr Moynihan



DARLINGTON FOOTBALL CLUB: IMPLEMENTATION OF LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S
INTERIM RECOMMENDATIONS

1.   In my minute of 17 October (flag A) I promised to provide an
update on the further consideration of the safety arrangements at
Darlington Football Club, in the light of Lord Justice Taylor's
interim recommendations,   by Durham County Council's Public
Protection Committee.    The report at flag B was before the
Committee at its meeting on 2 January for information and its
contents were noted.    Supplementary information has also been
obtained from the County Council.

 2.   The   position    on   the   four   high   priority   Taylor
 recommendations mentioned in my minute which had not been
 implemented have now been resolved to the satisfaction of the
 Council and the police.   The gates in the perimeter fencing have
 now been modified to allow full opening and the capacity of the
 terraces has been reduced to permit the viewing area to be filled
 in one hour.       The Council's view is that the practical
 difficulties of dividing the terraces into self contained areas
 are insurmountable.   The police do not believe that this, or the
 movement of home supporters from one end to the other which this
 allows, causes any problems and are content.   We also understand
 that the police do not consider it necessary for club stewards to
 have radio contact with the police room.

 3.   The Council will undoubtedly need to reassess its position
 in the light of Lord Justice Taylor's final report, including in
 respect of the need for self contained areas which can be closed
 off when maximum capacity is about to be reached.

4.   The Minister will wish to note that as Darlington are not at
present in the Football League its implementation of Lord Justice
Taylor's interim recommendations are not being monitored by the
Home Office, hence our interest.




A R BADEN
SARD
Rm P3/165
Extn 0675

 25 January 1990



•cc   Mr Lee
      Mr Mould, HO
      Mr Ellingford               ,v
»
                                                           6

Kf    •                                                    ITEM NO. 2


     DURHAM COUNTY COUNCIL                PUBLIC PROTECTION COMMITTEE

                                                    2ND JANUARY,   19 90

     SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT,      19 7 5     REPORT OF DIRECTOR
     DARLINGTON FOOTBALL CLUB.                         OF ENVIRONMENT
     198 7 ACT - REGULATED STANDS




     1.   DARLINGTON FOOTBALL CLUB

          At    the meeting of this Committee on 3rd October, 1989
          in    addition to my written report I reported verbally
          on    the following "Taylor" Recommendations included in
          the    priority category.

          Rec. 4      Written Agreement between Club and Police
                      about Respective Responsibilities

          The formal agreement between the Club and Police is in
          draft form but will be subject to the comments of the
          Association of Chief Police Officers following further
          discussions with Lord Justice Taylor.        The written
          agreement is presently in the form of letters between
          both     parties.    There   is no method  of   verifying
          spectator     numbers   in any particular  area   but an
          estimate is considered satisfactory.
                                   M .
          R e c . 6 Recognition of Signs of Distress and Crowd
                     Densitites

          The Police are considering ways of recognising signs
          of distress, crowd dynamics and crowd densities, and
          it is likely that a video will be produced by the
          Police, nationally, which will help safety stewards in
          this area.

          Rec.   32    Communications

          There is not a separate system of land lines to
          complement the radio communications, but the Police
          have a CELNET telephone at each game and this is
          considered satisfactory.

          Rec.   34    Communications

          The use of an illuminated advertising board
          the crowd is not considered necessarv at
          time.

          Rec.   40    First Aid and Medical Ecruicment

          The medical equipment to be available in the first aid
          room has been discussed between the Club and Ambulance
          Service and blankets and stretchers have been leaned
          to the Club by the Service.
Since  the   meeting  the  Advisory   Group  has  also
considered those "Taylor" Recommendations having a
lower priority and this completes consideration of all
43 Recommendations and their application to the Club.

The    following works have   also been   completed   at the
Club:-

(a)   the gates in the pitch-perimeter fence have been
      modified so as to permit full    opening into the
      pitch area.

(b)The   crush barriers        have been load-tested   in
      accordance with the     "Green Guide" and performed
      satisfactorily.

Rec. 19   Flow Rate through Turnstiles

The number of turnstiles at the main entrance is not
adequate to admit the number of spectators allocated
to the east side of the ground during a one-hour
period and the Club has considered providing two
additional turnstiles.    This is, however, likely to
take some time therefore the spectator capacities have
been   reduced    by just   over 700 in the  Safety
Certificate to give a total ground capacity of 10,932.

Other Points

(a)   Polam Lane forms part of the route for visiting
      supporters and I have arranged for the street
      lighting  to  be  upgraded  and the  pot  holes
      repaired.

(b)   The movement of Home Supporters between the north
      and   south  terraces   around  the   east   side
      immediately before Kick-Off and at half-time has
      been further considered by the Group.

      This    "migration" is a "ritual" enjoyed by Home
      Supporters keen to get behind the goal and over
      the last few years public order problems caused
      by this movement of fans has been minimal.   It is
      recognised, however, that there is a potential
      danger and the Club      is considering ways    of
      achieving a satisfactory arrangement.

It was originally envisaged that the Final Report of
the "Taylor" Inquiry would be published before the end
of the year, but I understand it has been delayed
until theend of January, 1990 .     I will, of course,
keep   the    Committee informed   of this   and    any
developments at the Club.


REGULATED STANDS

Members may recall that Part III of the Fire Safety
and   Safety,.j of Places of Sport  Act,  1937  was
implemented on 1st January, 1989 covering Regulated
     Stands   and    I    am   authorised    to   discharge    the
     Authority's    duties     under    this    legislation.     A
     regulated    stand    is    one  which    provides   covered
     accommodation     for   500   or  more    spectators   at   a
     non-designated sports ground.

     There are eight sports grounds which have Regulated
     Stands in the County listed below and those which are
     asterisked  indicate  those   stand owners   who have
     applied for a Safety Certificate.     The stands have
     been jointly inspected by the Police, Fire Brigade,
     Building Authorities   and my Department    and I am
     awaiting additional further information such as plans
     and structural reports before considering, further,
     the issue of Safety Certificates.

     1.    Consett Association Football Club*
     2.   Murray Park Sports Stadium, Stanley*
     3.   Blackhall Colliery Welfare Football Club
     4.    Shildon Association Football Club*
     5.    Ferryhill Athletic Football Club
     6.    Sedgefield Racecourse (two stands)*
     7.    Bishop Auckland Football Club*
     8.    Crook Town Football Club*

     Consett AFC and Shildon AFC have indicated that they
     intend to modify their stand layout so as to reduce
     the   available  area   for  spectators thereby  not
     qualifying as a regulated stand.

     Blackhall Colliery WFC and Ferryhill AFC have not
     applied for a Safety Certificate but have indicated
     that  they  are   prepared   to reduce the  spectator
     capacity to below the qualifying figure of 500.  This
     raises a technical problem and I am currently seeking
     advise from the Home Office.

     I am aware that regular attendances at some of these
     stands may be only a "handful" of spectators and on
     receipt of the advice from the Home Office I will be
     able to give further consideration to the proposals of
     those stand owners wishing to be removed from the
     provisions of this legislation.     I will continue to
     liaise with the Police, Fire Brigade and Building
     Authorities on the Safety Certificates and keep the
     Committee informed'of developments.




                                      D.J. NEWBEGIN
                                      DIRECTOR OF ENVIRONMENT




Environment Department,
County Hall,
Durham.

14th December,   1989
