                                      MT/
                                      i
     K                                                            pfXl_
PS/Secretary of State

LETTER FROM TOM PENDRY MP: REQUEST FOR A MEETING WITH THE ALL
                                                                      2?b
PARTY FOOTBALL COMMITTEE

Mr Pendry writes as Chairman of this Committee requesting a
meeting with the Secretary of State to discuss Lord Jus­
tice Taylor1s interim report and the recent trial of a
football identity pass scheme in Holland. Nicholas Ridley and
Colin Moynihan saw representatives of this Committee on 8 May.
The Home Secretary had a further meeting with them on 12 June.
Government and Opposition backbenchers were united in their
opposition to the Government1s proposals in the Football
Spectators Bill. The meetings were entirely unproductive.

The reasons advanced for a further meeting are rather spe­
cious. The Government has already responded in full to Lord
Justice Taylor's interim Report and the Dutch I/D card scheme
was limited to five clubs only and in no way resembles the
Government's proposals for a National Membership Scheme. A
further meeting is likely to be of little benefit.

That said, Mr Pendry and some of the Secretary of State's own
backbenchers are likely to be upset if they are turned down.
However,  I have discussed with the Minister who firmly
believes that we should not offer a further meeting -certainly
before we have completed the last stages of the Bill in the
latter part of October. I attach a draft letter which refuses
a further meeting. If, on the other hand, the Secretary of
State thought that he ought to offer to see the Committee, a
meeting could be arranged through Mr Pendry's office by
telephone.


                                                    n
                                                           u
David McDonald
Sport and Recreation Division

18 September 1989
                                        svs/M                    Mv
cc       PS/Mr Moynihan
         Mr Kinghan
         Mr Lee
         Mr Smith

                                        X-
                                        ^         ’Os.   s/vVX



                                         jp^y) ^
