From:    Jonathan Haslam                         2 3 August 1989
         Deputy Director of Information                            4UVP
         Public Relations Branch           c.c. *Mr Mower o/r
         Room 14 4, QAG.                        *Mr Payne
         Ext. 3735                              *Mr Goddard
                                                *Mr Whalley
To:      Mr Bolton G2                           *Ms Jago
                                                *Mr Brown
                                                *Mr Kinghon (DoE)
                                                 *w/o attachments


                         HTT.T.SBOROUGH REPORT

Thank you for your note of 2 3 August.

First, let me assure you that press office at all times seeks to
ensure that the correct position is given to the media.  In this
instance all that was asked of us was a copy of the press notice,
including the circular, issued by the Home Secretary on
4 August.  Press office took the opportunity to draw the
reporter's attention to paragraph four of the release dealing
with the circular.
Second, I must confess to a degree of confusion about the case
you present.                                 i

Paragraph 316 of the Taylor report states:

        "Those (the recommendations) which are asterisked should be
        carried out before the 1989/90 season starts. The rest
        should be started forthwith and completed as soon as
        possible".
As you know there are 2 8 such recommendations asterisked.

Paragraph 5 of the Home Office circular states:

        "The 43 recommendations are in paragraph 316.  They are in
        two categories: the 28 asterisked are thbse requiring
        implementation before the start of the ney football season
        or immediately thereafter (my emphasis); the remaining 15
        are those which etc etc".

Even, accepting the' Home Secretary's urging clubs to take urgent
action in both categories, there is divergence.

 Having read both the report and the circular carefully, I
 concluded that there were no grounds for complaint to the Mirror

 The question at issue, therefore, can only be whether PRB was
 given the correct circular to issue with the press release? For
 information I attach both the release and the circular we are
 working from.                                j -i

 I should be grateful for vouir advice on this point.




                          / J onathan haslam
