-V -:'


 Football Licensing Authority
 Chairman: Mr Norman Jacobs
 27 Haxcourt House
 19 Cavendish Square
 London W lM 9AD
 Tel: 071-491 7191
 Fax: 071-491 1882



   A Sandford Esq
   Chief Executive
   The Football League Ltd
   City House
    Maid
    NOTTINGHAM         Way*,r-1 fiRH
                          NG1   6BH                      25 September
                                                         “    *
                                                                      1991




    0 * ^          tK J d U .


    THE FOOTBALL SPECTATORS ACT 1989
    I am very sorry that British Rail prevented you from joining
    Bill Fox and Ian Stott at our meeting on 16 September.

    Durina the course of the discussion on the work of the
    Authority's inspectors, ia n Stott suggested that             ’s
    some confusion among clubs about the extent: of the Aut!hority s
    powers in advance of the introduction of llcensin5 n         may
    therefore be helpful if I set out the present position,

     a c t i o n 13 of the Football Spectators Act 1989, which came into
     force on 3 June 1991, provides the Authority with its powers to
     keep under review the discharge, by local authorities, of their
     S t ^ n / u n f e r the Safety of Iports Grounds Act 1975 in r e l a U o n
     to sports grounds at which designated football matches
     played.
         Section 13(6) provides that for the purpose of the discharge by
         the licensing authority of its functions of monitoring safety
         certification an Inspector may, on production of his authority,

              a       enter at any reasonable time any sports ground at which
                      designated football matches are played;

              b.      make such inspection of the ground and such enquiries
                      relating to the ground as he considers necessary, or

              c.      examine the safety certificate and any records kept
                      under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975, or this
                      part of the Act, and take copies of such records.
It is under the authority given in this section that Inspectors
are currently visiting g r o u n d s and meeting with all those with
a responsibility for safety within the                  which in addition
to the club management includes the local authority, police, fire
brigade, ambulance authority etc.          It is unfortunate, but I
believe inevitable, that during the course of their duties our
inspectors will identify instances where spectator safety is
being compromised.    Whenever this happens the problem will be
brought to the attention of those appropriate - club, local
authority etc, and it is hoped that the necessary remedial action
will be taken. If it is not, the A u t h o r i t y , after consulting the
local authority, the Chief Constable and the fire authority or
building authority, has the power under Section 13(2) of the 1989
Act to require a local authority to include m                  any safety
certificate such terms and conditions that it may specify. The
right of appeal to a magistrates’ court against conditio
inserted by the local authority is specifically disapplied from
conditions inserted by the Authority.
The Authority has always envisaged that where problems were
identified it would attempt to resolve these by consultation and
persuasion.   This view has been reinforced by the positive way
our Inspectors' initial comments and observations have been taken
on board by those they have met.     However, there s h o u l d be no
doubt that, if persuasion fails, the Authority will not hesitate
to use its statutory powers to effect the necessary changes.

I trust this  letter clarifies the extent of the Authority s
e x i s t i n g powers.
                   I am content for you to circulate it_ to all
Football League clubs if you think that it would be useful,

I am copying this letter to the Football Association, the Welsh
Football Association, the Club Secretary of f e™ i c k Rangers
Football Club and the stadium authorities at Wembley, Cardiff
Arms Park and (for information only) Twickenham*




                                               J R K DE Q U I D T




                          S 88U 617U 0                               NOW 16-100-H
                                                                        ii

football Licensing Authority                                   1     caajvI        C5 r
Chairman: Mr Norman Jacobs
27 Harcourt House
19 Cavendish Square
London W1M 9AD
Tel: 071-491 7191
Fax: 071-491 1882



                           FACSIMILE TRANSMISSION SHEET



  TO

  COMPANY                       D     t a _______
                                           t


  FAX NO
                                    , F u ^ ..............
  FROM

   DATE
   NUMBER OF SHEETS (INCLUDING THIS PAGE)

   RE:            ............................


   MESSAGE




   PLEASE DELIVER THIS "FACSIMILE" TO THE! ABOVE MENTIONED PERSON AS
   SOON AS POSSIBLE AFTER RECEIPT.    IF ANY SHEETS ARE MISSING OR
   ILLEGIBLE PLEASE TELEPHONE                     I         'JHWK TRU.

   Copies t o :           -. *........ -....                         *....... **•*




JO;d                        S88U6M10                         m               8S:SI NOW 16-100-H
             r\       -     ,                          •     S S S T T G t^ T iB
