                      COVERING CONFIDENTIAL


                                                  P/M/PSO/9839/90

PS/Mr Moynihan



1.   As requested in your minute of 11 April I attach an amended
draft which takes account of the meeting held between the League,
FA and the Home Secretary since Mr Ellingford's submission of 23
March.

2.   The Letter of 1 March from Arthur Sandford, Chief Executive
of the Football League, asks the Secretary of State for a meeting
to discuss finance for the Taylor recommendations on football
ground safety and planning issues regarding new and existing
stadia.
3.   Finance, has of course been overtaken by the Chancellor's
concession on Pool Betting Duty. The Minister will have seen the
Times report of 22 March (attached at Flag A) which reports Nr
Sandford's welcome for the concession.   Mr Sandford is reported
as saying that the League will respond by 'drawing up a total
strategy to meet the requirements of the Taylor report'.

4.   At the meeting with the Lord Ferrers on 4 April, the issue
of planning permission for new and redeveloped football grounds
was raised (paragraph 11 of minutes at Flag B). It was left that
it would be a matter for the football authorities to pursue
separately with the Minister.     They will undoubtedly want to
discuss this issue before the Secretary of State sees Mr Sandford
in July.    A draft Planning Policy Guidance Note on Sport and
Recreation will, I understand, be with the Minister soon and it
will contain advice which SARD has contributed to on this matter.
A meeting with the football authorities in early May might
therefore be timely.




A R BADEN
SARD C
Rm P3/165
Extn 0675

18 April 1990


cc   PS/Secretary of State
     Mr McDonald
     Mr Corner - (without Flags A and B)
     Mr Lee
     Mr Ellingford (without Flags A and B)
     Mr Mould    - (without Flags A and B)
                                           D E P A R T M E N T OF THE E N V IR O N M E N T
              >W.IAM (NT*,
              U, c-jrj -j,                 2 M A R S H A M S T R E E T L O N D O N SW1P 3EB
                                                            01-276   3000

       O ..                  <A^/          My ref :                  P/M/PSO/9839/90
       V>c RETAR^O$X/^
                                           Your r e f :




       Arthur Sandford Esq
       Chief Executive
       The Football League Limited
       Lytham St Anne's
       Lancashire FY8 1JG




       Thank you for your letter of 1 March to the Secretary of State
       about the financing of Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations on
       football ground safety and the planning issues surrounding the
       development of new and existing grounds.

       The Chancellor of the Exchequer's announcement in his Budget
       Statement about the reduction of Pool Betting Duty reflects the
       Government's concern to ensure that vital        improvements to
       football grounds are made for the safety and comfort of
       spectators.   I have noted the remarks attributed to you in the
       Times article of 22 March.   It is most encouraging that you have
       responded so positively and constructively to the Chancellor's
       proposal, and that both yourselves and the FA showed such
       willingness at the recent meeting with the Lord Ferrers to work
       with    Government   to    implement   Lord    Justice   Taylor's
       recommendations as quickly as possible.      Not least of these
       improvements is of course the introduction of all-seater stadia.

        I regret that I was unable to attend the meeting on 4 April.   I
        know that the issue of planning permission for new and
        redeveloped grounds was raised.    My office will be getting in
        touch with yours and with Graham Kelly's to arrange a meeting in
        order to explore this issue further.

         I am copying this letter to Graham.




                                                                COLIN MOYNIHAN




100%
