                                                                                       m-

             FOOTBALL MEMBERSHIP AUTHORITY SUB-COMMITTEE


MINUTES OF A MEETING HELD ON WEDNESDAY, 26TH APRIL 1989, AT THE
OFFICES OF THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION, LANCASTER GATE," LONDON ~W2~



Present:        l.H. S to tt (Management Committee) - in the Chair

                W.G. McKeag, B.A. (Cantab.) (Management Committee)
                T.R. Phillips (Commercial Director)
                G. Kirton (Football Association)
                D. McDonald (Department of the Environment)

                N. Kinghan (Department of th e Environment)
                K.P. Stein (Arthur Young)
                C. Metcalfe (Arthur Young)
                C.J. Whalley (Football League)




The meeting commenced a t 2.00 pm.

APOLOGIES FOR ABSENCE

Apologies for absence were received from Mr. R.H.G. Kelly (Football Association)
and from Mr. J.A. Crawford (Football League). The Chairman welcomed Mr. McDonald
to the meeting.

MINUTES OF LAST MEETING

The Minutes of the last meeting held on 4th April, 1989, were taken as read
and signed by the Chairman as a correct record, subject to the following amendments:

Page 2 - Selection of Suppliers - line 5
         "140 companies" should read *121 companies"

Page 4 - item v) - Membership Card
         "..... th e Government had no view on ..... " should read
         "..... the Government had no preconceived ideas about ......"

MATTERS ARISING FROM THE MINUTES

a)    Football Spectators Bill

     Mr. Kinghan reported th a t the amendments he had outlined a t the last meeting
     had gone through a t Report Stage in th e House of Lords. He added th a t
     the Government had undertaken to look a t a simplified appeals procedure,
     but it was not looking to take this away from th e FMA. Mr. McKeag requested
     th a t the Government d ifferen tiate between oral and w ritten evidence.
     Mr. Kinghan fe lt th a t the Government would take this on board.

      Mr. Kinghan responded to th e queries which Mr. McKeag had raised a t the
      last meeting:


                                                        Continued/2
lontinued/2


     i)       on restriction orders - Mr. Kinghan stated th a t the Home Office
              view was th a t it would not be right for them to issue guidance to
              the Courts on the criteria to be adopted on restriction orders.

     ii)      on mandatory disqualifications - Mr. Kinghan stated th a t the view
               was th a t it was not necessary fo r the Court to make an order of
              disqualification. The Court would s ta te th a t an offence was relevant
              and inform the FMA. Mr. McKeag saw no reason why the Court
               could not tell the offender th a t he was disqualified forthwith and
               th a t he would be notified in due course; his identity card could be
              surrendered.

              Mr. Kinghan fe lt th a t th e provision for immediate disqualification
              could be contained in th e rules of membership. He pointed out th a t
              the Bill provided for a c e rtific a te of relevance to be sent out by
              the clerk of the Court. Mr. McKeag’s suggestion would require it
              to be handed over there and then.

     iii)     on appeals - Mr. Kinghan reported th a t the view was th a t an offender
               would have to be disqualified whilst his appeal was pending, as the
              obligation would be for the Court to notify the FMA of such appeal
               and this would prove difficult to administer. Mr. McKeag wondered
               if there would be compensation for people wrongly disqualified, particularly
               for pre-payment supporters such as season tic k e t holders. Mr. Kinghan
               felt th a t the Home Office would be unlikely to consider this.

b)   Drafting of Scheme

     i)       Membership (D ata Protection Act) - Mr. Kinghan reported th a t
              there was nothing to stop the police or the FMA holding the names
              of people who are not members, providing th a t the police and the
              FMA are registered under the Data Protection Act. It would, therefore,
              not be a problem for the police o r th e Courts to pass this information
              on to the FMA.

     ii)      Application for Membership (Investigations) • - Mr. Kinghan confirmed
      ,       th a t, in the event of an application failing to pass the validation
               process, the police should carry out the follow-up investigation, but
               the onus would have to be on the FMA to -check- whether a criminal
               offence had been committed. Mr. McKeag fe lt th a t the Home Office
               might have to lay down some guidelines on this issue, as the police
               would require some indication as to why it was fe lt th a t a criminal
               offence had been committed. Mr. Kinghan suggested th a t it might
               be helpful if the police were to attend a meeting of this committee.
               He also fe lt th a t it would help if the application form asked if the
               applicant had been convicted of a relevant offence, although he
               recognised th a t the football authorities' view was th a t this would
               be another inhibiting fac to r. Mr. Stein wondered to what extent
               the FMA would be expected to search for multiple applications.

     iii)     Photographs - Mr. Kinghan reported th a t the Home Office had consulted
               ACPO and the unequivocal advice it had received from ACPO was
               th a t the absence of a photograph would make the policing of the
               scheme less effective. The Government shared ACPO’s view. The
               Chairman expressed his disappointment and fe lt th a t there was a need
               to consult further on this.


                                                           Continued/3
 tontinued/3


     iv)       Invalid Cards - Mr. Kinghan reported th a t he had nothing to add
                on this point, Mr. M etcalfe wondered what e ffe c t there would be
                on police charges to football clubs and fe lt th a t further questions
                needed to be asked of police forces. The Chairman confirmed th a t
                there was a need to come back on this point a t some stage.

     v)        Model for a scheme - Mr. Kinghan confirmed th a t there was no
               precedent for a membership scheme of this nature. He had, however,
               undertaken to provide this committee with a framework and circulated
               round the table the Rules for the National House-Building Council
               which was a framework Bill for approval by the S ecretary of State.
               He confirmed th a t the o ffe r of providing a Government lawyer still
               stood.

SELECTION OF SUPPLIERS

Mr. Metcalfe reported th a t a shortlist of 11 suppliers had now been drawn up
and these 11 suppliers could be broadly divided into 3 groups - systems integrators,
system manufacturers and consortia already formed. The shortlist was as follows:-

Systems Integrators           System Manufacturers             Consortia already formed

CMC                           Siemen Data Systems              Software Sciences
Logica                        McDonnell-Douglas                  (Thorn EMI/Norton Opax)
SD-Scicon                     Bull                             ICL (with Synchro)
                              GEC                              Systems Reliability
                                                                 (Aquix/Coggon Computers)
                                                               Check-In Admission Limited

Mr. M etcalfe reported th a t a number of meetings with these suppliers had been
arranged for week commencing 1st May, 1989. He confirmed th a t a d ra ft report
of the selection process had been prepared and this would be issued to the committee
through Mr. Phillips.

Mr. Stein confirmed th a t the prime contractors were major companies. He felt
th a t the next stage was the technology identification. He was hoping to prepare
a Statem ent of Requirements by 1st June, 1989, but fe lt th a t there could be a
problem in meeting this deadline as certain elements such as the exemptions from
the scheme had not y e t been made clear and also because of the uncertain state
of play pending the Hillsborough Inquiry.

Mr. Stein also reported th a t Arthur Young were looking a t the financial impact
of thfe scheme, the taxation angle and potential grants. He understood th a t grants
might be available from th e Department of the Environment, th e Department of
Trade and Industry and the European Commission. He would, therefore, need
to talk to Government officials.

FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL

Mr. McDonald reported th a t the trag ic events a t Hillsborough had clearly affected
the Bill’s course through Parliament, although he fe lt th a t it would still be enacted
in this session. He confirmed th a t the Bill had completed its Report Stage in
the House of Lords, but no d a te had y e t been fixed for its Third Reading.


                                                            Continued/4



                                           - 3 -
Continued/4


Mr. McDonald reported further th a t it was hoped to have a t least the Second
Reading in the House of Commons before the end of July. It was as y e t unresolved
w hether the Bill would go to Committee Stage before the summer recess, but
he did feel th a t there was no question of Royal Assent being gained before the
last week in October 1989.

Mr. McDonald accepted th a t implementation of the scheme could not now be realised
by Spring 1990 and fe lt th a t the Government was now more likely to be looking
a t the s ta r t of the 1990/91 season. He added th a t the Prime Minister anticipated
receiving an interim report from Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry into the Hillsborough
Disaster before October and he felt th a t the delay in the Bill’s parliamentary
process would enable the Government and the FMA to look a t the interim report
and take any points on board. Mr. McDonald considered it unlikely th a t the Committee
Stage on P a rt One of the Bill would take place before the interim report.

The Chairman reported th a t this committee was not able to move forward a t this
moment on the composition of the FMA and the rules of the scheme as the situation
post-Hillsborough had not y e t been discussed by e ith er the Football League
Management Committee or the Football Association Executive Committee. He
added, however, th a t Mr. Phillips and Arthur Young would press ahead with discussions
with the shortlisted suppliers.

In response to a question from Mr. Phillips, Mr. Kinghan confirmed th a t the
Government did not now expect the d ra ft scheme to be ready for 31st August
1989. It did not expect the FMA to produce a scheme before Royal Assent.
Mr. Kinghan expected th a t the Government’s o ffer of financial assistance would
be similarly extended.

ANY OTHER BUSINESS

Mr. McKeag expressed a personal view on his concern for the technology to be
used. The critical question was th a t of getting people safely through the turnstiles.
He was not certain th a t he or the football authorities would like to be associated
with the FMA, if responsibility is to be laid a t the door of the FMA should a
tragedy occur. Mr. Kinghan re-affirmed th a t the Minister had sta te d th a t the
scheme would not be implemented unless the technology was satisfactory.
     9

Again expressing a personal view, Mr. McKeag fe lt th a t, a fte r Hillsborough, the
Government might like to o ffer football the chance to come forward with its
own suggestion as there had been a g reat deal of heart-searching. He fe lt th a t
football might be able to come up with some sort of rapprochement which could
entail more flexibility.

NEXT MEETING

It was agreed not to fix a d a te for the next meeting a t this moment.

There being no fu rth er business, the Chairman closed the meeting a t 4.25 pm.




                                                Chairman

                                                 Date ......
