          &S INSPE"CT0RftTE/ FEU■   - '‘"l   88,13.1,,* w . ; ? 71273 ;^ 4 1: - P.


Q   s .8.7/fIseml^ peb



FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED CLUB SEMINAR ON TAYLOR IMPLEMENTATION
•THURSDAY 2 AUGUST 13 90

  attended this seminar on 2 August to give a presentation on the
work of the Football Licensing Authority, 1 took the opportunity
t.o;attend for the whole day.    A copy of the programme is at
Annex A    ,
Arthur Sandfordss presentation in the morning was about funding.
He indicated that calculations toy the League now estimated that
there would be a £2Q0m~£250m shortfall to ieet the minimum needs
of clubs as identified in the Taylor Report: that is to say the
provision of    covered seating accommodation. To meet the total
bill of improvements in facilities would mean expenditure in the
region of £600m.   This would be the cost of doing away with the
hostile environment.   He said that he wanted t h e -League 0 0 make
g, casa for extending the reduction in pools b e t t i n g ’levy for a
further 5 years, He recognised in this connection that it would
be necessary    to say what the League could do       itself.

Ee said that many clubs were awaiting for the setting up of the
Football Licensing Authority and for the revised Green Guide
before making plans. They were also awaiting guidelines from the
football Trust and revised policy planning “guidance from the
department of the Environment.      Other clubs had plans well
advanced. He thought that clubs should look at other "Government
programmes for grant aid both at local level. Central Government
level and at the European level.

Mr  Sandford   announced  that   the  Advisory   Design  Council
recommendation 5 of the Taylor Report had now been"appointed.
Its Chairman world be Mr Gwylvm Roberts. The obiactive of the
Advisory Design Council would be to look for good stadium design
at minimum cost.     (Mr Simon .Inglis who spoke to ms on the
telephone on 3 August told me that he had been invited to join
the Advisory and Design Council and was very teen to do "so,
T told him that 2 did not think, that it would conflict with his
nsnbership of the Football Licensing Authority0

nr SAnaiord invited clubs to consider self"help moves such as
balk purchasing of seats which could result in substantial
discount* from manufacturers and leasing arrangements under which
clubs would not be required to find the capital costs of new
seating«   He was pleased that: the Football Trust had been
persuaded to give ?5% grant of up to £70 cost cer individual
installed seat,

H<s said the discussions were continuing with the Inland EevanuK
about uaxation and capital allowances, 'h ® advised clubs with tan
losses to maximise trust income because they could clearly not
benefiv from tax allowances.                  ”              '     /
>- ‘ FROM FIRE S E R V I C E S INSPECTORflTE/FEU


              Ha also indicated that the League and clubs should maximise
              sponsorship income. He made reference to the recent sponsorship
              by Rumbelows and to the potential for maximising income from
              video and tv sources.

               Finally he pointed to the need for clubs to apply their own
               sources of income where, this was practicable not excluding
               increasing prices  of accommodation where   facilities were
               improved„

               (It should be noted that proposals for raising funds by
               introducing a levy on transfer fees etc was considered by the
               League at its private session at the conference on Wednesday
               1 August but the decision was deferred.) •

               Mr Tom Wharton spoke about the work of the Football Trust 1990.
               Ha indicated that before the establishment of the Football Trust
               199 0 some £9m per year was available from the pools betting
               industry of which £Sm from the Spot-the-Bal1 competition went to
               the football grounds improvement trust.        There had been a
               disagreement in earlier years about the use of trust funds, some
               trustees believing that only the interest on accumulated capital
               should be dispersed, while others thought that the totality of
               the money    should be made .available     for   football ground
               Improvements.    This had now been resolved though only after
               resignation of one of the trustees.       Treasury rules about
               dispersement of the new income made available from the reduction
               in the pools betting levy established without doubt that the
               trust was expected to disperse the whole of the money which it
               received.  The trust had now put up the ”ceiling” on grants to
               75% of approved expenditure and up to £300, 000 per club in total
               for safety.        For toilets, family enclosures and     similar
               improvements in amenity, grants of up to 70% were available.

               The new Football Trust 1990 had income of £10m per year from the
               old sources and about £2 0m per year from the reduction in the
               pools betting levy.   It had been agreed that the old Football
               Grounds Improvement Trust should remain in existence during 1990
               to provide a means of continuing to make money available during
               the closed season before the Football Trust ; 1990        became
               operational,

               Mr Wharton said that he had become Chairman of the Licensing
               Authority Liaison Committee of the Trust (known as the Lilac
               Committee) and they had appointed Peter Lee, formerly Acting Head
               of the Spurts     and Recreation Division of Do£, as the new
               S&cretary of the Football Trust (with effect from’the beginning
               of August).

               Mr Wharton said tnat national stadia were being treated in the
               s«®6(way as League clubs - that was a Treasury requirement. The
               T r u s t 1& contribution to Northern Ireland would be £150,000 for
               all football clubs in the province.

               K a i referred to the booklet recently produced by the Police
               Scientific Development Branch of the Home Office in co-operation
               with ACpo on the installation of CCTV,   £2m had been allocated’


\
FROH FIRE'SERVICES INSPECTORME/FEU               88,13,L/"             1   ? '




       Q . the updating of      CCTV systems and 100% aid would be provided.
        The Trust regarded       CCTV,  ..the single most effective means of
        combating football      hooliganism.    6 copies of the CCTV booklet
        were being sent to      clubs by the Trust,

       A new brochure had been produced on the work of the Football
       Trust 1990 (to replace the old "Blue Book") which specified
       procedures on grant applications. The priority would be towards
       the provision of seated accommodation though this would not be
       an exclusive priority.   In the first instance, grants would be
       directed towards Divisions 1 and 2, where the timetable was more
       demanding. Major projects would be assessed on the basis of need
       and resources.  The Trust was not in the business of providing
       money to fund empty seats.

        Ha made reference to police cost and charges.      The Trust had
        decided to phase out aid on police charges for which there was
        a 41% increase in costs during 1989/90.    Funds had temporarily
        bfcen allocated for 3 seasons and the matter would be looked at
        again in the light of current discussions.

        In answer to questions, Mr Wharton said that although the police
        had in the past been willing to accept ownership and maintenance •
        responsibilities arising from the provision of GCTV equipment,
        they now expected clubs to accept these responsibilities. This
        had expenditure implications.   He was asked whether the Trust *s
        grants were available on a ground basis or a club basis; if the
        former, there was no financial advantage to be had from ground
        sharing. Mr Wharton replied that the Trust would be prepared to
        consider double allocations of grant money where clubs shared
        facilities.

        He was asked whether the.- priority being given to 1st and 2nd
        Division clubs would mean that small clubs would at present be
        excluded.    He said that the Trust would still consider
        applications from small clubs but repeated that it was not in the
        business for funding unused capacity.



        There were 3 Government speakers; Mr Mike Ash of the Department
        of the Environment Inner Cities Police Unit gave a fairly
        standard presentation on inner cities grants and indicated how
        football clubs might be able to take advantage of various grants
        programmes by making proposals which envisaged community use of
        club resources.      Mr Des Coles of the Department of the
        Environment, Planning and Development Control Directorate, gave
        a presentation based on DoE* s forthcoming policy planning
        document , the main message of which was if you were thinking of
        trying to develop in the Green Belt, forget it.   it-, copy of that
        spaech is at .-nnex A . )
                                                                       X
        A copy of my own presentation on the Football Licensing Authority
        is at Annex So
FROM FIRE SERVICES INS PECTORATE/FEU   ,       . 08,13,1,,.          371273   P.


       Q    dviaorv Design Council

           At the seminar it was announced that Mr Gwylym Roberts had been
           appointed as Chairman of the Advisory and Design Council. Mr
           Roberts, who is an engineer, was introduced to the audience. He
           said that it was expected that the ADC would have about 6 members
           who were predominantly architects and/or engineers that they
           would co-opt other members with particular skills when it was
           thought necessary. The intention of the Advisory Design Council
           would be to produce a code of good practice for the development
           of the football stadia and for new stadia. They wanted to start
           by examining existing research and ideas on stadium design * They
           would also hop®, if it was necessary, to be able to commission
           new research,

           Mr Roberta told the conference that       ha envisaged a hectic
           12 months following the first meeting     off the Advisory Design
           Council this month, the aim would be to   disseminate views which
           would help clubs to develop in the most   effective way possible,

           Mr Roberts subsequently indicated to me that he would like to
           come to the Home Office to discuss these issues, I said that he
           would be very welcome (and gave him my telephone number as a
           contact pointc but suggested that it might be better to wait
           until after the holiday season or at least until after Mr Mould
           returns from leave at the beginning of September,




                                                      P S BOLT Oil
                                                      02 D i v i s i o n



           7 August 199 0
