    4                                       'H
         /
    s'
1




             PS/Mr Moynihan




             FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL



             I attach revised bull point briefing taking account of yesterday's
             developments.   If the Minister is content we will draw on it for
             PSO and TO cases.




             P A LEE
             21 April 1989


             cc     PS/Secretary of State
                    PS/Lord Caithness
                    PS/Lord Hesketh
                    PS/Sir T Heiser
                    Mr Owen
                    Mr McDonald
                    Ms Caines
                    Mrs Weinberg
                    Mr Newson
                    Ms Jackson
                    Mr Russell
                    Mr Rock
                    Mr Smith
                    Mr Hunt
THE CONTINUING NEED FOR THE FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL:
BULL POINTS


The need for the Bill

- The Football Spectators Bill was introduced because of the need
to take further powerful measures to fight football hooliganism.
That need remains.

- The immediate background to the decision to legislate we the
number of serious incidents in West Germany during the European
Championships iij June 1988.

- Everyone is appalled at what happened at Hillsborough. This
does not mean the need for action against football violence has
gone away.

- In spite of the efforts of the Government and the football
authorities over the past few years we still need over 5,000
police officers on duty every Saturday to contain the problem, to
protect the true supporters and those living near to football
grounds.

- The reputation of our football supporters abroad is as low as
it can be.  The Bill will empower the courts to prevent convicted
hooligans from travelling to England matches abroad.      We must
have this in place before the World Cup finals in Italy in June
1990.

- It would be irresponsible to throw away the one measure
available to us not only to deal with the long standing problem
of hooliganism but also to take account of any relevant measures
which the Taylor Inquiry might recommend.    If we have no Bill
then we are precluding any possibility of legislative action for
a whole year.

- Completing the Bill this session will allow full account to be
taken of any interim recommendations of the Inquiry.

- The Bill provides an enabling framework.   It does not draw up
the Football Membership Scheme.    That will be for the football
authorities.   The design of the scheme will be able to take
account of the final report of the Inquiry.

- The introduction of the national membership scheme follows the
recommendations of the last judicial inquiry on football grounds
-the Popplewell Inquiry.

- The Government has given a firm commitment not to implement the
scheme until it is satisfied that it will work and particularly
that there are no worries about the technology.

- We are considering the possibility of an amendment to the Bill
to enable its licensing provisions to provide for all seated
accommodation at designated major football grounds.   We will be
consulting the football authorities about this.
Safety; Getting into the ground

- It has always been the case that new admission procedures
required when the scheme is in place will have to qualify for a
safety certificate in the normal way.      Safety must always be
paramount.   Excluding troublemakers is   a major contribution to
safety.

- It is clearly necessary to design and implement the system of
checking membership cards in such a way that disorder does not
result.   Potential suppliers of membership card equipment have
said that it is possible for cards to be validated in no extra
time that it t^kes now for people to part with      their ticket of
pay their entry fee and pass through theturnstiles.

- Hillsborough demonstrates only too tragically that there is
already a problem about last minute crowds at matches.        The
scheme might help insofar as potential troublemakers would know
that if they cause trouble in trying to gain entry to a ground,
they might lose their membership.  It could also have a deterrent
effect on those prepared to travel to all ticket matches without
a ticket.

The scheme and physical crowd controls at the ground

- Over time, the scheme will drive the hooligans away and grounds
will become safer places.      This could mean a relaxation of
segregation arrangements and reduced policing levels.

- Immediate question which arise, post Hillsborough, about the
continuing use of perimeter fencing underline the need for the
scheme.   If segregation and pitch invasion controls are to be
relaxed   there  must  be  an  effective  system  of  excluding
troublemakers at matches.
