110-3.BM


THE FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS ASSOCIATION - MEETING 30 MARCH
TAYLOR PROPOSALS ON NEW OFFENCES

Line to take


We are carefully and urgently considering Lord Justice Taylors
recommendations on creating new offences. We are currently
consulting ACPO and other Government Departments about the
proposed offences. Too soon to say what our conclusions will be.
BACKGROUND


General


Lord Justice Taylor recommended new criminal offences at sports
grounds

     i)      throwing a missile;


    ii)      chanting obscene and racialist abuse;

   iii)   going on the pitch without reasonable excuse.


He also recommended that consideration should be given to
criminalising the activity of ticket touts at football grounds on
the day of a match.


Before deciding whether to introduce legislation to create these
new offences consideration must be given to the possible
difficulties of enforcement and the extent to which the mischief
at which the new offences would be aimed is covered by existing
offences, for instance the Public Order Act 1986.


Under section 4 of the Act it is an offence to use threatening
behaviour likely to cause fear or provocation of violence.
Section 5 created a new offence of disorderly conduct "within the
sight or hearing of another person likely to be caused harassment,
alarm or distress thereby".


We expect replies from ACPO and the Crown Prosecution Service on
the proposed new offences before Easter.


Throwing a missile


In certain circumstances this may amount to assault or causing the
fear or provocation of violence which would be an offence under
section 4. Where throwing a missile is not caught by section 4,
Taylor argues that section 5 may not cover the behaviour because
of the difficulty of adducing evidence of the victim element.
Taylor may well be overstating this difficulty - the recent case
of DPP v Orum [[1988] 3. AU ER] makes clear that the "victim" may,
in law, be a police officer. But if throwing a missile at a
sports ground without anyone being likely to be harassed, alarmed
or distressed is thought to be behaviour which should attract
criminal sanctions there may be a case for a further look at the
law.


Chanting obscene or racialist abuse


Taylor concluded, probably correctly, that the chanting at a
football match is more likely to cause offence and embarrassment
than to stir up racial hatred. But the offence and embarrassment
may provide the basis to charge an offence under section 5. If it
does not, then consideration needs to be given to whether a
criminal offence should be created for conduct which causes no
harassment, alarm or distress. Enforcement considerations are
also particularly relevant here.


Going on to the pitch without reasonable excuse

This behaviour may often be covered by section 5. If not, the
police may be able to respond to a pitch invasion by use of their
common law power to deal with a breach of the peace or a
reasonably apprehended imminent breach of the peace.


It is difficult to envisage circumstances of the going on a pitch
to which neither section 5 nor common law powers are apt but which
nonetheless is without reasonable excuse and deserves a criminal
penalty.

Ticket touts


Taylor recommended   that the activity of ticket touts at football
grounds on the day   of a match should be made unlawful. He
suggested a number   of ways this might be achieved while
acknowledging that   it would require careful consideration and
drafting. He argued that football touts were a special case which
needed controlling in the interests of safety and order to the
extent that arguments in favour of allowing market freedom should
be overridden.


As with the other offences, we are considering the recommendation
and are currently awaiting replies on the proposed touting offence
from ACPO and the Crown Prosecution Service.
