hs.2.22/hillsbl.peb                       FILE NUMBER
DRAFT LETTER
ADDRESSEE'S REFERENCE



TO                         ENCLOSURES       COPIES TO BE SENT TO

Robert G Hughes Esq MP
House of Commons
^pTDON    SW1A OAA


                                         (FULL ADDRESSES, IF
(FULL POSTAL ADDRESS)                    NECESSARY)


                  LETTER DRAFTED FOR SIGNATURE BY ..Mr Brandon-Bravo....
                                                      (NAME OF SIGNATORY)


                 Thank you for your letter of 13 February enclosing one
                 from Mr Hicks.


                 You did not send me a copy of the article to which
                 Mr Hicks referred but I can understand his distress.

                 I do not want to add to the controversy or to your
                 constituent's grief.    I think it is fair to point out
                 that Lord Justice Taylor accepts that there was a drunken
                 element in the crowd at Hillsborough but was satisfied on
                 the evidence that the great majority were not drunk or
                 even the worse for drink.

                In his general conclusions in Chapter 16 of his Interim
                Report, he attributed the immediate cause of the incident
                to the failure when gate C was opened to cut off access
                to the central pens which were already overfull. He said
                that the presence of an unruly minority who had drunk too
                much aggravated the problem of dangerous congestion of
                the turnstiles but he placed that in context.
I have no doubt that there will be some people who were
at Hillsborough on the day of the tragedy, whether fans
or policemen, whose individual perception of the events
does not accord with Lord Justice Taylor's conclusions.
I think that those of us who were not there, or who did
not hear all the evidence, really have no basis to
question his considered views or his conclusion about the
immediate cause of the incident.

I have shown your letter, and that from Mr Hicks, to
Lord Ferrers who is the Minister of State at the Home
Office whose responsibilities encompass police matters
and the safety of sports grounds.    He has pointed out
that of the 6 objectives of the Hillsborough Family
Support Group, only 3 come specifically within the area
of responsibility of the Home Office, and the Government
has already announced that it intends to act on each of
them.    The Football Licensing Authority, which the
Government expects to appoint within the next few months
under the Football Spectators Act, will be given the
responsibility of reviewing the way in which local
authorities carry out their responsibilities for safety
at sports grounds under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act
1975.


The Home Office has already agreed to revise the "Green
Guide" on safety at sports grounds to incorporate
recommendations made by the Taylor Inquiry, and some
other changes, and will shortly be setting up a working
group to consider the revised guide before it is sent out
for wider circulation and comment. Home Office Ministers
will also be considering an order under Section 15A of
the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 which will have the
effect of requiring local authorities to include specific
terms or conditions in safety certificates.

The question of "no fault" compensation is for the Lord
Chancellor's Department, rather than for the Home Office.
You said that Mr Hicks had approached you about the
possibility ofmeeting with one of the Home Office
Ministers.    I do not think that that is out of the
question.   Lord Ferrers is the Minister of State with
responsibility for both sports ground safety matters and
the police.     If Mr Hicks wishes to see him with
representatives of the Support Group, I suggest he
contacts the Minister's Private Secretary on 273 2468 to
arrange a date and time.

Although Lord Ferrers is happy to meet Mr Hicks he has
suggested that since the particular objectives of the
support group are already being addressed, he might find
it more helpful as an alternative to have a mane detailed
discussion with the Head of the Division within the Home
Office who has responsibility for taking these issues
forward. His name is Mr Peter Bolton and his telephone
number is 273 3322.
