r have discussed this case carefully with Mr Mould in G2 (safety)
Division.    The Home Office is reluctant to intervene in a dispute
with the safety licensing authority for a ground (in this case
Coventry City Council), and we do not consider this is required in
this case.    The Council and the police hold that the match was
crowded, but not dangerous.


My anxiety was raised by the inference I drew from Superintendent
Birch’s letter of 15 September to|    '~ T   (this constituent) that
Liverpool City Council members were content with the explanation
and videos given or shown to them at Coventry police HQ on 6
September since that is contradicted by Councillor Chase's letters
of 12 and 13 September to the police and the FA.


Mr Mould has therefore sought and obtained added assurance from
Coventry City Council that the safety of spectators was       adequate
at the Coventry City v Everton match on 19 August.     They accept
there were difficulties, and improvements to ease congestion in
the future have been made.    We suspect however that the police may
have handled the crowd unsympathetically on the day/ as alleged by
                                                                   j
a number of Everton supporters in statements to Liverpool City
Council.


To PS/MofS as draft aside.




                                                F J SMITH
                                                F8 Division




 25 October 1989                                            PO 21764/89
                                                    QPE/89 52/3/129(S)
Thank you for your letter of 5 September to Colin Moynihan
enclosing this correspondence from I     1                in   """"
                                     1   d_____________
connection with the Coventry City v Everton football match on
19 August.


Liverpool City Council wrote on 2 3 August to Coventry City
Council (the licensing authority for the Highfield Road
ground) and West Midlands Police (who police matches there).
Their comprehensive replies enclosed, explain the many steps
taken to implement Lord Justice Taylor's interim
recommendations, and comment in detail on the specific
complaints made about the match.    While it is accepted that
conditions both outside and inside the ground were at times
crowded, it is refuted that there was severe crushing or that
lives were put at risk.    Nevertheless, improvements have been
made to increase the throughput of the turnstiles for the'
future.


It is understandable that following the tragedy at
Hillsborough anxieties are more easily aroused when any
                                                                      t
congestion or delay occurs while large numbers of spectators
are being admitted to grounds, even if conditions are in fact
safe.     Safety of spectators now receives increased attention,
and the Government will consider with great care Lord Justice
Taylor's final conclusions.


Mistakes were made at Hillsborough, by the police and by
others.    Nevertheless many officers made valiant efforts to
rescue the injured and save life that day; and determined
efforts are made every Saturday by all services concerned to
ensure the safety of spectators at football matches.
           s reaction is understandable but I would encourage him
to reconsider his attitude to the police, who continue to
serve the public well and professionally, often in difficulty
and demanding circumstances.




                HP
