                                                                           - 2 MAR 1390 | ^ ° 3


                                                                                    1990

AAA\

  — 4w—    im (Va
                                                           r^   c o \ V \ r 'lo s s e s
                                                                      M r A/V(>>rrz7\rtY
                                                   x # \             M r - (t irv\(2ct
                 ^v-A>                                               (V\r . 0
                  +    -A   J           tr
                      b I ? fa   o                                   M r A J ' V ^ na^ L ^
                                                                     (V\r /VWvo-^y
                                                                               t'C^vvA-G^'

                                                                      w C litv )C ^ O ^ n cX v

                                                                   W<L-X^£ax=J rv-o\
                                                                   ^~a^ANrvN^L^ y-c_^^

                                lO DO W N ING STREET
                                     LONDON SW1A 2AA
       From the Private Secretary
                                                        26 February 1990


            k
            < U ju ,        i U+t»


         FAST-TRACK PUBLISHING OF GOVERNMENT REPORTS

            The Prime Minister has seen the Lord
  X    President's minute of 19 February which she
       has noted without comment.

            I am sending copies of this letter to
       the Private Secretaries to Ministers in
       charge of Departments, the Economic Secretary
       to the Treasury, sir Robin Butler and the
       Chief Executive of HMSO,


                                 L.      t* rt~

                                        v
                                        ■J        • •

                                                   DOMINIC MORRIS



       Tim Sutton, Esq.,
       Office of the Lord President.
 PRIME MINISTER




 FAST-TRACK PUBLISHING OF GOVERNMENT REPORTS


In the wake of the problems we encountered over the publication
of Lord Justice Taylor's final report on the Hillsborough Stadium
disaster, I have looked into the steps which would be needed to
establish a fast-track arrangement for the publication of similar
reports in future.


2.   The primary lesson underlined by our experience over the
Taylor report is the need for close collaboration and advance
planning between the Department sponsoring a report and HMSO.
The crucial point is fcr departments to identify wall in Advance
the possible need for the rapid publication of a report and
consult HMSO at an early stage about this and any other aspects
of the report’s publication, including any security requirements.
If this is done, full advantage can be taken, for example, of
word processing to speed the production of written text. Plans
can be made for photographs and other illustrations to be
processed in advance of receipt of the rest of the text of a
report.


3.   Departments may of course have difficulty in setting a
timetable for the production of a report sufficiently far ahead
because of uncertainty about when the final text will be
available.  But it should be possible, in all but the most
exceptional cases, to set a clear deadline and stick to it.
Other problems can arise if final proof stage is used not just to
correct typographical errors but to change the actual text.
 Again, this problem can be much reduced if a report is prepared
 on word processing equipment whic’i can output tape or disk in a
 format suitable for direct input to the printer’s typesetting
 equipment. But this too requires collaboration between
 Departments and HMSO in advance to ensure that necessary
 technical standards are met. it is no surprise that advance
 planning and subsequent adherence to the agreed timetable by all
 concerned emerge as the key factors in achieving fast publication
 of reports,


 4.   It would clearly make no economic sense for HMSO to maintain
 a permanently idle printing capacity in case of an urgent
requirement which might arise only occasionally. HMSO therefore
relies on buying the services of private sector printers, a
handful of whom have been specially cleared for the production
of classified material. Productive capacity can be earmarked for
precisely the right time, provided sufficient advance notice is
given.


5.    HMSO have, h w w r ,   reviewed W i * * performance standard for
the production of important reports like the Taylor report.
Where fast-track treatment is requested by the responsible
Minister, they would guarantee the following production times,
subject to three working days notice of firm dates for delivery
of final copy and/or clearance of proofs i


                      TxmSMXHrn              P r in tin g

     Up to 48pp         12 hrs                2 days
     48pp-144pp         24 hrs                3 days
     Over I44pp         36 hrs                4 days


If simultaneous publication of a report was required at several
locations in addition to London,**"then an extra day would need to
be added, if applied in the case of the Taylor report, this
would have meant that, assuming the text of the report had been
received by HMSO on Friday 19 January (it was in fact received by
them on Monday 22 January), it could have been published on
Tuesday 23 January. Depending ©a their si2e and complexity, and
the degree of advance notice, i.t might be possible to produce
some publications within 24 hours, should that prove necessary.

6.   The costs associated with such fast-track arrangements could
substantially exceed normal print-buying methods, it has long
been the accepted practice that those buying reports should not
have to pay higher cover prices to reflect the urgency or
security required in a particular case. Sponsor Departments
could therefore on occasion find themselves asked to contribute
towards any exceptional costs involved in fast-track publishing.
The extent of such costs would depend on market conditions, and
could only be determined case-by-case.


7.   Colleagues will wish to be aware of the new performance
standard proposed by HMSO, which represents a considerable
improvement on existing arrangements. They will also wish to
have in mind the other lessons .. have set out which can be
derived from our experiences over the Taylor report.

8.   I am copying this minute to Ministers in charge of
Departments, the Economic Secretary to the Treasury, Sir Robin
Butler and the Chief Executive of HMSO.




19 February 199ft
