I




    1DRAFT ANNOUNCEMENT   ON   POLICY TOWARDS   ALL-SEATING AT   FOOTBALL
    GROUNDS

    Q.   To ask the Secretary of State for National Heritage, if
         there is to be a reconsideration of the policy towards the
         all-seating requirement at football grounds.

    A.   The Government keeps under continual scrutiny the safety of
         sports grounds. We continue to support the principles of
         improved spectator safety and comfort which were set out by
         Lord Justice Taylor in his final report on the Hillsbrough
         Stadium disaster. In recent months we have been examining
         the all-seating requirement for Football League grounds in
         the context of the representations that have been made and
         our concern to ensure the highest standards of safety given
         all the factors involved, including the size of particular
         grounds. League status and the financial health of the clubs
         concerned.   The safety of our sports grounds remain^
         paramount. ffa w w is ^

         We have decided that it would be wrong to review either the
         principle   or the timetable    for all-seating at First
         Division grounds in the Football League (the new Premier
         League). It is essential that our top clubs meet the
         standards necessary to compete in Europe and make full use
         of the resources available to them to provide grounds of
         which we can all be proud. We also remain firmly committed
         to the principle of all-seating for the great majority of
         Second Division clubs.

         However, there may be equally compelling reasons not to
         proceed with an all-seating requirement at all Third and
         Fourth Division clubs iirthe Football League. We also need
         to consider the positionTat those Second Division clubs with
         very low average attendances. Further representations are
         being invited from a number of interested organisations to
         assist me in finalising our re-examination of these and
         related issues. I have set a four week period for the
         receipt of these further views and I shall announce my
         conclusions speedily thereafter.



         My Rt Honourable Friend,     the Secretary of State for
         Scotland, will make a separate statement about the position
         in Scotland.




                                                                        1
•
*•


     -


         ALL-SEATING AT FOOTBALL GROUNDS

         BULL POINTS

              Substantial progress has been made in improving standards of
              safety and comfort at our football grounds due to the
              implementation of the Taylor report, the work of the
              Football Licensing Authority and funds made available by the
              Football Trust. The First Division is now over 55% seated
              and £23.5m was spent by clubs in the calendar year 1991 on
              ground safety and general improvement works;

              the  Football   Trust has approved grants amounting       to
              approximately £49m towards all-seating and safety;

              there haS   also been a continuing reduction in football
              hooliganism since a peak of arrests and ejections at
              football matches in the 1988/89 season;

              today's announcement by my Rt Hon Friend the Secretary of
              State for the Department of National Heritage makes clear
              the Government's commitment to ensure   the safety of our
              sports grounds;

              the announcement makes clear it would be wrong to review
              either the principle or the timetable for all-seating at
              First Division grounds in the Football League and we remain
              firmly committed to the principle of all-seating for the
              great majority of Second Division clubs;

              it is essential that our top clubs meet the standards
              necessary to compete in Europe and make full use of the
              resources available to them to provide grounds of which we
              can all be proud;

              taking account of the improvements I have referred to above
              and the need to address issues of safety and quality in the
              round with priority being given to the most urgent, my Rt
              Hon Friend has also announced there may be compelling
              reasons not to proceed with an all-seating requirement at
              all Third and Fourth Division clubs in the Football League.
              Further representations are being sought over the next four
              weeks and my Rt Hon Friend will be making an announcement
              shortly thereafter.




                                                                         1
>




    Background note

    A copy of the PQ answer announcing the re-examination of the all­
    seating requirements is attached at Flag A.

    Interested organisations have     been   invited   to   comment   on   the
    following issues by 4 July.

         i.    whether standing accommodation should be allowed at
               some Third and Fourth Division grounds. If so, should
               this be:

               a.     in all cases (subject to the FLA determining that
                      the terracing is safe); or

               b.     on the basis of a fixed capacity threshold (say
                      10,000) above which clubs must go all-seating;

         ii.   whether, in view of average attendances at some Second
               Division clubs being significantly lower than at some
               Third Division clubs, standing accommodation should
               also be retained at those Second Division grounds;

         iii. under what circumstances could an extension of the
              August 1994 deadline be relaxed for any Second Division
              club.
         iv. what    transitional  arrangements,   if any,   will be
              appropriate for clubs which are promoted;

         v.    whether any special arrangements should be made for a
               match in a cup competition where a big club is due to
               play   "away" at a small club where all-seating is not
               required, or for a league match between two small clubs
               but where a large attendance is anticipated.

    In addition to these points the review will also need to examine
    the remit of the Football Licensing Authority, whether it needs
    additional powers in order to ensure safe terracing and whether
    guidance on the design of seating is needed to complement the
    advice and the green guide on safety of sports grounds.

    A list of those organisations to be consulted is attached at Flag
    B.

    The AllParty Football Committee has already submitted its case
    for a     review ofthe all-seater requirement. A summary of its main
    conclusions is attached at Flag C. Although the paper is strong
    on argument it is weak on conclusions and reflects an inability
    of the Committee to come up with precise recommendations with the
    exception of its suggestion that clubs willing to restrict ground
    capacity to ten thousand should be able to retain standing
    accommodation.




                                                                             1
I   *■ i
      F P U M                                              0 1 . 0 2 *19 <




    #
                                                    m
                                     DEPARTMENT OP NATIONAL HERITAGE


    ALL-SEATING AT FOOTBALL GROUNDS



                Substantial progress h a s been
                mad© in improving standards of
                safety and c o m f o r t    a t our
                football g r o u n d s due to t h e
                implementation o f t h e T a y l o r
                re p o r t , the     work   of    the
                Football Licensing Authority
                and funds mad© available by
                the Football Trust,       Thft F i r s t
                Division i s       now o v e r    55%
                seated and £23. 5m was spent by
                clubs In the oal endar y e a r
                1991 on ground s a f e t y        and
                general improvement w o rk s;

                the       Football          Trust  has
                approved grants amounting to
                a p p r o x i m a t e l y £49m towards
                all-seating and safety;

                there    has    also  been  a
                continuing      reduction  in
                football hooliganism since a
                peak of arrests and ejections
                at football matches in the
                1988/89 season;

            my Rt Hon and Learned Friend
            the Secretary of State for the
            Department     of      National
            Heritage will be making an
            announcement on the safety of
            our sports    gr o u n d s later
            today.
COPIES TO GO TO:

The Football Association

The Football League

The Premier League

The Football Association of Wales

The Professional Footballers Association

The Football Licensing Authority

The Football Trust

The Football Stadia Advisory Design Council

The Association of Chief Police Officers

The National Federation of Football Supporters Clubs

The Football Supporters Association
