                                                15 January 1991




Dear

Thank you for your letter of 6 December to the Minister for Sport
about all seated accommodation at football grounds. I have been
asked to reply because issues arising from Lord Justice Taylor's
report into the Hillsborough Stadium disaster are principally
matters for the Home Office.

Lord Justice Taylor made a number of recommendations relating to
the prevention of overcrowding and improvement of evacuation
procedures, which have been incorporated into the recently
revised Home Office "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds". However,
he considered that a new ethos for football, including the
provision of more modern and comfortable accommodation, would not
only improve safety. There would also be an improvement in
behaviour, making crowd control easier. His final report reflects
not only the trend towards seating in the rest of Europe, but
evidence that trouble from misbehaviour and physical injuries
have been reduced where the proportion of standing accommodation
has been reduced following the Hillsborough tragedy.

Lord Justice Taylor acknowledged that there will undoubtedly be
some people like yourself who regret the passing of open
terraces. But he concluded that seating does more than any other
single measure to achieve the objectives of safety and the
reduction of behaviour and crowd control problems. The Government
has accepted that view.




Yours sincerely




Miss M Sharp
(Fire and Emergency Planning Department)
€th December 1990.

          Bear Mr Atkins,

          This letter is a plea from a 20 year-old who derives
immense satisfaction from his Saturday afternoon standing on a
football terrace for the government to reconsider its response
to that aspect of the otherwise admirable Taylor Heport that
comes out in favour of all-seater stadia.
          The advocates of all-seater stadia draw continental
comparisons, citing sedentary palaces such as Munich’s Olympia-
Stadion, Barcelona’s Nova Campa, Naples8 Sao Paulo and Milan’s
San Siro, and maintain these to be the point of aspiration for
English clubs. This is to ignore the fact that continental
football has a tradition of industrial and commercial patronage
and benefaction that make Mr Maxwell's modest contributions to
the domestic game appear all the more so, and available to no
English clubs. Furthermore, that we have $2 clubs with significant
supportinevitably results in a more even distribution of the
public’s attendance and money than is the ease on the continent «
thus, while total attendances in England and Italy are compar­
able, Milan thinks nothing of attracting 80,000 to its derby,
while the Manchester, Liverpool or London equivalents are content
with 45,000. I hope I have therefore put to you the point that
comparisons with the continent, in this context, are scarcely
useful when the human and economic bases of the two games are
so different.
          To turn to the question of ground safety, there seems
to be no dispute, even in the Report, that danger from over­
crowding is a result of rate of crowd entry into the ground.
If anything, when every supporter no longer has to arrive early
if he is to guarantee himself a prime spot (the Chelsea Shed
was half full 50 minutes before kick-off against Spurs last
Saturday), bat has his seat allocated to him on a ticket, he will
feel no need to leave the pub earlier than , say, ten minutes
before kick-off. For the Government instead to set more stringent
standards on facilities for access to and early exit fro® grounds
(the M&raoana in Rio can be cleared of 200,000 spectators in 15
minutes) would seem to be a more judicious application of its
judicial powers than the implementation of an expensive and
essentially cosmetic measure as the seating of those who have no
wish to be sat.
           It has also been argued in favour of all-seater stadia
that UEFA rules stipulate the playing of European competition
games in front of fully-seated crowds; it should be remembered
though that Europe is only attainable to very few clubs and, in
any case, it would be perfectly practicaMe for the standing
terraces to be closed on the very few occasions that they would
be needed for European competition. Notwithstanding your own
membership of the Buropean Movement, this government still, and
rightly, emphasises that any European tapestry would be strength­
ened by the diversity of heritage that distinguishes each
constituent thread; it would be nothing less than tragic for the
likes of the Stamford Bridge Shed, the Anfield Kop, the Highbury
North Bank, Maine Road’s Kippax, Ayresorae Park's Colgate Ehd and
Old 3?rafford’s Stretford End to disappear in the name of bland
Euroconformity, and in the face of the Government* s indifference.
           I hope that I have managed to convey at least some of
 the helpless dismay, and anger, felt and expressed by so many
 fellow fans. Please, please think again.

          Yours sincerely,
