                      Reference




David Mould
Home Office    G-2


BRISTOL RUGBY FOOTBALL CLUB - LETTER FROM
WIILIAM WALDEGRAVE MP

     I       attach a contribution to the reply
to the letter from William Waidegrave to
the Home Secretary about the difficulties
which have been encountered with the
rebuilding of the main stand at the
Football Club.



T E MINTON
DOE CD4 Building Regulations Division
2410 Millbank Tower 217 4495
2 April 1990

cc   Mr Fuller
     Mr Field
     Mr Baden SARD
     Your second point concerned building regulations.      A
stand such as that built by Bristol Football Club is a
'building' so far as the building regulations are concerned
and needs to comply with the requirements of the regulations.
This means, amongst other things, that the stairways and ramps
in the stand have to be such as to afford safe passage for
the users of the: stand.
     The guidance in the Approved Document which accompanies
the statutory requirements on stairs and gives practical
advice on how the requirements should be met, do»e suggest
that a stairway serving an area used for assembly purposes
should be limited to 16 risers in a flight.   However, there
is no obligation to adopt any particular solution in the
guidance if it is preferred to meet the requirement in some
other way.
     At Bristol, the building control officer approved the
original scheme with 29 riser flights believing that these
flights afforded safe passage because the particular relation­
ship between rise and going led to a relatively shallow pitch
of stair.   However, as you know a revised scheme had to be
put forward with the maximum rise being increased to enable
spectators at the back of the stand to see the touchline.
This led to the stairways being much steeper and the building
control officer took the view that in these circumstances
the 29 riser flights without landings did not afford safe
passage.
     I understand that after recent discussions between the
Football Club and the local authority a solution has now been
agreed which entails providing 2 extra stairways (with a
maximum of 16 riser flights) at either end of the stand,
making 8 stairways in the stand in all.   These 2 extra
stairways will relieve the pressure on the 6 main stairways
and the building control officer in Bristol is now satisfied


                                                         / that
that the design and layout of the stairways will provide safe
passage.
     I understand that only the structural requirements remain
to be considered and no particular difficulties are foreseen
there.   I hope that this will enable the club to get on with
the rebuilding of the stand as soon as the season is over.
                      IMMEDIATE 3 Y F A C S I M I L E




                  u      /        ^       /   ^        o
DATE


TIME                         "3       - o         s


            jF ?y■■.?.:!
{      : :c:j:;• '‘"; srieet* !
                                                               Q~

TO ■
                 / M R                V           t>o(C 'v-X )
MAME


DIV/RQQM.             )6                      S
eUUJDINf: .
                f w a r & V i « /ti                   < , V" f^sJc

FROM:

MAME          Oftvn D                         m o u            id


DlV/nOCM        t o d y n                                  —    G - s -
BUILDING
               ■Hz/m                      offics. -                 cs.       _______

IE I NO:

               O I           "...>                H        _                           ..


       HIM    06SI > 0 ^ 0                                          H3d/aiby0i33d£HI   5 3 3 I M 3 S 3a
 1.         Mr.fiT Minton
            CI^H;



 2,         Mr A Baden
            SARD




 CORRESPONDENCE FROM W WALDEGRAVE MP


 A araft reply is attached,  it reflects your wish to write
 direct to Mr Waldegrave on the building regulations issue.

 Grateful for any comments - especially the penultimate
 paragraph as soon as possible.




                                         D J MOULD
                                         G2 Division
                                         Ext 3099


 4 April 1990




W o *



      / u




'd      SI 'ON       ZJsH                  n3d/31ba0133dSNI S 3 G I M 3 S ]HId Mi
     Thank you for your letter of 19 March on behalf of the Bristol

     Rugby Football Union Club about the implications of the Final

     Report by Lord Justice Taylor for the Memorial Ground.



     I am sorry to hear that the Bristol Rugby Club has experienced

     difficulties and that our efforts to help were unsuccessful.

     The Memorial Ground is a ground designated under the Safety of

     Sports Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) as requiring a safety

     certificate issued by the local authority (in this case Avon

     County Council).     The figure of 8.5 thousand is probably the

     capacity authorised by that certificate as the maximum number

 of spectators who can be accommodated safely at the ground.

 The purpose of the safety certificate is to ensure that,

 whatever the nominal capacity of the ground, the authorised

 number of spectators reflects its actual condition.               This is

 intended to give flexibility in that it provides the option

 for the club to limit expenditure or incur additional cost in

 order to increase the authorised number up to the maximum

 potential of the ground.



 The Final Report by Lord Justice Taylor does not change the

 position.     The Report makes the point that crowd problems are

 directly related to the nature of the event and the numbers

 attending it.      Lord Justice Taylor also made it clear that the

 emphasis of his report was on football (ie soccer) with its

 special problems such as overcrowding and misbehaviour.                We

 drew this to the attention of local authorities responsible

 for the issue of safety certificates and the police last

 February.     I enclose a copy of our circular for ease of




'<     SI'OH     3l:frl   0661 > 0 ^ 0           n3d/31fcia0133dSNI S 3 G I M 3 S 3HId H0
     information.      Should the club feel that the requirements set

     down in the safety certificate are unreasonable they have a

     right, under the 1975 Act, to appeal to the courts.



     There is no suggestion in the Final Report that the sale of

     alcohol should be banned at rugby grounds.           Chapter 6 of the

     Report and Lord Justice Taylor's comments on the relaxation of

     alcohol sales relate to the provisions of the Sporting Events

     (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985 which applies only to
     association football.



     On all seated accommodation, the schedule which accompanied my

     statement on 29 January (copy attached) explained that we do

     not have the statutory means to make such requirements on

     sports other than association football and that we would wish

     to discuss the recommendation with representative sporting

 organisations concerned.            This remains the position and I

 quite take your point about there not being the same anxiety

 about violence at the Memorial Ground as there is at some

 soccer grounds.



 There is no conflict between requirements under Building

 Regulations and the advice contained in the Guide to Safety at

 Sports Grounds (the Green Guide).            Our guide is a voluntary

 code which specifically states that it is without prejudice to

 the operation of the          building regulations and that it is

 intended to be used in order to achieve reasonable safety at

 existing sports grounds.            It is not a design brief for new




'<     SI'ON        n :H   m v w w                  n 3 d / 3 1 d a 0 1 3 3 d S N I S 3 3 I M 3 S m i NOdd
"work where the scope to build in a high level of spectator

    safety may be greater than it is in existing buildings.



    The advice in the Green Guide on stairways is consistent with

    that in the Approved Document which accompanies and gives
    practical advice on how to meet the statutory requirements

    under the building regulations,    I understand the problem at

    Bristol arose over the steepness and length of the gangways

    between seat rows which, under building regulations, are

    considered to be stairways.    This is a matter for Chris

    Patten's department and I understand that Colin Moynihan, to

    whom I am copying this letter, is writing to you direct to say

    that a solution has been found locally.



    I am arranging for copies to be sent    to the Chief Executives

    of Avon County Council,    Bristol City Council (who are the

    building authority) and    to the Chief Constable of Avon and

    Somerset Police so that    they are all aware of the position and

    of your concern.




d      SI'OH    £l:M   066ffr0>0                n 3 J / a m a o i 3 3 d S N i s33ina3s   woad
