PS/Secretary of State

LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INQUIRY - INTERIM REPORT
                                                            +5
A number of points emerged from this morning's interdepartmental
meeting of officials, to supplement my note yesterday:
Publication

The intention is to      lay the report before Parliament at 11.00am on
Friday. Lord Justice     Taylor will hold a press conference at the same
time (at the Home       Office). The Home Secretary will make himself
available for TV and    radio interviews thereafter.
Government response

An annotated first draft of the Home Secretary's statement in response
to the report is attached, at A. A revised version will be tabled at
this afternoon's meeting, and should be relatively easy to agree. In
this and in his interviews, the Home Secretary's line will be to
welcome the report generally; to accept the recommendations in
general; to urge the police, the clubs and local authorities to get on
with   implementing them;    but not to be      drawn   on individual
recommendations - this is an interim report. The Home Office will
issue a circular (at B) with copies of the report and will then
consult on individual recommendations.
Resource Implications

There    are resource implicationsfor the police, local authorities and
clubs    in the recommendations but none of great significance. For the
clubs,   the main implications concern the costs of more police/stewards
and of   reducing capacity on the terraces; but "safety comes first".
New Chapter

The final version of the report circulated by the Home Secretary's
Office last night differs from the version on which I briefed
 esterday and which the Secretary of State saw in that it contains a
 ew chapter 23, which:

         - says that any comments on membership schemes, "identity
         rsa-rrifii" r -Hhn. yiyyj for a cenLrai safety authority and othfef long
         term issues will be in his final report; and              -------— —   —

             explains    both   his   rejection  of   the   immediate
         post-Hillsborough call to pull down all perimeter fences and
         his recommendation that gates in such fences should be left
         open during matches.




NEIL KINGHAN                                 cc: PS/Mr Moynihan
SARD                                             PS/Sir T Heiser
                                                 Mr Owen
                                                 Mr McDonald
2 August 1989                                    Miss Caines
                                                 Mrs Weinberg
                                                 Mr Newsom
                                                 Mr Smith
hs.8.2/hillsbl.peb
                                                           A
                                                   4




HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY - DRAFT PRESS STATEMENT

In a statement today the Home Secretary said that he was grateful
to Lord Justice Taylor and his team for completing the first part
of his inquiry in time to produce an interim report before the
start of the football season.


It was an excellent report which pulled no punches about       the
causes of the disaster.


The Home Secretary said that the Government welcomed the broad
thrust of thereport and supported the principles of          the
recommendations. They contained a number of matters which should
be dealt with without delay pending the longer term findings of
the inquiry which will be published in the final report.

The Home Office was circulating the report immediately to local
authorities, the police, football clubs and others concerned with
the organisation of football matches urging them to take action
on the report's recommendations so as to put as many of them into
effect as possible before the beginning of the season.

The Home Secretary said that he was satisfied that the report had
not identified any major shortcomings m the law         safety in
sports grounds, though clearly the Government would look at the
Safety of Sports Grounds Act and the Home Office guide to safety
at sports grounds in the light of the final report of the
inquiry.    /V- l3 . S-<s_e J-wcxJ


He said that most of the problems which had contributed to the
tragedy at Hillsborough had been recognised in the past.   The
tragedy revealed by the report was that there had been
shortcomings in applying those lessons not only on the part of
the police, but of the club and of the local authority
responsible for the safety certificate.
                The report he said revealed quite clearly that there were major
                deficiencies                 in the layout and organisation of the Hillsborough
                ground which should have been recognised and corrected.


                He also          said that the behaviowr of the fans outside the ground
                which led to the police opening the gates was not excusable but
 f-o            it was predictable.                                      ,                                         ,               /
O w ig e 's   vu2xO    \-i~ n-Jr Kvfi.              * l~eU »-n<5w -           o-s^ >                                             J b ^ J -cn r            { L sl

                The South Yorkshire Police


                The Home Secretary said that it would be for the Chief Constable
                in       the     first            instance               to     consider              the         conduct       of       individual
                officers and the South Yorkshire police collectively in the light
                of       the     inquiry             and      the         investigation                      carried      out      by        the      West
   (...)        Midlands              police.               The          Home        Secretary                said       that     he         would         be
                looking to the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire initially for a
                report on the action he proposes to take.


                National Police Intelligence Unit


                The          Home      Secretary                  said        that          steps            to    set    up      the         national
                computer based police football intelligence system referred to in
                paragraph 2.20 of the report are already in hand but steps were
                being taken to see if it could be brought into operation sooner
                than had been intended.


                Supervision of Safety Certificates
       o
                The Home Secretary also pointed out that powers recently taken by
                the Government                       in the Football                    Spectators                 Bill will             permit the
                 setting up of a new authority with powers to supervise the way in
                which          local          authorities                 carried           out         their       responsibilities                      for
                 the safety of sports grounds.                                                                                               6~e   c x d A s - c ^


                      f 'O     K- °      < s ^ € jc A -   - ( ^   ( ''                       f f e r w ije                      c a a   J4
                              su-ef    (reo                              i~ X    I     fS                                                     fir&fcrZGj
DRAFT CIRCULAR


1.   The Chief Executive
     County Councils
     Metropolitan District Councils
     London Borough Councils
     Common Council of the City of London
     Fire and Civil Defence Authorities
2.   Chief Officers of Police

3.   Chief Fire Officers

4.   Chief Ambulance Officers




Dear Sir
HO CIRCULAR      /1989

INTERIM REPORT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY
Introduction
The Interim Report of the Inquiry set up by the Home Secretary
into the tragic events at Hillsborough football ground Sheffield
on 15 April has now been published. A copy of the Report is
attached. Further copies are available from HMSO bookshops.

2.   The purpose of this circular is to inform recipients of the
contents of the Report and to urge them to take required action
without delay in order to implement, as necessary, the Inquiry's
recommendations to improve safety arrangements at sports grounds.

Government response
3.   The Home Secretary has welcomed the broad thrust of the
Interim Report and supports the principles of the
recommendations which he believes should be dealt with without
delay pending the longer term findings of the Inquiry which will
be published in its Final Report.
Scope of the recommendations
4.   Although the scope of recommendations is wide they are aimed
primarily at football league grounds and the international
stadiums used for soccer and rugby where there are liable to be
large, densely packed crowds on terraces. Recipients should
nonetheless consider their application to other designated sports
grounds and sports grounds at which large crowds are in
attendance.
                                                  £>   •
5.   The recommendations are in two categories: those requiring
implementation before the start of the new football season or
immediately thereafter; and those which, although requiring
immediate action are likely to take longer to put into effect.
The Home Secretary nevertheless urges recipients to take urgent
action on both categories so as to put into effect as many of the
recommendations as possible before the start of the season.

The guide to safety at sports grounds:
6.   It is anticipated that the Guide will be amended to reflect
the Inquiry's findings in due course after consultation with
appropriate bodies. Any changes will take account of the Final
Report's recommendations. If there is any doubt as to the
nature of crush barrier test described in Annex C of the Guide
advice can be obtained from the Home Office 01-217 5352.

The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
7.   Consideration is also being given to any necessary
enforcement of the Report's recommendations by means of a
Statutory Instrument under section 15A of the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) requiring safety certificates to
include mandatory terms and conditions. Consultation as required
under section 18 of the 1975 Act will first be carried out before
any such Order is made.
Football clubs
8.   A copy of this circular together with the Report has been
sent to all 92 football league clubs and the international
stadiums in the expectation that they will co-operate fully.
Should co-operation not be forthcoming local authorities are
reminded of their powers under s.10 of the 1975 Act for use if
there is judged to be a serious risk to spectators in any part of
the ground.

Resource implications
9.   Whilst acknowledging that local authorities will need to
examine current priorities in order to action the Inquiry's
recommendations, it is not envisaged that there should be
significant long-term resource implications for them. The cost
of any additional policing and/or provision of ambulance
services at football grounds is expected to be met by the clubs
or ground operators themselves.

Other
10. Any enquiries about this circular except barrier testing
(see paragraph 6 above) should be addressed to Mr A Brown
(01-273 2765).


11.   Copies also go to those bodies on the attached list.

                          Yours faithfully




                          A H TURNEY
                          Fire and Emergency Planning Department
