     iAa Vj . c ,                   i   K-J-
                        cj?rrr-^



1.        Mr Kijacffian                 V*
2-        PS/Mr. Moynihan
3.        PS/Secretary of   State




PARLIAMENTARY QUESTION FROM GRAHAM ALLEN MP
LEVY ON FOOTBALL POOLS TO FINANCE ALL-SEATED SOCCER STADIA


1.    Graham Allen MP has asked the Chancellor of the Exchequer
if he will introduce a levy on the football pools to pay for
major football grounds to install all-seating arrangements.

2.       The draft answer and background note prepared by officials
at HM Customs and Excise is beneath.     The answer makes clear that
there is no question of a statutory levy being introduced and the
background     note  explains  that   to  do  so   would  amount  to
h y p othecation.

3.    The draft answer will not be submitted to the     Chancellor
until DOE Ministers have given their approval to the    line taken.
In these circumstances I would be grateful to learn      as soon as
possible that the Secretary of State and Mr Moynihan    are content
for the draft to go forward.




T C SMITH
SARD C
25 April 1989 •

cc         PS/Lord Caithness
           PS/Lord Hesketh
           PS/Sir T Heiser
           Mr Owen
           Mr Fletcher
           Mr McDonald
           Miss Caines
           Mrs Weinberg
           Mr Lee —
           Mr Newsom
           Mr Rock
MR GRAHAM ALLEN
NOTT INGHAM NORTH




To ask Mr Chancellor of the Exchequer,      if he will introduce a
levy on the football pools to pay for major football grounds t
install all seating arrangements.




Pools promoters make substantial p a y m e n t s takin to a voluntary
levy,   to the Football Trust.    The Government has no intention
introducing a statutory levy.
NOTE                                                      PQ 1 3 2 / 8 9




There has been considerable media comment in the wake of the
Hillsborough tragedy suggesting that improvements to football
grounds,    and the provision of all-seat accommodation,       should be
financed by a ‘reduction in pool betting duty,      or a levy on the
pools.     The idea of a levy is not new.    Tom Pendry MP introduced
a 10-minute rule Bill in 1986 to set up a Football Betting Levy
Board.     The Department of the Environment took the lead on the
proposal as it was a measure to assist sport.


Pool betting duty is charged at 42,1/2 percent of stakes and
yields about £280m a year.      It is a tax on gambling,      not on
football.     In addition the pools companies currently pay over
£l7m to football of which over £9m goes to the Football Trust
which in effect is a voluntary levy board.


  j
A levy imposed on football pool betting would not directly
 affect Government revenue; but it would reduce the taxable
 capacity of pools promoters,     and would neeg^to be taken into
 account in fixing the rate of pool b e t t i n g ^ /.There would
 certainly be strong pressure for any new levy to be matched by a
 corresponding reduction in the rate of pool betting duty.                 A
 statutory levy would amount to hypothecation of revenue and
 should be resisted.
