                                                                              ICQfi 1 cL.cr''
              FROM: ROBERT G. HUGHES MP (Harrow West)

                                                                                  2a
                                                              (jJMXSL      fitiU J L .
                          H O U S E OF C O M M O N S
                                                            cc Iks IMfoUAi^
                              LONDON      SW1A OAA
                                                                 (U /.
13 February 1990                                                           /VuM -€T
Martin Brandon-Bravo Esq MP
House of Commons
LONDON SW1A OAA




R e : Hillsborough Family Support Group



Trevor Hicks, who is the Chairman of the above Group, is one of my
constituents and he lost two teenage daughters in the Hillsborough
disaster.

Mr Hicks and the other members of the Hillsborough Family Support Group
recently met with the Leader of the Opposition, Neil Kinnock MP.  Mr
Hicks has now approached me with the possibility of meeting with one of
the Home Office Ministers, preferable the Home Secretary the Rt Hon
David Waddington QC MP.

The Group are very concerned to obtain justice and they are keen to put
forward their views about the disaster.  Nevertheless, their overriding
interest is to ensure that such a disaster never happens again.   I have
met with Mr Hicks on several occasions and although his circumstances
are very close to the issues, his comments are thoroughly thought
through and he can and does discuss the Group's objectives logically.

I strongly believe that the Hillsborough Family Support Group should be
afforded an interview by the Home Office and indeed the Party.  For your
information I am enclosing some details regarding their objectives which
I have been passed by the Group.

With best wishes
TeT                                                     Trevor & Jenni Hiciks




House Of Commons,
uondon,
SW1A   OAA.

f.a.o: Robert Hughes MP (Harrow West)                      7th February 1990.




                          re: Peter Wright Article

fu     er to our discussions I enclose copies of the “Sheffield Star'1
ne     aper that carried the interview with Peter Wright.

     You will see that despite Taylor and all the conflicting evidence to
the contrary he insists on claiming drink was a major factor in the
disaster.The families find this outrageous and offensive to the memories of
our loved ones.

     He also claims that     "additional evidence, particularily about the
effect of alcohol on fans will present a different picture at the Coroners
Inquest." This is alarming families and again is most offensive.

It is wrong that Mr. Wright should infer/ use confidential information (if
indeed he has i t!) to deflect the critiscsym that he justly was subjected
to.He is abusing his priviledged position.    His comments beg two further
questions

 1)why was all the   evidence not given to Taylor /West Midlands Police?

2)It could be argued that this act of "disclosure" could well
prejudice the Coroners Inquest/ Jurors.

At the Inquiry, Andrew Collins QC became so vexed at the Police Barrister's
( Mr.Woodward QC)   attempts to use this smear tactic that he released blood
alcohol levels of  the victims in an attempt to stop it. Now here we go
again.

I would welcome your views on how we can stop it once and for all and
obviously a statement from Mr. Wadaington supporting Taylor would be one
waY •                                 _
H XLLSBORQUGH                           X              SUPPORT             GROUP




                              O B J E O T X V E S



 To support and assist each other.



 To seek justice.



 To press for a National Body to standardise and supervise the Safety
 Certification process.



 To     improve safety at all       sports        stadia by revision        of ’’The Green
 Guide"     and    the   introduction        of   such    other     recommendations       from
  Lord Justice Taylors Reports as are necessary*



  To     press    Parliament     for     the       introduction       of    the    necessary
  legislation to ensure (4) above becomes mandatory.



  Press    for    immediate    improvement        of   the   Administration       of   Justice
  Act    1982    ( incorporating       the    Fatal      Accident   Act    1976   ) and    for
  the introduction of "non - liability" compensation legislation.
