                          cbu.vw.>A'vg;sisAt   •   _______         \          .
          "D O-Es                                                  W "“Y-
     J




                                                                                  'V?7

FILE NOTE


A summary note of the DOE presentation to the Lord Justice Taylor
Inquiry on the Hillsborough Stadium disaster at Queen Anne's Gate
on 17 October 1989.

Present          Lord Justice Taylor
                 Mr B Johnson                      Assessor
                 Professor L Maunder               Assessor
                 Mr R Whalley                      Secretary to the Inquiry
                 Mr J Sweetman                     Assistant Secretary
                 Mr P Owen
                 Mr D McDonald
                 Mr N Kinghan
                 Mr P Lee

     Introduction

1.   Lord Justice Taylor welcomed the DOE delegation and said that
     he would like to take the opportunity to discuss the
     provisions of the Football Spectators Bill and how they would
     be enforced and also the Government's position on all seater
     stadia. In doing so he might adopt the role of devil's
     advocate - an approach he had taken with other witnesses.
     National Membership Scheme

2.   Mr Owen introduced discussion on the Football Spectators Bill
     by describing the genesis of the national membership scheme.
     He spoke to the brief attached to this note and emphasised
     the following points
          (1) Government decided on the present course only
              reluctantly and would have much preferred football to
              take the voluntary route on membership schemes;
          (2) the package of measures already in place had brought
              some success in containing hooliganism but not enough
              to cure the problem. More had to be done and the
              Government had decided to legislate to deliver it;
          (3) a working party had been set up under the Chairmanship
              of the Minister for Sport and on which the interested
              parties were represented, to review the principles and
              technology on which a national membership scheme might
              be based;
          (4) it would be for the Football Membership Authority to
              draw up the detailed scheme, the Act only provided a
              framework for it;

          (5) the Government's present view was that the scheme
              would have to be comprehensive with few exemptions;
              there   would  have  to   be   temporary membership
              arrangements;  the card would   have to be machine
      readable and, a view    strongly held by        the   police,
      carry a photograph;
  (6) the   Bill  had   become   intensely   party political
      following Hillborough. The Parliamentary timetable
      ruled out withdrawing the Bill and returning it later,
      post Taylor. The Government wished to have the
      provisions in place so that any relevant Taylor safety
      recommendations could be       taken up quickly.   The
      Government    had    therefore    provided   for   two
      Parliamentary debates on the scheme, post Taylor - one
      on the formal establishment of the Football Membership
      Authority and another on the safety remit of the
      Football Licencing Authority;
   (7) on timing there was an element of "poker play" between
       the Government and the football authorities. The
       Government's formal position was that it wished to see
       the scheme implemented in the early months of the
       1990/91 season. But it had always made it clear that
       it would not approve the introduction of the scheme
       until it was satisfied that the technology had been
       properly tested and was working well and that the
       scheme would be effective and safe.
The following points were made in answer to questions asked
by Lord Justice Taylor
   (1) What other strategies did Government consider?
      All the options are kept under continuous review,
      there had been major developments in policing tactics
      and strategy, ground control and segregation, the use
      of closed circuit television surveillance; but more
      was necessary, the partial membership scheme needed to
      be developed further, only legislation could achieve
      this.

   (2) What about experience in other countries?
      There is no parallel    with   the   national    membership
      scheme abroad.
   (3) How will the national membership scheme work?

      A detailed account was given of how the hooligan will
      be prevented from attending matches. Mandatory and
      discretionary bans and review arrangements were
      covered. The Council of Tribunals position - agreeing
      that an informal review procedure was appropriate and
      that a full blown appeal tribunal arrangement in the
      context of simply attending football matches was not -
      was explained.
  (4) Why  not   expand   the  successful   exclusion         order
      provision of the 1986 Public Order Act?

      Exclusion orders had achieved some success but they
      were difficult to police.
 (5) Will the hooligan not regard the scheme as a challenge
     and seek to steal valid cards, use forged ones or
     cause   chaos    at   the   turnstile,    perhaps   by
     simultaneously blocking all entrances by presenting
     faulty cards?
    There was a detailed discussion on this area. Ideally
    cards which show up as invalid for whatever reason
    should be subject to a second check away from the
    turnstiles. The role of the police and stewards will
    need to be carefully considered. It was inevitable
    that in the early days there would be determined
    attempts to beat the scheme. The scheme would take
    time to become fully effective but from the off the
    police and the clubs would be able to develop the
    scheme on a racket basis.
 (6) What is the   position   on   the   availability   of   the
     technology?
     The position on tendering was outlined. There would be
     testing in real conditions beginning next season and
     the scheme would be implemented during 1991. The
     experience of present membership schemes based on
     machine readable cards was that the technology was
     reliable.
 (7) Why is Scotland excluded?
    This issue was considered by the Minister for Sport's
    working party. Scotland's recent record on hooliganism
    had shown a marked improvement. Their teams, like
    Wales', had not been banned from UEFA competitions
    and, unlike Wales', did not have representatives in
    the Football League. Scottish Ministers had made it
    clear that the position would be kept under review and
    the scheme would be extended to Scotland if it became
    necessary.
 (8) Why not focus on the hooligan and extend Part II of
     the Act to the domestic front?
    So many matches - Saturdays and midweek - restriction
    orders would almost amount to custodial sentences.
    There would be huge resource implications for the
    police in operating attendance centres.

 (9) How do you decide on "relevant offences" when it comes
     to withdrawing membership?

    The provisions of Act and the role of the courts in
    issuing a declaration of relevance in appropriate
    cases were explained.

(10) What about the cost of football clubs?

    Government's view is that clubs, like any other
    business, must make their product safe for their
    customers and bear the cost of doing so. The scheme
    could be introduced on the basis of there being no
       direct cost to the clubs. It could generate income
       from fees charged to the members and commercial
       exploitation of the data base.

  (11) Will not the casual supporter be lost to the game?
       Anyone wishing to attend League matches - even if only
       a few a season - will be encouraged to join the
       scheme, but there would be temporary membership
       arrangements.

The Football Licensing Authority and its safety role

Lord Justice Taylor said that he was looking closely at the
local authorities' safety certificate procedure. Witnesses
had described it as unsatisfactory and he had heard claims of
negligence and the application of varying standards. Perhaps
the answer was to take the safety role away from the local
authorities and give it to a national body, like the Health
and Safety Executive or, less radically, for such a body to
monitor the local authorities' safety function.
Mr Owen explained the potential role of the FLA and its
Inspectorate and how it had been expanded         following
Hillsborough. Mr Kinghan developed the detail of how the
multi-discipline teams of inspectors would work. He also
explained that the HSE did not become involved in areas
already subject to separate primary legislation - like the
Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.

The move to all seater stadia
Lord Justice Taylor said that there appeared to be many
involved in football and among those concerned with safety at
sports stadia who favoured all seated accommodation and
asked about the Government's position. Mr Owen said that the
Government acknowledged the wide recognition that a higher
proportion of seating at football grounds would be helpful -
from the point of view of safety and security and also
comfort of the spectators. The Government wished to see such
a development and had therefore amended the Bill to provide
for the FLA to advise the Secretary of State on the issue. It
did not seem appropriate to require that all Football League
grounds should, at a stroke, become all seated accommodation
and one approach might be to aim for the gradual expansion of
seated accommodation at say all First Division clubs and
identified clubs in other divisions.




SARD
January 1990
