                                 DEPARTM ENT OF TH E EN V IRO N M EN T
                                 2 MARSHAM STREET L O N D O N SWIP 3EB
                                                071-276    3000
                                 My r e f :         AT/PSO/41691/90
                                 Your r e f :



Alan C Coppin Esq
Managing Director                                         2 9 NOV 1990
Wembley Stadium Ltd
Empire Way
Wembley HA9 ODW




      f \A r   •



The Minister has asked me to thank you for your letter of 13
November about the proposed building of a new national stadium in
Birmingham.

The Minister made clear in his recent reply to John Butcher's
question about the possible public funding of such a scheme that
the Government's priority is the introduction of all seating
accommodation in line with Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations.

The Minister also agrees that if the Football Association are to
bid for the European Championships in 1996 or the World Cup 1n
1998 then a strategy identifying the necessary regional stadia
should be developed as a matter of urgency.




                        I              Vo \{


TERESA VOKES
Private Secretary
              r A v v K K iV u
                   ’P _Q ...v^\va   "V ^   C_A ^ SOT
                                                                   AT/PSO/41691/90


DRAFT RIll'Lll! I?UK P5/MK ATKINS TO SEND— TO ALAN C COPPIN ESQ,
MANAGING DIRECTOR, WEMBLEY STADIUM LTD, EMPIRE WAY, WEMBLEY HA9
ODW

The Minister has asked me to thank you for your letter of 13

November about the proposed building of a new national stadium in

Birmingham.


The Minister made clear in his recent reply                         •T'~>hn Butcher's

question about:^poss ibl e£f und ing of such a scheme.Ithe Government's

priority is the introduction of all seating accommodation in line

with Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations.


The Minister also argues^that if the Football Association are to

bid for the European Campionships                      in 1996 or the World Cup in

1998 then a strategy identifying the necessary regional stadia

should be developed as a matter of urgency.




                  ic iis iS
                                                                                                        /\ d jc s ic e         r v w - f x e tV/\T. V cu^kxrx
                                                                                                                       C o t   N \^

CMi                      WEMBLEY
                         STADIUM LIMITED
                                                                                                                               |A f , EcxcL^v
                                                                                                                               ft )eiV

EM PIRE WAY, WEMBLEY HA9 ODW
FA X N O s^T H E S T A D IU M 08*900 1055 CONFERENCE CENTRE 081-903 3234 PERSONAL FAX NO:




                        AC/gjl

                        13th November 1990

                        Mr Robert J Atkins M P
                        Minister for Sport
                        Room N 15/03
                        2 Marsham Street
                        London
                        S W 1P 3E B


                         D ear Mr Atkins

                         Last Sunday I participated in the BBC 2 television programme, Midlands at
                         Westminster. The focus of the programme was 'should a new national
                         football stadium be built in Birmingham', which as you know is being
                         promoted by the Labour controlled City council. I was concerned to discover
                         that a conservative M em ber of Parliament will be asking you a question in
                         the House to determine whether the government will fund or partly fund this
                         project.

                         I thought it might be useful for you if I set out my view of the national stadium
                         issue.

                         1.        Football’s requirements

                         I do not consider the right question was asked of the consultants appointed
                         to consider the national stadium feasibility. From football's viewpoint the
                         strategic issues are:

                                       - what are football's stadia requirements (to stage events such as the
                                         World Cup).

                                       - is a new national stadium necessary.

                          This is rather different to asking can a new facility work in Birmingham.

                          In my judgem ent football does not require a new national football stadium.
                          By any measure W em bley now ranks among the top facilities in the world. It
                          has an 80,0 0 0 all seater capacity and in many ways leads the world in the
                          technology and systems it employs.




 TEL: 081-902 8833 (Admin.)
  TEL: 081-900 1234 (Box Office)
  TELEX: 8811735
  W em bley Stadium Lim ited (Registered in E ng land No. 223957) Registered Office: T h e W em bley Stadium HA9 ODW
Page 2

M r Robert J Atkins letter


I know you have seen this at first hand on your recent visit to the stadium and
that you are well aw are that the massive refurbishment programme at
W em bley running at £1 million per month over the last four and a half years
has been funded by the private sector with no assistance from the pubiic
sector, Football Trust or Football authorities.

Again, in my view, what football does need is a national stadium (which it
already has) and perhaps 5 or 6 all seater regional stadia each capable of
accommodating, say, 40,0 0 0 to 4 5 ,000 spectators.The continuing debate on
a new national stadium is only likely to divert resources and effort away from
the real need of establishing these regional stadia.

Currently, football receives considerable sums as its share of staging events
at W em bley. It is clear to us understanding as we do the funding and
operating economics of large stadia, that these surpluses would need to be
applied to either meeting the revenue shortfall or the interest charges from
operating a new purpose-built facility.   Thus, financially, football would be a
net loser rather than a gainer from its development.

2.       Birmingham’s requirements

In commenting on Birmingham's needs I do not only speak from an obvious
vested interest (a point mentioned by my Labour debating opponent last
Sunday) but as a Birmingham business rate payer. W em bley owns the Hall
G reen greyhound racing stadium and has an interest in the Regional
Exhibition Centre in Smallheath.

In my view, a new national soccer stadium operated by local government
would be a drain on the ratepayers of Birmingham (in the sam e way a.s other
flagship projects in the city are), as well as the football authorities. This
would be the case even if government money was used as part of the
funding package.

You may wish to consider whether the Conservative government would in
any case wish to support a publicly run/subsidised operation to the detriment
of a well run private operation such as W em bley. Would this be quasi­
nationalisation!
Page 3

M r Robert J Atkins letter


If Birmingham has funds available to support major projects perhaps they
would be better spent on facilities like the National Exhibition Centre to
compete with centres such as Frankfurt (currently twice the size of the N E C )
which bring real economic benefit to the area.

C o n c lu s io n

I have som e very specific comments on the Peat Marwick McLintock national
stadium feasibility study which is being published this w eek (I used to work
in Peat's Leisure and Tourism Group which prepared the report), but I have
concentrated in this letter on the wider issues.

As I said earlier, I hope it is of some use.

Yours sincerely




Alan C Coppin
M a n a g in g D ir e c to r
