h s .7.4/flsem.peb


                                                       3322




                                         4 July 1990
        5/8210



David Dent Esq
Secretary
The Football League Limited
LYTHAM ST ANNES
Lancashire     FY8 1JG




Thank you for your letter of 29 June 1990.

I would like to be able to say that the Chairman of the Football
Licensing Authority would speak to your seminar on 2 August but
as you know he has not yet been named. I will undertake that if
the Chairman is identified before the date of your seminar that
I will ask him whether he is prepared to speak.

If that is not practicable, I will be very happy to speak to the
seminar myself.   I think it would be very helpful to see a copy
of your proposed programme when you have it available so that
I may know how long you would like me to speak.

                                        Yours sincerely




                                        P E BOLTON
                                        (Fire and Emergency
                                        Planning Department)
                                                              °^JVDED    ^

                                 THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED
   Lytham St. Annes, Lancashire, FY8 1JG. T elephone 0253 729421. Telex 67675. Fax 0253 724786                          Secretary ). D. Dent


5/8210                                                                                                               29th June, 1990.



P.E. Bolton, Esq.,
Fire and Emergency Planning Department,
The Home Office,
Queen Anne's Gate,
LONDON,
SWlH 9AT.


Dear Mr. Bolton,

        At your meeting with Arthur Sandford on 6th June, he informed you of our
intention to hold a club seminar on the implementation of the Taylor Report and I
believe you offered to arrange for either the Chairman of the Football Licensing
Authority or a senior Home Office Official to speak at this seminar.

        Can I now confirm that the seminar is to be held on Thursday, 2nd August,
1990 at The Albany Hotel, Smallbrook, Queensway, Birmingham, B5 4EW. Attendance
at the seminar is being limited to two representatives per club, probably
Chairman and Secretary.

        We would greatly value the opportunity to receive a presentation frcm the
Chairman of the F.L.A. or a senior Heme Office official on the role of the
F.L.A., how the licensing system will operate, the gradual reduction of terrace
capacities and the move towards all-seated accomodation etc.

        I do hope that you will be able to assist us with this important seminar.
We will of course take care of any accommodation and travel requirements.

        I should be grateful if you would let me know as soon as possible whether
you are able to help so that I can finalise the running order etc. In the
meantime, if you have any queries Arthur or I will be pleased to help.

         I look forward to hearing frcm you.


                                                     Yours sincerely,




                 All correspondence to b e addressed to The Secretary. Registered Office as above. Registered in England 80612
