GOVERNM ENT  IMPLEMENTATION                           OF      THE       TAYLOR          REPORT
RECOM MENDATIONS

Background

Hillsborough & After

1.      Following the tragic events at the FA Cup semi-final at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989, at
which 9 ^ people died, Lord Justice Taylor's Final R eport on the Hillsborough Stadium disaster
was published in January 1990. The Taylor R eport contained 76 recommendations, many o f
which, including a reduction in the permitted crowd density on terraces and the removal o f spikes
from perim eter fences, were included in a revised edition o f the Government's Guide to Safety
at Sports Grounds ('the Green Guide'), published in 1990. The vast majority o f football grounds
no longer have any perim eter fencing.

2.      By far the most important o f Taylor's recommendations was that standing accommodation
should be eliminated at all grounds designated under the Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975. The
Government accepted the Report, but chose to limit the all-seater requirement to football, due to
the particular problems o f safety and crowd control experienced in that sport. Accordingly, clubs
in the old Division 1 and 2 o f the Football League were given until August 1994, and at those in
Divisions 3 and 4 until August 1999, to go all-seater.

3.     In order to help dubs meet the costs o f implementing Taylor, the Chancellor, in his 1990
budget, made available ^ 1 0 0 m over a five year period through the Football Trust by means o f a
reduction in the rate o f Pool Betting Duty.

R eview o f the All-Seater Policy

4.      Responsibility for policy on safety at sports grounds transferred from the Hom e Office to
the D epartm ent o f National Heritage in April 1992. Shortly thereafter, the all-seater policy was
reviewed in order to ensure that it targeted more effectively those clubs where the risk is greatest.
In July 1992, it was announced that all clubs in the FA Premier League and the First Division of
the Football League w ould still be required to go all-seater by August 1994 , in accordance w ith
Taylor's original recommendation. Clubs in the Second and Third Divisions however will be
perm itted to keep some standing accommodation, provided the terracing is safe. This decision
acknow ledged the fact that the main risk lies w ith the large clubs and highly charged matches
played in the top tw o divisions. W hen a big club is drawn to play at a small ground in a cup
com petition the match may be m oved to a more appropriate ground on the advice o f the police
or at the wishes o f the clubs themselves.

5.      Clubs in Divisions 2 and 3 o f the Football League now have until August 1999 either to
introduce all-seated accommodation or to ensure that any retained terracing meets the appropriate
standards. Clubs seeking to make m inor modifications to good quality existing terraces will be
expected to ensure that those modifications conform to the upper standards for terracing contained
in the current edition o f the Green Guide. In the event that the terracing requires substantial
renovation or replacement, clubs will be expected to ensure that the new terracing conforms w ith
the standards recommended by the Football Stadia Advisory Design Council (FSADC) as set out
in their report o f M arch 1993. The FSADC's key requirements are that terracing should be
designed to enable subsequent conversion to seating and should have adequate sightlines for
standing and ultimately seated spectators.
6.      In August 1993, the Chancellor announced that the reduction in Pool Betting D uty was
to be extended for a further five years from March 1995, thereby releasing a further ^ 1 0 0 m to assist
clubs in the lower Divisions to implement the safe terracing policy.

7.     Although it is not a requirement for other sports to adopt all-seating accommodation, it is
the Government's policy to encourage such a development in other sports. It is generally
recognised however that crowd problems are directly related to the nature o f the event and the
num bers attending it. The numbers and atmosphere at a football match have created special
problems such as overcrowding and misbehaviour not found to the same extent elsewhere.

Implementation o f the All-Seater Policy

8.     The vast majority o f the 46 Premier League and First Division clubs now have all-seater
grounds or have closed their standing accommodation and are working on its conversion to seating.

9.      The all-seater policy was implemented by means o f the Football Licensing Authority's
licensing system, which was established under the Football Spectators Act 1989. In July 1994 the
Secretary o f State for National Heritage made an O rder under Section 11 o f the Act empowering
the FLA to include conditions in their licences requiring dubs to have all-seater grounds by a given
date. In the majority o f cases this was 1 August 1994, but, on 26 June in answer to a w ritten PQ
from Sebastian Coe MP, the Secretary o f State announced that lim ited extensions, o f one year
each, w ould be granted to the five clubs which are in the process o f relocating (Derby County,
Grimsby Town, Middlesbrough, Portsmouth, & Sunderland), and to Newcastle U nited which are
redeveloping on site; (five other clubs - Barnsley, Chelsea, Manchester City, Oldham Athletic, and
Swindon Tow n had also applied for extensions but were turned down). The Secretary o f State also
confirm ed that those clubs in the First Division o f the Football League prom oted since 1991
(Bolton Wanderers, Burnley, Port Vale, Reading, Stoke City, & W est Bromwich Albion) would
have three years from the date o f their prom otion to go all-seater.

10.    T he Football Licensing A uthority (FLA), established under the Football Spectators Act
1989, was funded by grant-in-aid o f £860,000 in 1993-94. The Authority has four functions:

        (a)     operating a licensing scheme for grounds at which designated football matches are
        played;

        (b)    keeping under review the discharge by local authorities o f their safety certification
        functions under the Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975 at grounds at which designated
        football matches are played;

        (c)    ensuring that clubs in the FA Premier League and First Division o f the Football
        League m eet the August 1994 deadline for all-seated accommodation at their grounds;

        (d)    ensuring that any terracing retained by clubs in Divisions 2 and 3 o f the Football
        League meets the necessary safety standards.


Lines to take

        By the time o f the August 1994 all-seater deadline, the vast majority o f the 46 clubs in the
        Premier League and First Division had all-seater grounds or had closed their last remaining
standing accommodation and were working on its conversion to seating.

Clubs in Divisions 2 and 3 o f the Football League have until August 1999 either to
introduce all-seated accommodation or to ensure that any retained terracing meets the
appropriate standards.

By M arch 1995 the Government, through a 2.5% reduction in Pool Betting D uty, will
have made available -£100m to help clubs m eet the cost o f implementing the all-seater
requirements.

In August 1993 the Chancellor announced that the Pool Betting D uty concession was to
be extended for a further five years from March 1995 thereby releasing a further -£100m
to help clubs in the low er Divisions to implement the safe terracing policy.

T he G overnm ent have set up the Football Licensing Authority which is responsible for
keeping under review the way in which local authorities discharge their functions under
the Safety o f Sports Grounds Act 1975.
