est.to/RRyder/6.29.3
                                                                              ,   2oft-       ,/v^ f

            —b \ . r ^ c o o .            0              ^                                                 •*v
                                                                                          a
ic.&/AV                                                           I
   ■MvOw'3*^' ,j                         '■■   '■'*• •   '.   /




                                                                      S;
                                 ;i'h


The Rt Hon Malcom Rifkind QC MP                                                                        I
Secretary of State for Scotland                                                           c C I" ?
Whitehall
LONDON
SW1A 2AU
                                                                           March 1990



      c VjuA >^ol— -
                                        v ^       /^ncp
TAYLOR REPORTS FOOTBi^lf^ V                    • -^ 5 : “
Thank you for sending copies of your letters of 8 and 26 March to
John Major.   I have been asked to deal with them since I have
taken the lead in the Treasury on football issues arising in
connection with the Budget.
I do accept that the situation in Scotland, so far as the
implementation of the Taylor report is concerned, is a little
different from that in England and Wales. The Scottish clubs do
not have the same recent history of hooliganism as the English
ones, and they have not been banned from European competitions.
Moreover, I accept that you do not have the legislative means to
require the Scottish clubs to implement all-seater stadia by any
specific deadline.
Nevertheless, there are clearly strong arguments for adopting the
same approach to safety matters in Scotland as in England and
Wales, which would mean, in line with the Taylor recommendations,
requiring the premier division clubs to become all-seater by 1994-
95, and first and second division clubs by 1999-2000. I am    sure
you will agree that the need for improved comfort and safety at
sports grounds applies just as much north of the border as it does
south of it. Moreover, football has hit the headlines recently,
and I think there are strong presentational arguments for having a
coherent and consistent strategy in both Scotland and England and
Wales. Last, but by no means least, the £100 million made
available to football over the next five years by the budget
should make it easier for Scottish clubs to accept an accelerated
timetable for implementing ground improvements.

You mentioned in your first letter that the Scottish football
authorities   would   either   need    financial help, or     the
implementation timetable should be altered. Now that we have been
able to give some help - which we will review after 5 years -
would it not be sensible to approach the Scottish football
authorities again to see if it would in fact be possible for
Scottish league clubs to conform to the timetable suggested iu trie
Taylor report? I have to say I would find it surprising if the
generous assistance offered by the Chancellor had no effect at all
on the time required by Scottish clubs to become all-seater.    If
the clubs could meet the accelerated timetable, I am sure it would
be right for us to encourage them to do so.

I am copying this letter to the recipients of yours.




                                            RICHARD RYDER
