                                  FOOTBALL STADIA
                                     ADVISORY
                                   DESIGN COUNCIL
           Winchester House, 259-269 Old Marylebone Road. London NW1 5RA
                     Telephone: 071-224 9944 Fax: 071-723 2792




The Rt. Hon. David Mellor, MP,
Secretary of State for National Heritage,
Horse Guards Road,
London SW1P 3AL.

2nd July 1992


Dear


ALL SEATING REQUIREMENTS AT FOOTBALL LEAGUE GROUNDS

On behalf of the members of the Football Stadia Advisory Design
Council I should like to thank you for your invitation to comment
on aspects of your forthcoming review of the Government's All-
Seater Policy in England and Wales.

The subject has been carefully considered by members of the
Council and of our Architects Working Party, and I have pleasure
in submitting our response herewith.

This deals separately with :

A.       - the policy issues,
B.       - provisional recommendations for design criteria for
            standing accommodation, and
C.       - the future role of this Council in assisting with
           the implementation of Government policy, including
            any changes that may result from this current reyiew.

As I believe you are aware the future of this Council is in
jeopardy,   and I am currently in discussion with the Football
authorities .regarding our posible future role, funding and
constitution.

Having regard to the major role which we have already played in
assisting with the implementation of the Government's policy to
improve safety at football grounds, and the contribution which
I believe we could continue to make in the future in providing
guidance to the FLA and others, particularly in advising on how
any changes in Government policy might best be implemented, I
hope that it might be possible for me to have a meeting with you.




            Chairman: Gwilym R obots CBE FEng FICE   Executive Officer: Christine Gausden MCIOB
At such meeting I would like to discuss the future role,
constitution and funding of this Council, as well as highlighting
some of the points made in our formal response.

In addition, of course, we would be happy to elaborate on the
various issues raised, either in writing or in discussion with
your officials.




Gwilym Roberts
Chairman
                                  FOOTBALL STADIA
                                     ADVISORY
                                   DESIGN COUNCIL
           W inchester House, 259-269 Old Marylebone Road. London NW1 5RA
                      Telephone: 071-224 9944 Fax: 071-723 2792
                       « *




                                           REVIEW

                                            OF THE

        GOVERNMENT’S ALL-SEATER POLICY

                     IN ENGLAND AND WALES




                               RESPONSE FROM
                      THE FOOTBALL STADIA

                 ADVISORY DESIGN COUNCIL




July 2, 1992.




            Chairman: Gwilym Roberts CBE FEng FICE   Executive Officer: Christine Gausden MCIOB
                           PART A

                      POLICY ISSUES

1.   General.

Two members of the Football Stadia Advisory Design Council
 (FSADC) were closely involved with Lord Justice Taylor in the
development of his Hillsborough Report.        Professor Leonard
Maunder OBE sat with him as an Assessor for some six months and
vas Chairman of the Technical Working Party, while Dr. Chris
Nicholson was also a member of the Working Party.        We are,
•therefore, particularly conscious of the reasons that lay behind
•the recommendations for all-seating being made mandatory at
Football League Grounds, which are summarised in paragraphs 61 -
94 of the Hillsborough Report.

2.    In our view, nothing has happened since then to challenge
•the arguments that all-seating facilities will produce safer
conditions at grounds.

3.    Indeed the only question then was the ability of the clubs
•to fund the changes. This is, we believe, still the situation
today.

4.   In this connection, however, it is pertinent to consider the
statement in Paragraph 4 of Part B of our response, namely "that
if all the criteria for safe terracing are met, there may in fact
be only a marginal difference in cost between constructing new
terracing and new seated areas".

5.   Turning now to the specific issues raised in your
consultative document, our views are summarised in the following
paragraphs.

6.   Standing accommodation at Third and Fourth Division grounds.

While the FSADC holds the view that, intrinsically, seated
spectator areas are safer than standing accommodation, in the
absence of any detailed research into the subject the Council is
unable to give authoritative advice as to whether standing
accommodation should be permissable at Third and Fourth Division
grounds.  If, however, it is decided to permit standing at such
grounds, it is strongly felt that the requirements for standing
areas should be as high in terms of amenity and safety as for
seated areas.   Our preliminary recommendations are outlined in
paragraph 11 below and amplified in Part B of this document.
7.    Thresholds

The FSADC does not believe that any distinction should be made
between grounds based on either the ground's capacity or the
average attendances. The reasons for these views are:

i.    Capacity:    We emphasise that a calculation based on
      capacity is irrelevant, because the determination of
      safety levels depends on the capacity of any one particular
      area within a ground, not its overall capacity. Potential
      danger may still be present in one area of standing
      accommodation, however large or small is the overall
      capacity.

ii.   Average attendance: This is also deemed to be irrelevant,
      given the natural fluctuations of attendances during the
      course of a typical season.

The FSADC therefore advises that no distinction should be made,
and that furthermore, all Second Division clubs should be
required to have all-seater stadia.      Applying this blanket
requirement will minimise potential confusion and prevent clubs
artificially reducing their capacities or amending their
attendance records.


8.    Relaxation of deadlines.

The FSADC believes that the Government should not announce a
general relaxation of the deadline for Second Division clubs.
It is for the FLA to determine where circumstances may dictate
any relaxation on a local basis.


9.    Transitional arrangements

The FSADC does not have a view on the timescale which promoted
clubs should be allowed in order to implement the all-seater
requirement. However, it is our experience that ambitious Third
Division clubs are already planning in advance and, therefore,
the time allowed should be relatively short - perhaps 15 months
maximum (ie. two close seasons and one playing season) - in order
not to give dilatory clubs an unfair advantage in the promotion
race.


10.   Special arrangements

The FSADC does not have a view on whether any special
arrangements should be made for the visit of well-supported clubs
to smaller grounds. This must remain a matter for the relevant
football authorities, the FLA and the local safety advisors.
11.   Safe Terracing - the FSADC view

It is the FSADC view that the requirements of standing areas be
as high in terms of amenity and safety as for seated areas. The
current advice in the Green Guide is deemed to be useful, but not
entirely adequate.

The FSADC therefore strongly recommends that a document offering
clear and concise guidance be formulated as soon as possible, and
that the FSADC, with its proven record of producing such
documentation (see below) is the best placed independent body to
fulfil that role.

Part B of this response outlines the issues which the FSADC
considers need to be addressed in such a document if standing
accommodation is to be acceptable.

                            *******



The FSADC has already produced three Guideline publications,
namely on Seating, Public Address Systems and Roofs.       It is
currently preparing three more on Facilities for the Disabled/
Planning Briefs and Procedures, and Toilets. The FSADC has also
published two major pieces of research, namely a Bibliography of
Stadia References and a Digest of Stadia Criteria. A third piece
of research describing the Experiences and Attitudes of
Supporters with Disabilities will be published shortly.     This
is designed to help clubs and local authorities interpret the
recent changes in the Building Regulations.
                             PART B

            DESIGN CRITERIA FOR STANDING
                  ACCOMMODATION

 PRELIMINARY RECOMMENDATIONS OF FSADC
The following criteria have been drawn up in consultation with
the FSADC's Architects' Working Party. They are necessarily an
immediate reaction and would need development and amplification
before becoming firm recommendations.

Underlying the criteria is the basic recommendation that the
requirements for standing areas should be as high in terms of
amenity and safety as for seated areas.

Drawing upon research already published by the FSADC on standards
for seated areas, the FSADC therefore notes:

1.     Sightlines

As is the case for seated areas, sightlines should be calculated
for each row of the standing terrace to a pre-determined "C"
value, albeit taking into account height variations among
spectators and their greater mobility.

2.     Future conversion of terracing to seating

It should be an FLA requirement that any new terracing should be
profiled so as to be capable of simple and quick conversion to
seating. The following criteria need to be considered:

i.     it must be shown that the sightlines ("C" value) for the
        future seating installations will meet current FSADC
        guidelines.

ii.    The location and widths of aisles, walkways, vomitories,
       steps and ramps must be appropriate for future seating
       installations, yet be sufficient to cater for the larger
       number of   standing spectators likely to use the area.
       (Approximately twice the number of spectators can be
       accommodated in any given area if standing rather than
       seated.)

iii.    Details  such as the stepping, signage and future seat fixing
       have to be planned for in advance.

3.     Amenities

Facilities for toilets and catering should be of a similar
standard as those offered for seated spectators.     Furthermore,
it should be noted that because standing areas can accommodate
approximately twice the number of spectators as seated areas, any
standing terrace which is designed for eventual conversion to
seating must nevertheless provide toilet and catering facilities
commensurate with the standing capacity of the terrace, not the
eventual seated capacity.    (Guidance on the ratio of toilets
capacity is to be published in a forthcoming FSADC Guideline) .

4.    Costs

It is the FSADC's view that, if all the criteria for safe
terracing are met, there may in fact be only a marginal
difference in cost between constructing new terracing and new
seated areas. This is owing to the following factors:

i.    the substantial costs involved in installing (and    testing
       annually) crush barriers and section fencing.

ii.   the   additional costs of constructing the terraces to accept
      the   greater structural loads created both by the barriers
      and   fences, and the larger number of spectators likely to
      use   the terrace.

iii. the additional costs of having to construct a greater number
      of toilets, stairways, vomitories etc. to cater for the
      larger number of spectators likely to use the terrace.

5.    Roof cover, separation and segregation

The FSADC believes that although covered terracing is obviously
preferable to uncovered terracing, it is not possible to dictate
that all terracing should be covered.      That must remain the
commercial decision of the club.    However, it is important to
ensure that spectators occupying uncovered areas be either
separated from those under cover, to prevent overcrowding, or be
provided with a strictly controlled point of transfer.      This
vould apply equally if, for example, a single terrace has a roof
over only the rear half (unless the licensed capacity level was
sufficiently low to allow the full number to be accommodated
safely under the roof).

6.    Conclusion

It is the FSADC's view that terracing can be designed to be made
safe for standing spectators but it must not be seen as a cheap
alternative, ie. a licence for clubs to take no remedial action.

In view of the marginal cost differences between constructing new
standing areas and new seated ares, it may be advisable for the
Football Trust to review the level of grants it provides relative
to standing and seated accommodation.
                               *******


The FSADC's Architects' Working Party comprises the following
members: Chairman: Geraint John (Sports Council Chief Architect
and FSADC member), Simon Inglis (FSADC Editor and FLA member),
Ernest Atherden (Atherden Fuller Partnership), Duncan MacLean
 (Miller Partnership), Rod Sheard (Lobb Partnership), Terry Ward
 (Husband Design Group) and Christine Gausden (FSADC Executive
Officer).
                           PART C

                FUTURE ROLE OF FSADC

                IN ASSISTING WITH THE

     IMPLEMENTATION OF GOVERNMENT POLICY


1.   The FSADC was established in 1990 in accordance with Lord
Justice Taylor's recommendation in paragraph 96 of his Report.

2.   Funding was provided by the FA and FL, but was limited in
both time and amount.

3.   During its 2! year existence the Council has, inter alia,
produced Guidelines and other publications, provided technical
advice to Clubs and their consultants, presented technical papers
and investigated research needs.

4.   It is understood that the FLA and their Inspectors rely
heavily on FSADC's existing publications in assessing facilities
at Football Grounds.

5.   The   Council's  work   has   also    been   well   regarded
internationally e.g. by FIFA and UEFA.

6.   Unless there is an immediate agreement regarding the FSADC 's
future it will cease to function before the end of 1992.

7.   With the right level of funding and appropriate constitution
the FSADC's future activities could include: -

i.    Providing the further technical guidelines and other
      publications needed to help clubs develop grounds which are
      safe and possess amenities appropriate to the late 1990's
      and the 21st century.

ii.   Supporting the FLA, FT and other bodies by providing the
      independent specialist advice they need for particular
      subjects.  (If standing is allowed at certain grounds, the
      development of appropriate guidelines would become a matter
      of great urgency).

iii. Identify areas where technical research is required to raise
     standards and attain greater benefits for the investments
     that will be made, and to initiate such research.
    iv.   Assist the   FT in ensuring that the improvements made  to
          grounds as the result of the distribution ofpublic money
           by the FT to Clubs are to acceptable standards of quality
          and amenity.

    8.   If the FSADC is to continue, it is essential that agreement
    can be reached over the next few weeks as to the:

    i.    tasks which it should undertake,

    ii.   the extent   and manner of its funding, and

    iii. its constitution.




i
