                           CONFIDENTIAL

                                               cc:   Mr   Yates
                                                     Mr   Hammond
                                                     Mr   Boys-Smith
                                                     Mr   Malone-Lee
                                                     Mr   Goddard
                                                     Mr   Watts



Mr Turnev


SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS ACTS:     DEPARTMENTAL RESPONSIBILITY

In your absence I have done my best to keep in touch with this
aspect of Hillsborough follow-up.     I shall not attempt to
summarise developments here.     As you will see from papers such as
the No 10 letter of 9 May recording a Ministerial discussion,
Mr Hammond's minute of 10 May and the note of a meeting with DOE
officials on 11 May, one issue that has surfaced is whether
brining an "all-seats" requirements, and possibly other Taylor
recommendations, into the Football Spectators Bill should be by
means of amendments to the Safety at Sports Grounds Acts.        The
Home Office view so far articulated is in favour of that course,
as being an orderly development of legislation.      DOE seem to want
to build new safety requirements into the structure of the
Football Spectators Bill so that they will be enforced centrally
and not by local authorities.    This would to my mind be a further
complication in what is already quite complex legislation.       The
matter will need to be brought to issue quite soon.


What it prompts me to wonder is whether it provides an opportunity
for us to press, if we so wished, for safety at sports grounds
generally to become a DOE subject.    I have not gone into it
properly, but my impression is that Home Office responsibility is
a hangover from a time when we had responsibility for a much wider
range of safety matters, many of which - eg consumer protection -
have long since passed from us.   The untidy division of
responsibility between us and DOE has been accentuated by DOE's
proactive role in recent years and compounded by their ingrained
suspicion of local authority functions.     Our responsibility for
some emergency services - fire and police - gives us an interest
in sports ground safety, and some might argue that it makes it
desirable for us to retain overall responsibility - though I would
not myself see that as a cogent argument.     It seems to me that the
current extent of DOE interest in sporting activity, its economy
and organisation, could well justify their assuming responsibility
for the safety aspects.


I recognise that changes in Departmental responsibility are
unfashionable, and may demand effort to achieve out of proportion
to the benefit derived.   If that is thought to be so in this case,
I do not press it.   It is simply that, if there is a desire for
change, it would be a pity to let the current opportunity slip
through the fingers.




                            M J Moriarty
                            15 May 1989
