                                                                       '(3
E.R.   hs.9.21/hillsb6.dm

       From:    D J Mould                       cc   Ms   Bannister
                G2 Division                          Ms   Nicholson
                Ext 3099                             Mr   Mower
                                                     Mr   Goddard
                21 September 1989                    Mr   Addison
                                                     Mr   Lidington


       Ms Craig
       Private Office

       HILLSBOROUGH:    CORRESPONDENCE FROM MR PATNICK OBE MP
       As requested a draft reply is enclosed for Mr Patten's signature
       to the attached correspondence from Mr Patnick MP.
       2.   The Government have already welcomed the thoroughness of the
       Interim Report and Mr Patnick concedes that it does not gloss
       over the causes of the events which took place on that fateful
       day. Whilst the main criticism of the report is levelled at the
       police, they are not the only ones who are criticised.       Both
       Sheffield City Council and the football club (together with the
       club's professional advisers) are the subject of criticism. Nor
       does the report overlook contributory factors such as the
       behaviour of fans outside the ground.     It will probably be as
       well to comment on these in a general way in reply Mr Patnick.
       It seems unnecessary however to comment in detail on the list of
       individual points raised by            some of which appear to be
       rhetoric.
       3.   The cost of the Inquiry is being met by the Government.  It
       is the police investigation costs which are probably giving rise
       to |         |'s displeasure. The draft explains the position on
       this.

       4.   The Inquiry has already said that it will be addressing
       wider, longer term issues such as perimeter fencing and pre-match
       drinking by football fans in the Final Report.        As for the
       constituent's comments about a disaster fund (to which the
       Government contributed), the tragedy touched the whole nation
       whose sympathy manifested itself by way of voluntary donations
       for the families of victims.
       5.      A draft reply is attached.




                                                 D J MOULD

       Encs


       FEP/89 35/48/106
h s.9.21/hillsb6.dm                                FILE NUMBER ..FEP/89 35/48/106,
D R A ^ P LETTER


ADDRESSEE’S REFERENCE


  TO                                  ENCLOSURES      COPIES TO BE SENT TO
Irvine Patnick OBE MP             (In pouch)
House of Commons
LONDON SW1A OAA




( ^ ^ L POSTAL ADDRESS)                              (FULL ADDRESSES, IF NECESSARY

                   LETTER DRAFTED FOR SIGNATURE BY ...MR PATTEN.........
                                                      (NAME OF SIGNATORY)

                   Thank you for your letter of 29 August to the Home Secretary
                   with this one from j                  as an example of the
                   feeling in Sheffield following the findings of the Interim
                   Report of the Hillsborough Inquiry.

                   As you say, any suggestion that the outcome of the Inquiry
                   has glossed over the causes of the terrible events of that
                   day is quite wrong.      The Inquiry did not set out to
                   apportion blame for what happened but to find out the causes
                   and make recommendations to prevent such an accident from
                   happening again.   Although the police were criticised the
                   Interim Report highlights several other contributory factors
                   which led to the accident, for example the absence of an
                   authorised maximum capacity for the pens, the layout of the
                   crush barriers    and inadequate     signs and ticketing.
                   Criticism was not therefore confined solely to the police.

                   The Report also concluded that a substantial minority of
                   fans who had had too much to drink aggravated the problems
                   outside the ground but that the evidence did not suggest
                   that there was a very significant number of ticketless fans.
                   The problems of pre-match drinking and fans without tickets
which will be considered in the second stage of the Inquiry
which is now addressing the more general,   long term issues
of safety at sports events.


The immediate costs of the Hillsborough Inquiry will be met
in full by the Government. With regard to the costs of the
investigations undertaken by the West Midlands police,
although their results were made available to Lord Justice
Taylor they were originally started at the initiative of the
Chief Constable of South Yorkshire as they concerned the
policing of his area.   In addition to the investigation of
policing and related events on the day, the investigations
by West Midlands police are necessary for the presentation
of evidence to the coroner's inquests, complaints and
discipline matters and, more recently, from allegations of
criminal liability.


The Government by way of police specific grant at 51% plus
block grant already pays a sizeable proportion of the costs
of policing in South Yorkshire.     However, in view of the
exceptional and unforeseen circumstances of the Hillsborough
tragedy, the Government has offered the South Yorkshire
Police Authority an additional special payment from central
funds to assist them with the additional costs they now face
in respect of the work carried out on their behalf by the
West Midlands police.


Finally,   the disaster fund, to which the Government
contributed, was set up to receive donations from the public
wishing to express their sympathy for the family and friends
of victims of a national disaster.
