                                                          CC M fS5 IVfcAvffU-YVv


          *'
                      kk.   £f(fhuL            1Ua'5 (

hs.2.22/hillsb2.peb   IW W O u v d fo ^ -& rfM >          MtSW&               ~
                      Uw W f          ,V          to ^   W ^ ^ /lT o J U
From:   P E Bolton    **,<!,'. ( S ^ s p f o r *                     ■ (
        G2 Division   Im X\1c      y^cjjsvM,             Miss Nicholson
        X3322         Ofluinl A l W J                    Mr Godfrey
        22 February                                      £ S S L d
                      Se-n GSbJtdbJt.      )             Mrs Reisz


Ms Dent


HILLSBOROUGH FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP                             \ TW > ' "rJUJZl
You asked for advice on the attached letter from Robert Hughes
MP to Mr Brandon-Bravo covering a letter from Trevor Hicks, the
Chairman of the Hillsborough Family Support Group.
2.   The letter from Mr Hicks is concerned primarily with remarks
made by Mr Peter Wright the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
quoted in the "Sheffield Star" (of which we do not have a copy)
about drunkenness among football fans on the day of the
Hillsborough tragedy. Although we do not know precisely what
Mr Wright said, his remarks are undoubtedly along similar lines
to those attributed to members of the South Yorkshire Police in
ah article in "Police" magazine which appeared in November 1989.
Mr Eric Heffer MP drew this to the attention of the Home
Secretary and the draft reply which I have provided for
Mr Brandon-Bravo's use draws heavily on the reply to Mr Heffer
which was sent by Lord Ferrers on 19 February.
3.   The other issues raised by Mr Hughes is the possibility of
a meeting for Mr Hicks with one of the Home Office Ministers,
preferably the Home Secretary.
4.   I cannot see that there would be any practical purpose for
such a meeting for the reasons which I have set out in the draft
letter. In fact Ministers would doubtless have to explain to
Mr Hicks why they were unable to prevent Mr Wright or members of
the South Yorkshire Police holding or expressing the views which
have been attributed to them.      Nevertheless Mr Hicks is a
responsible individual who lost 2 daughters in the tragedy.
5.   The Hillsborough Family Support Group has already had one
meeting with a "cross party" group of MPs and a second has been
arranged for 27 February. Mr Hicks is often interviewed by the
media and there may therefore be a strong presentational case
for granting him an interview - which should perhaps be with Lord
Ferrers. (I have today submitted a separate note to Lord Ferrers
suggesting that he should agree to meet, at their request,
representations of the Football Supporters Association and the
Federation of Football Supporters Clubs.)
    6.   However as the draft letter suggests, the Home Office is
    already committed to meeting the 3 specific objectives of the
    support group which are in the Home Office area of responsibility
    and if Mr Hicks wished to discuss these matters in greater
    detail, I shall be very happy to see him myself.




                                             P E BOLTON


    Encs

0
