                                                   K*
h s .8.17/taylor.peb



                                                        3322



                                        17 August 1989


Neil Kinghan Esq
Department of the Environment
Room P3/167
2 Marsham Street
LONDON    SW1P 3EB




LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INTERIM REPORT

In the final paragraph of your letter       of 14 August 1989 you
referred to the advice sought by Mr          Moynihan on what the
"position of our two Departments will       be if it appears that
football clubs are opening their doors        to spectators without
having taken on board the recommendations   of the interim report".

As you know our circular of 4 August said in paragraph 3 that the
Home Secretary welcomed the recommendations of the report which
he believed should be dealt with without delay.    In paragraph 5
we said that the Home Secretary nevertheless urges recipients to
take urgent action on both categories so as to put into effect as
many of the recommendations as possible before the start of the
season.

Such feedback as we have suggests that in fact all the parties
concerned are trying to comply with the recommendations.
Nevertheless it is clear from telephone calls and correspondence
which we have had that it is difficult to apply the letter of
some of them in particular circumstances.     The application of
recommendation 8, for example, is not straightforward where clubs
have perimeter fences of a completely different kind from those
found at Hillsborough.   The line which we are taking is broadly
that Taylor should be complied with unless there are compelling
reasons of public safety against.

We recognise however that discretion and indeed authority in
connection with the safety certificate rests with the local
authority and that if, having considered all the circumstances
and consulted with the interested parties, they conclude that a
Taylor recommendation is inappropriate or should not be complied
with they are free to make that judgement.     In correspondence
with the local authority in Sunderland, we have indicated that we
would not expect them to depart from Taylor recommendations
unless they were satisfied that their alternative solution would
provide at least the same or preferably a higher degree of public
safety.   There are no sanctions which we can impose against the
local authorities, but we do not think that any are necessary.
It is of course the case that if the local authority want to
breach a Taylor recommendation against police advice, the police
may appeal against any proposed change in the safety certificate
or decline to take part in the policing or stewarding of the
match inside the ground until more appropriate arrangements can
be agreed between the club and the force in accordance with
recommendation number 4.

I realise that your letter seeks advice on what might be done if
clubs open their doors to spectators without taking on board the
recommendations.      It seems    to be that the number of
recommendations which fall to the clubs over which the police or
the local authority have little control are very few, No.25 seems
to be the only obvious exception; 22 and 23 possibly.

In the last resort of course these are only recommendations of an
independent inquiry and in law there is no way in which we can
insist that they should be complied with if, at the local level,
a contrary decision is taken.

One thing that we must bear in mind is that although the Taylor
recommendations are addressed to "existing football grounds",
only a limited number of them are appropriate for grounds which
are not designated under the 1975 Act.

                                        Yours sincerely




                                        P E BOLTON
                                        (Fire and Emergency
                                        Planning Department)


he   Mr   Boys Smith
     Mr   Turney
     Mr   Goddard
     Mr   Whalley
     Ms   Jago
