h s .2.5/hillsb4.dm


From:   D J Mould                     cc     Ms Dent
        G2 Division                          Ms Harrison
        X3099                                Mr Turney
                                             HMCIFS
        5 February 1990                      HMCIC
                                             Mr Mower
                                             Mr Goddard
                                             Mr Bolton
                                             Mr Godfrey


Miss Nicholson
Private Office



HILLSBOROUGH     INQUIRY:   FINAL   REPORT    -   CIRCULAR   TO   LOCAL
AUTHORITIES

INTRODUCTION

This submission seeks the agreement of Ministers to the issue of
the attached circular to local authorities with responsibilities
under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act). The
circular covers the Final Report of the Hillsborough Inquiry and
tlje Government's response to its findings.

BACKGROUND

2.   Many of the Report's recommendations impact directly upon
local authorities. Whilst most, if not all, will have obtained
a copy, the Government undertook to draw local authorities'
attention to the relevant recommendations, some of which were
carried forward from the Interim Report but modified.        The
circular achieves this.    It is also planned to copy it and
enclosures to all Chief Officers of Police in order to ensure
that they too are aware of the Report's contents and the
Government response. Copies will also be sent to football league
clubs and the main representative sporting organisations.

CONSULTATION

3.   Normally,   the local authority associations would be
consulted about the contents of a circular prior to its issue,
especially where there could be resource implications for local
authorities (see also paragraph 4 below). In this instance it
is considered that to do so would delay for too long the issue
of the circular.

RESOURCE IMPLICATIONS

4.   Many of the recommendations which entail action by local
authorities should form part of their normal safety certification
#




* E.R.
     function and have already been recommended in the Interim Report.
     It is not therefore considered that there are any significant
     additional resource implications for local authorities.

     PROPOSAL

     5.   Ministers are asked to agree the issue and circulation of
     the circular and its enclosures.




                                              D J MOULD


     FEP/90 35/48/89


     Enc
                                                 HOME OFFICE
                                         Queen Anne's Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                Direct line: 01 -273 3 3 2 2
                                               Switchboard: 01-273 3000


Our reference: FEP/90 35/48/89                     February 1990
Your reference:



   To:   The Chief Executive:

               County Councils
               Metropolitan District Councils
               London Borough Councils
               Common Council of the City of London




   Dear Sir/Madam

   HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR 11/1990
   FINAL REPORT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY

   Introduction

   The Final Report of the Inquiry set up by the Home Secretary
   following the disaster at the Hillsborough football ground was
   published on 29 January. A copy of the Report is attached.

   2.   The purpose of this circular is first, to apprise recipients
   of the Report's recommendations and the Government's response to
   them; and second to give guidance to local authorities with
   safety certification responsibilities on compliance with the
   recommendations.

   The Report

   3.   The Report contains 76 recommendations, 43 of which are
   repeated in substance (see also paragraph 6     below) from the
   Interim Report circulated with HOC 68/1989. Attached at Annex A
   is a copy of the Home Secretary's oral statement to the House
   of Commons on 29 January responding to the final Report.     At
   Annex B is a copy of the schedule referred to in the statement
   setting out the Government's initial response to the individual
   recommendations in the report.

   4.   Local authorities may wish to note, in      particular, the
   response to recommendations 1-4 (all seated accommodation) and
   recommendation 6 (National Review Body). The intention is to
   bring into force the relevant sections of Part I of the Football
   Spectators Act 1989 in order to implement these recommendations
as regards football grounds as soon as practicable.             Safety
certificates should not be amended for this purpose.

Scope

5.   Paragraphs 238-239 of the Report indicate that in directing
the recommendations "essentially" to sports grounds designated
under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 the flexibility of
approach referred to in paragraph 5 of the Guide to Safety at
Sports Grounds (the Green Guide) should apply. Paragraph 14 of
the Report makes clear that its emphasis is on football, with its
special problems such as overcrowding and misbehaviour, which
are not experienced to the same extent elsewhere.      The Report
states that "crowd problems are directly related to the nature
of the event and the numbers attending it". It would therefore
be consistent with the Report's findings for local authorities
to take proper account of these factors when applying the
recommendations to individual grounds:     for example a careful
appraisal of the value of such matters as the installation of
sophisticated communications systems and CCTV may be necessary
where spectator attendances are numbered in hundreds rather than
thousands and where the police presence at the ground is minimal.

Interim Report Recommendations Adjusted

6.   The   attention  of   local   authorities   is  drawn   to
recommendations 8, 11, 12(b), 19, 20, 31, 33, 58, 66 and 67 all
of which were contained in the Interim Report but have been
modified as follows:

        recommendation 8    revised maximum figure

        recommendation 11 - "agreement" between club and police is
                            replaced by "statement of intent11

        recommendation 12 - qualification introduced by 1 2 (b)

        recommendation 19 - discretion as regards opening of pitch
                            perimeter gates

        recommendat ion 20 - mannincr bv police or steward

        recommendation 31 - revised   composition   of   the   Advisory
                            Group

        recommendation 33 - reference to 1975 Act provision

        recommendat ion 58 - hand-signals not recommended

        recommendation 66 - recommended threshold figure of 2000

        recommendation 67 - ambulance may be approved          by   the
                            ambulance authorities.
New Safety Recommendations

7.   New  recommendations are summarised below and               local
authorities are urged to take the action indicated               where
appropriate.

        Turnstiles (recommendation 10) - to note the revised
        maximum flow-rate to be used in place of the figure of
        750 quoted in the Green Guide which will be amended as
        soon as possible;

        Gangways (recommendation 13) - to include appropriate
        conditions in safety certificates;

        Perimeter Fences (recommendations 14, 15, 17) - to
        secure   action  by  clubs  to   comply with   these
        recommendations and to amend safety certificates, as
        necessary;

        Safety Certificates (recommendations 24, 25, 26) - to
        consider   any   necessary   adjustment   to   safety
        certificates and note Home Office       intention to
        implement recommendation 24;

        Duties of Clubs (recommendations 39, 40, 42, 43) - to
        consider appropriate amendment to safety certificates,
        as necessary;

        Police Planning (recommendations 47, 48, 50, 52, 53),
        Communications (55) and Co-ordination (61) - to note
        the recommendations and the Government's response;

        First Aid (recommendation 69) and Offences/Penalties
        (recommendations  70-73)  - to    note  Government's
        response;

        Green Guide (recommendations 74-76 and Appendix 3) -
        to note the Government response and to adopt the
        revised criteria/requirements which will be included
        in a revised guide as soon as possible.

Resource Implications

8.   Action to consider, revise and enforce the provisions of
safety certificates in the light of the Report may have short
term resource implications but is not expected to give rise to
significant long-term resource implications above existing
commitments.

Other

9.    Copies of this circular, annexes and enclosures are sent
to Fire and Civil Defence Authorities, Police Authorities,
Regional Managers Health Authorities, Chief Officers of Police,
Chief    Fire  Officers   and  Chief   Ambulance  Officers   for
information.   Copies have also been sent to all football league
clubs and the representative organisations on the attached list.
%




* E.R.
     10. Any enquiries about the contents of this circular should
     be addressed to Mr A Brown (01-273-2765).

                                           Yours faithfully




                                           P E BOLTON
                                           (Fire and Emergency
                                           Planning Department)



     Enc
t




, E.R.


         Association of County Councils

         Association of Metropolitan Authorities

         London Boroughs Association

         Association of London Authorities

         Association of District Councils

         Welsh Counties Association

         Association of Chief Police Officers

         Clerks to Police Authorities

         Regional Managers, Health Authorities

         Chief and Assistant Chief Fire Officers' Association

         National Association of Fire Officers

         Fire Brigades Union

         Police Federation

         Police Superintendents' Association

         Association of Chief Ambulance Officers

         Football Association

         Football Association of Wales

         Football League

         Football Trust

         Football Grounds Improvement Trust

         Rugby Football Union

         Welsh Rugby Football Union

         Rugby Football League

         Speedway Control Board

         Cricket Council

         Jockey Club

         National Greyhound Racing Club
Lawn Tennis Association

All England Tennis and Croquet Club

Royal and Ancient Golf Club

RAC Motor Sports Association

British Board of Amateur Athletics

Hockey Association

British Show Jumping Association

National Federation of Football Supporters Clubs

Football Supporters Association

St Johns Ambulance

Sports Councils for England and Wales

Central Council for Physical Recreation
