                                               I <4-

                                        4-             <_




pS /
                         cx_   cJ^r^=i^ir~

(d-XZs'           (~frcyv^ ^           ±*2-r*=J As,
f*S I 1-}&yvkJ2                    .




                               ’   (
                                              CONFIDENTIAL



DRAFT LETTER FOR PS/SECRETARY OF STATE TO PS/HOME SECRETARY



HOME SECRETARY'S STATEMENT ON LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S FINAL REPORT



My Secretary of State has considered the draft statement which
you sent us yesterday evening. There are a number of amendments
which he would like to see made to the draft, so that it reflects
fully the points agreed at yesterday morning's meeting at No.10:
          i




-    on page 6, he considers it important that the Home Secretary
should        be        as    positive       as    possible    about    taking     forward      Lord
Justice Taylor's recommendatibns                          for anti-hooliganism measures.
He suggests amending the final sentence of the first paragraph to
read:


         "I    welcome             these     recommendations       in   principle         and   will
        consider the most practical methods of giving them effect♦"
                                                                                      I



    - on page 7, he suggests that the first sentence should begin


         "As        I    have       mentioned,       in     relation    to    hooliganism       Lord
         Justice Taylor takes the view..."


    And that,           for the sake of completeness,               the second sentence of
    the same paragraph should end:


         "an        extension           of   the    courts'    powers    to    make       attendance
         orders and to impose electronic tagging."

                   i.

       pages- 7              and   8;    replace      the     paragraphs      on   the      national
    membership scheme by those attached to this letter.
/
J4y Secretary of State takes the view that the paragraphs on the
national     membership   scheme   should    come   at   the   end   of   the
statement, as they do in the draft. He recalls that it was agreed
at yesterday's meeting that the Home Secretary would confirm hia
intention to     implement Part    II of    the Football   Spectators Act
very soon.


As you know,     my Secretary of State is leaving for Nairobi this
evening. He hopes that it will be possible for him to agree the
draft which the Home Secretary will show to the Prime Minister,
before he leaves. He would,        therefore,   like to have a word with
the Home Secretary on the telephone later today.
                             CONFIDENTIAL
i

/



            PARAGRAPHS ON THE NATIONAL MEMBERSHIP SCHEME




     I come now to the proposed Football Membership Scheme. The
House will be aware that as yet no such scheme exists.               Lord
Justice Taylor therefore addressed himself to the Invitation to
Tender   Issued   by   the   consultants   employed   by   the   football
authorities. Against that background he felt unable to support
the implementation of the provisions of Part I of the-Football
Spectators Act concerning the National Membership Scheme and
instead proposed the anti-hooliganism measures to which I have
referred.


     We have decided, in the light of his advice, not to proceed
with the establishment of a Football Membership Authority to draw
up a scheme at this time. However, hooliganism in football is a
notoriously recalcitrant problem. We do not therefore intend to
repeal Part I of the Football Spectators Act. It will remain on
the statute book, and the practical concerns expressed by Lord
Justice Taylor about its operation will be fully explored in the
light of advice from the specialist companies who responded to
the invitation to tender on 19 June, so that if hoolganism is not
quelled by the alternative measures proposed in the Taylor report
we can introduce an effective and tested Membership Scheme as
quickly as possible.


     The right course at the moment is to implement the Taylor
proposals as I have indicated,        and give the industry and the
clubs yet another chance to put themselves in order. The public
will not forgive them if they don't now act.




                              CONFIDENTIAL
