                                               I                                                          $ rW
                                               J                                                     §tB&f$fc€;-M
                       THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                                    LIMITED
                                                    T T A /T T T T 7 n                       I
                                                                                             I     , - 5 MAR 1990
                                                    Founded 1863
                                    Patron: H e r M a j e s t y T h e Q u e e n
                                  President: H.R.H. T h e D u k e o f K e n t
                                        Chairman: F. A. M i l l i c h i p

    Chief Executive:                                                                    Phone: 01-402 7151/262 4542
                                                                                               Telex: 261110
R. H. G. K e l l y f c i s                                                                Facsimile: 01-402 0486



                             16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW
  O ur Ref:          RHGK/RB/132                 Your Ref:                             March 1990
                                                                                   2nd M



     The Hon Colin Moynihan MP
     Department of the Environment
     2 Marsham Street
     London SWlP 3EB




     Dear Colin,


                                                 Taylor Enquiry


           I am enclosing for your information copies of Bert
     Millichip's letter to David Waddington and John Major.

           I apologise for the short delay in letting you see
     these.

                 With kind regards,



                                              Y ours          sincerely




                                 Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Gate, London W2 3LW
                                 Incorporated in London Registration Number 77797
                        THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                                    L I M IT E D
                                                    Founded 1863

                                    Patron: H e r M a j e s t y T h e Q u e e n
                                  President: H .R .H . T h e D u k e o f K e n t
                                        Chairman: F. A. M il l i c h i p

    C hief Executive:                                                                  Phone: 01-402 7151/262 4542
                                                                                              Telex: 261110
R. H. G. K e l l y   f cis
                                                                                         Facsimile: 01-402 0486



                             16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW
  Our Ref:           FAM/RHGK/RB/9 0             Your Ref:                        19th February 1990




    The Rt Hon David Waddington, MP
    Home Office
    50 Queen Anne's Gate
    London SWlH 9AT



    Dear Home Secretary,


                                 TAYLOR INQUIRY:                    FINAL REPORT

          Now that we have had some time to scrutinise the Taylor
    Report fully, I thought I should write formally to set out The
    Football Association's response to its recommendations.

          At the outset, whilst we welcome the Report's
    recommendations, we must make it clear to you that we consider
    some of Lord Justice Taylor's strictures most unfounded.

         The Football Association has limited powers it can
   exercise in relation to crowd control and safety which were
   set out in our submission to Sir Peter. The respective
   responsibilities of police, club, and local authority under
   the supervision of your Department were fully set out in the
   Popplewell Reports, and have been accepted by Lord Justice
   Taylor.

         We support Sir Peter Taylor's suggested strategy against
   hooliganism: stronger detection measures, new criminal
   offences, greater use of attendance orders and the
   introduction of electronic tagging, together with the crowd
   control and facility improvements he recommends. We believe
   that if this strategy is to be effective it must be treated as
   an integral whole. We are therefore anxious that the proposed
   criminal offences within football grounds are indeed created
   and enforced.

         We accept Lord Justice Taylor's view that "in the end
   the bulk of the finances for ground improvement must be raised
   by the clubs themselves". We have always recognised this.



                                 Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Gate, London W 23LW
                                 Incorporated in London Registration Number 77797
The Rt Hon David Waddington          -   2   -         19.2.90



But in view of the considerable capital sums which will be
involved in meeting the targets Taylor sets, we are pleased
that he did not rule out consideration of a reduction in pools
betting tax or the extension of capital allowances to ground
improvements. We would be grateful if the Government would
indeed give urgent consideration to these proposals. I am
writing to the Chancellor of the Exchequer about them.

      Increasingly over the past few years, we have been
working in a partnership with the Government and police in
tackling hooliganism. The successful introduction of CCTV,
ground improvements and closer crowd control are all the
fruits of this co-operation. Clearly there is much more to be
done, and the Taylor Report gives us the opportunity to renew
our commitment to fight hooliganism and improve crowd safety
and conditions.   We are considering areas in which The
Football Association can provide new ideas, resources and
assistance to promote safety with the game. We are ready to
work with the Government to implement Taylor's strategies.

      As many of the Report's recommendations bear on Home
Office responsibilities, I would be very grateful if it would
be possible for us to meet you with our collegues from The
Football League to discuss the Report and its implications.
My earnest hope is that we will be able to agree a common
approach to promote, in Lord Justice Taylor's words, "better
and safer conditions at sports grounds in the future".



                      Yours sincerely,


             f   a
                                 .f
                       F.A. Millichip
                          Chairman
        FAM/MD/JMC/230



Chancellor of the Exchequer
Parliament Street
SW1P 3AG                                                               21 February 1990



Dear Chancellor,

TAYLOR INQUIRY: SPORTS GROUND IMPROVEMENTS

As you know the Government has accepted the major recommendation of the Taylor Report on
the Hillsborough stadium disaster that designated sports grounds should have all seated
accommodation in accordance with a prescribed timetable. The Football Association
unreservedly accepts this recommendation and is determined to play its part to ensure that all
seated accommodation is installed by the required deadlines. Taylor’s proposal accords with the
recommendations we made to the Inquiry and our stated position on ground improvement.

We accept Lord Justice Taylor’s view that "in the end the bulk of the finances for ground
improvement must be raised by the clubs themselves". Considerable funds could be involved in
providing all seater accommodation and, we estimate these to be in the region of £130m. We
believe that footballs own efforts would be helped considerably by two changes in the taxation
area which, whilst relatively modest in terms of the cost to the Exchequer, would nevertheless
provide a significant motivational and financial incentive to clubs. These changes which I would
like you to consider are concerned firstly with the availability of tax allowances on the capital
spending which would be required and secondly a reduction in Pools betting tax.

As regards tax allowances on capital spending to install seats in football stadia you will, no
doubt be aware that tax relief, in the form of capital allowances is not generally available unless
the expenditure is on plant and machinery (as interpreted for tax purposes) or is in relation to
work which is necessary under the Safety of Sports Ground Act 1975. There is some doubt as
to whether capital allowances will be available on seating but allowances would certainly not be
available in relation to any cover or roof in order to provide protection for the seated areas
which are going to be installed.


                                                                             ...cont/...
                                         -   1   -
Chancellor of the Exchequer
FAM/MD/JMC/230
21 February 1990

We believe that significant assistance would be provided to clubs by clarifying the tax position
and providing that any capital expenditure incurred as a result of the implementation of Lord
Justice’s Taylor’s recommendation should qualify for tax allowances under the capital
allowances regime. We believe that this could be done quite simply by an appropriate
amendment to Section 49 Finance (No. 2) Act 1975 which currently provides capital allowances
on expenditure which is necessary "for compliance with the terms and conditions of the safety
certificate issued for the sports ground". The amendment would treat expenditure on seating,
roofs and covers incurred as a result of the implementation of the Taylor recommendation as
being expenditure on plant and machinery qualifying for a 25% annual writing down allowance.

The majority of clubs do, of course, run at a loss, and have no liability for corporation tax.
They would not, therefore, benefit from this amendment. Our second proposal would therefore
be to reduce the rate of Pools betting tax from 42.5% to 40%. We would procure a guarantee
from the parties concerned that the whole sum released following a reduction in the Pools
betting tax would go directly towards ground improvements. In the event of a reduction from
42.5% to 40% this would amount to a sum of £17.5m per annum. This would enable us to give
additional assistance to those clubs that would not benefit from writing down allowances.

We are under no illusions about the responsibility which football itself bears for investing its
resources wisely to improve safety and conditions for spectators. In accepting this responsibility
and with the aim of working in partnership with the Government we would ask whether the
Government for its part could assess whether the above changes to fiscal policy would help to
secure in Lord Justice Taylor’s words "better and safe conditions at sports grounds in the
future".

If you would like a meeting we would make ourselves available at any time to discuss the points
raised in this letter. In the meantime, we would ask you to give serious consideration to
incorporating these changes in your forthcoming budget.

Yours sincerely,




F A Millichip
Chairman
