                                         2-4 Cockspur Street
                                        London SW1Y 5DH
                                      Telephone: 071-211 6238
                                       Facsimile: 071-211 6249
                            From the Secretary o f State fo r N ational Heritage
                                 The Rt. Hon. Stephen Dorrell MP




Our ref: C94/4415/8284
Your ref: CE/AA/LF

Peter Bounds Esq
Chief Executive
The City of Liverpool
PO Box 88
Municipal Buildings
Dale Street
Liverpool
L69 2DH                                                                            13 September 1994




As you know, a copy of your letter of 28 June to the Home Secretary, and Mr Hudson's reply
of 25 July, have been sent to me in view of my Department's responsibility for safety of sports
grounds matters.

I can well understand your concern. The whole Government was greatly saddened by the
tragedy at Hillsborough. This is why we have tried to ensure that the circumstances which
caused it should be fully and openly investigated. A t least four investigations of the events have
been undertaken to ensure that all the relevant issues were properly covered.

The first of these was, of course, the formal inquiry by Lord Justice Taylor, which was
commissioned by the Home Secretary on the second day after the disaster. The Taylor Inquiry
involved some 440 officers from the West Midlands Police Force. They took some 3,776
statements as well as using video films from three separate sources which provided, in all, some
7 1hours of further material. This vast store of evidence was carefully sifted, and I think it is fair
to say that Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report gives a very clear picture of events on the day.




                                                      I
 The inquest into the deaths at Hillsborough constituted a second inquiry into these events. The
 inquiry took over 100 days to examine all the material facts, and to determine the identities of
 the deceased and how, when and where they met their deaths.

 In a third inquiry, which followed up their work for Lord Justice Taylor, the West Midlands
 Police Force conducted a further major investigation with a view to discovering whether the
 disaster resulted from, or was made worse by, criminal activity on the part of any individual. The
 Director of Public Prosecutions concluded that the results did not indicate that anyone should
 be made the subject of criminal proceedings.

 The fourth investigation covered complaints which were made regarding Police behaviour. This
 investigation involved the taking of a further 5,341 statements as well as the scrutiny of all the
 material which had previously been examined. It was supervised throughout by the Police
 Complaints Authority. The Authority subsequently announced that it was satisfied that the
 inquiry had been properly and thoroughly conducted.

 I understand that you have already approached the Attorney General following the 'Cook
 Report', since the programme contained serious allegations about the conduct of the Coroner's
 Inquest. I also understand that the Attorney General has made it clear that he would consider
 a renewed application for a further investigation by the Coroner only if this was supported by
 significant cogent and fresh evidence in proper form. However, the Attorney General is not
 satisfied that the material presented to the City of Liverpool Council as described in paragraph
 A of the minutes constitutes such fresh evidence.

 Taking account of all the previous enquiries, and of the response you have already received
 fromthe Attorney General, I do not consider that there is any action which I can properly take
 in this matter, and consequently 1am afraid I do not think a meeting would serve any useful
 purpose.




 STEPH EN DORRELL
SECRETARY OF STATE
PEPARTMENT OF
NATIQNAU HERITAGE
                                     '/'/      V
                      The City of Liverpool
                      Chief Executive
                      Peter Bounds
                      PO Box 88, Municipal Buildings, Dale Street, Liverpool L69 2D H.
                      Tel: 051 -2 2 5 2 3 3 4 /5 Fax: 051 -22 5 2924




                                                                               i         ;
Our Ref:   CE/AA/LF
Date:      28 June 1994
                                                                                   ~ 6 JUL 19.94




Rt. Hon Michael Howard Q.C.          M.P.
Home Secretary
50 Queen Anne Gate
London
SW1H 9AT




Dear Mr. Howard,

Re:   Hillsborough Disasters^         /
                                'V"*

I understand that many local M.P.s have written to you in relation
to a recent television documentary "The Cook Report" concerning
the Hillsborough disaster. As a result of that programme an
extraordinary meeting of the City Council was held on 24th June.
I enclose for your consideration a copy of the minutes of that
meeting.   In particular, I would draw your attention to paragraph
Al and paragraph C of the Motion detailed therein.

In accordance with the terms of the Motion which was carried
unanimously, I would request that a cross party delegation of City
Councillors with the support of Merseyside M.P.s meet with you in
order to press the Council's case for an independent inquiry. It
would be of great benefit to all concerned if the meeting could be
held within the next seven days.

I look forward to hearing from you in respect of a suitable date
for the meeting as a matter or urgency.


Yours sincerely,




CHIEF EXECUTIVE
                                                                                                 2.'?/'?




                                                              From: D B Webb
                                                                    SARD

                                                              Extn: 6084
                              SECRETARY OF STATE
                               DEPT. OF NATIONAL
                                        HUT/                  Copy: PS/Mr Sproat
                                                                    PS/Mr Phillips
                                 - 6 SEP 1994                       Mr Ramsay
                               FILING   INSTRUCTIONS                Ms MacLean
                              FILE No    ___........_____
                                                                    Mr Jones
                                                                    Mr Newsom

                                                              Date: 5 September 1994


1.      Mi^Stewart,

2.      Secretary of State,


HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER: CORRESPONDENCE FROM UVBIPOOL CITY
COUNCIL


Issue

 1.     On 28 June, Mr Peter Bounds, the Chief Executive of Liverpool City Council, wrote
to the Home Secretary (flag A) asking him to meet a cross party delegation of Councillors
and Liverpool MPs who are pressing for a further Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium
disaster following an edition of 'The Cook Report'. Mr Bounds' letter and the reply sent by
the Home Secretary's Private Secretary (flag B) have been passed to DNH to consider.
                                                                         leXr<u   ,J   ^

Background                                                  j)o > lc o                 ^

2.     As you know, the Hillsborough Stadium disaster on 15 April 1989 resulted in the
deaths of 96 Liverpool supporters and over 400 injuries. Since then, four investigations have
taken place in order to establish the causes and cover all the relevant issues:

        (a)    the formal Inquiry by Lord Justice Taylor into the causes of thedisaster;

        (b)    the Coroners' inquest on the deaths;

        (c)    an investigation by West Midlands Police Force with a view to discovering
                whether the disaster resulted from, or was exacerbated by criminal activity on
                the part of any individual;

        (d)    an investigation by the Police Complaints Authority into Police behaviour on
               the day.
3.    However, there have been a number of attempts in the High Court by relatives of the
deceased to re-open various aspects of the Inquiry. All have been unsuccessful, on the
grounds that no fresh evidence has been forthcoming.

4.      Mr Bounds' letter has been prompted by an edition of 'The Cook Report', broadcast
in June, which alleged that the time of death fixed by the Coroner was wrong, and that some
witness statements were altered under police pressure to conform to the agreed time of
death.

5.     A t flag C is copy of the Home Office submission to Ministers, which sets out the
background in full (and also deals with representations from Joe Benton MP on behalf of one
of the Hillsborough families, which also followed the 'Cook Report' allegations). You will see
from paragraphs 8 and 9 that Liverpool City Council has already sought to reopen the


                                                                                                1„
Coroners' inquest. However, the Attorney General has informed the Council that there is
no basis for a further application to the High Court for this. A copy of the A ttorney/"
General's reply to Mr Bounds is attached at flag D.                                            _
                                                                                                          i) j
6.       It now appears that Liverpool City Council wishes to seek a further public enquiry,
Since the safety of sports grounds legislation is now the responsibility of this Department, it^ .
falls to you to decide whether or not to grant this request.

                                                                                                     l—
Recommendation                                                                             ,j

7.     We recommend that you do not agree to a further public enquiry. The terms of
reference given to Lord Justice Taylor were 'to inquire into the events at Sheffield
Wednesday Football Ground on 15 April 1989 and to make recommendations about the
needs of crowd control and safety at sports events'. The matters raised in the 'Cook Report'
and subsequently by Liverpool City Council relate to the Coroners' Inquest You may
consider that since this aspect has been covered fully in the Home Office letter and the
Attorney General's response, there are no grounds for a meeting with Liverpool City Council
or for a further publice inquiry. A draft reply which you may wish to send to Mr Bounds is
attached.




                                                                            D B WEBB
P Bounds Esq
Chief Executive
The City of Liverpool
PO Box 88                                           H i s -
Municipal Buildings
Dale Street
Liverpool
L69 2DH                                                                      September 1994




As you know, a copy of your letter of 28 June to the Home Secretary, and Mr Hudson's reply
of 25 July have been sent to me in view of my Department's responsibility for safety of sports
grounds matters.


I can well understand your concern. The whole Government was greatly saddened by the
tragedy at Hillsborough. This is why we have tried to ensure that the circumstances which
caused it should be fully and openly investigated. A t least four investigations of the events
have been undertaken to ensure that all the relevant issues were properly covered.


The first of these was, of course, the formal inquiry by Lord Justice Taylor, which was
commissioned by the Home Secretary on the second day after the disaster. The Taylor
Inquiry involved some 440 officers from the West Midlands Police Force. They took some
3,776 statements as well as using video films from three separate sources which provided, in
all, some 7 1 hours of further material. This vast store of evidence was carefully sifted, and
I think it is fair to say that Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report gives a very clear picture of
events on the day.


The inquest into the deaths at Hillsborough constituted a second inquiry into these events.
The inquiry took over 100 days to examine all the material facts, and to determine the
identities of the deceased and how, when and where they met their deaths.


In a third inquiry, which followed up their work for Lord Justice Taylor, the West Midlands
Police Force conducted a further major investigation with a view to discovering whether the
disaster resulted from, or was made worse by, criminal activity on the part of any indiviadual.
The Director of Public Prosecutions concluded that the results did not indicate that anyone
should be made the subject of criminal proceedings.


The fourth investigation covered complaints which were made regarding Police behaviour.
This investigation involved the taking of a further 5,341 statements as well as the scrutiny of
all the material which had previously been examined. It was supervised throughout by the
Police Complaints Authority. The Authority subsequently announced that it was satisfied that
the inquiry had been properly and thoroughly conducted.


I understand that you have already approached the Attorney General following the 'Cook
Report', since the programme contained serious allegations about the conduct of the
Coroner's Inquest. I also understand that the Attorney General has made it clear that he
would consider a renewed application for a further investigation by the Coroner only if this
was supported by significant cogent and fresh evidence in proper form.          However, the
Attorney General is not satisfied that the material presented to the City of Liverpool Council
as described in paragraph A of the minutes constitutes such fresh evidence.


Taking account of all the previous enquiries, and of the response you have already received
fromthe Attorney General, I do not consider that there is any action which I can properly
take in this matter, and consequently I ,do not think a meeting would serve any useful
purpose.



                                                      I     I




STB’HBsl DORRB.L
                         C IT Y   O F L IV E R P O O L




                           24th June,         1994



     At an Extraordinary Meeting of the City Council held

on 24th June,   1994 at 3.00 p.m.      in the Town Hall.




al/cttee/cc/finalmin/Z24 0694
                                                       24th June,    1994

                                     - 47 -

*P                              PRESENT

                            THE LORD MAYOR
                      (Councillor Roger Johnston)

      COUNCILLORS: Alderson, Allen, Anderson, Bann, Ben-Tovim,
      Vera Best, Bolland, Dawn Booth, Bostock, Brennan,   Bullock,
      Cardwell, Carrick, Chinn, M.B.E., Margaret Clarke,   Janet
      Clein, Paul Clein, Flora Clucas, Concepcion, Rosemary
      Cooper, Coventry, Coyne, Curtis, Dean, Eileen Devaney, Joe
      Devaney, Downham, Ellison, Marilyn Fielding, Fitzsimmons,
      Beatrice Fraenkel, Dorothy Gavin, Gibbons,     Hackett,
      Hanratty, Ian Harvey, Phillip Harvey, Herrity,
      Ann Hines, Mary Johnston, Lady Doreen Jones, Ann Keenan,
      Kenny, Frances Kidd, Knibb, Joan Lang, Joe Lang,
      Petrona Lashley, Livingston, Jacqueline McCarthy, McCauley,
      Marie McGiveron, Pauline McKibbin, Millea, Murphy, Nelson,
      Sarah Norman, Owen, Phillips, Prendergast, Quinn, Radford,
      R ichard Roberts, Scott, Smith, Spriggs, Stanley, Stewart,
      Storey, O.B.E., Elizabeth Thomas, Tyrer, and Woodruff.



*N    Apologies for absence were submitted from Councillors
      J. Backhouse, E.M. Clein, C. Curry, Julie Gosling,
      Theresa Griffin, Cathy Hancox, R. Kemp, L. Hughes, Elaine
      Kinahan, R. Lancaster, Erica Plant, H. Rimmer C.B.E. and
      P. Tyrrell.



                         COUNCIL MINUTES

      The minutes of the Annual Meeting of the City Council held
      on the 17th May, 1994 were submitted and signed by the Lord
      Mayor.

                         HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

      By permission of the Council Ms. Sheila Colman, a
      researcher who has worked extensively with families
      affected by the Hillsborough tragedy and Phil Hammond,
      Secretary of the Hillsborough Families Support Group
      addressed the meeting.



       Moti on by Councillor J. Spriggs,
             seconded by Councillor Peter Millea,




     al/cttee/cc/finalmin/Z24 0694
24th June,   1994

                                - 48 -

  That -

  (A) In view of the disturbing evidence first disclosed by
      the Hillsborough Disaster Working Party in February
      1992 and referred to in the "Cook Report" Television
      Programme broadcast on Independent Television on 2nd
      June, 1994, concerning the circumstances surrounding
      the deaths of several of the victims of the
      Hillsborough disaster, and particularly in relation to
      the death there of Kevin Williams this City Council -

      (1) Demands that the Attorney General Orders a fresh
          and scrupulously independent inquiry to investigate
          this evidence and related matters as soon as
          possible;

      (2) Calls on:-

               (i) The City's M.P.'s in particular;

             (ii)   Any other M.P.'s whose constituents were
                    directly affected by this disaster;

             (i i i ) The Home Affairs Spokespersons of the Labour
                      and Liberal Democrat Parties; and

              (iv) The Association of Metropolitan Authorities;

             to fully support this demand.

       (3) Calls on the Trustees of the Hillsborough Disaster
           Trust Fund, which was set up by the City Council,
           to meet with the Chair and Opposition Spokesperson
           of the Hillsborough Disaster Working Party to
           investigate the possibility of those funds
           remaining in the Trust Fund being used to help
           finance the fight of the victims families to
           establish the truth of exactly what did happen at
           Hillsborough on April 15th 1989; and

   (B) This Council deplores recent news coverage in the
       United States, and in particular the Broadcast by CBS
       News on 31st May, 1994, which in reporting on
       preparations for the World Cup, has implied that the
       Hillsborough Disaster was caused by Hooligan behaviour.

  Am endment by Councillor G. Knibb,
       duly seconded,

  That the Motion be varied by the addition of the following
  p a r ag ra ph :-

       (C) A cross party delegation lobby Westminster with the
           support of Merseyside M.P.'s to meet with the
           Attorney General and the Home Secretary to press
           for an inquiry.


al/cttee/cc/finalmin/Z24 0694
                                                  24th June,   1994

                                - 49 -



 During the course of the debate the Amendment was accepted
 and became the Substantive Motion.

 The Substantive Motion was carried unanimously and it was
 resolved accordingly.


 The Council then rose.




al/cttee/cc/finalmin/Z24 0694
                           From : T h e P rivate S e c r e t a r y



                                                                            H   om e   O f f ic e
                                                                           QUEpN ANNE’S GATE
                                                                           LONDON SW1H 9AT

                                                                                 25 JUL 1994




The Home Secretary has asked me to thank you for your letter of 28 June
requesting a meeting with him following a recent "Cook Report" concerning the
Hillsborough disaster. I understand that you wrote in similar terms to the
Attorney General and that you have received a reply from his Private Secretary
on 7 July.

As I understand it, the concern of the programme related to the allegations
that some witness statements were altered under police pressure to conform to
the agreed time of death.    As far as this issue is concerned, should the
families of those who lost their relatives at Hillsborough have new evidence
of police misdemeanors they should be reported, in the first instance, to the
Chief Officer of the relevant force under Part IX of the Police and Criminal
Evidence Act 1984.

The Attorney General's Private Secretary has explained the Attorney General's
position in relation to this matter and there is nothing the Home Secretary
can add to this since it is purely a matter for the Attorney General to decide
whether an application should be made to the High Court for a fresh inquest
to be held.

There has, as you know,      already been an independent inquiry into the
Hillsborough disaster. The Lord Chief Justice, as he is now, was appointed
by the then Home Secretary to undertake this inquiry because at the time of
Hillsborough the Home Office had responsibility for safety at sports grounds.
However, responsibility for this matter now rests with the Department of
National Heritage and any decision to re-open the Inquiry would be a matter
for them to consider. I have therefore passed your letter to that Department.

In these circumstances, the Home Secretary has asked me say that he does not
think a meeting with a delegation of city councillors in relation to
Hillsborough would serve any useful purpose.




                                                          c   C R HUDSON




 Peter Bounds Esq
 Chief Executive
 The City of Liverpool
 PO Box 88
 Municipal Buildings
 Dale Street
 Liverpool L69 2DH
A-
 14 JUL '94 16:54 HOME OFFICE -F8- 071 273 4284                                .3/23




           From: Mrs B H Fair
                 F8 Division                           cc   Mies Smith
                 ext 3314                                   Mr Burns
                 14 July 1994                               Mr Warnc
                                                            Mr Clayton o/a
                                                            Ms Flaschner
                                                            Mr Moorey
                                                            Mr Rock
                                                            Mr Cameron

           1.    Mrs Eollov


           2.    Hr Hu dson


          Correspondence from kk joe bentqn       kb



           issue


          Whether the Home Secretary should agree to meet Mr Benton and his
          constitue tits, Mr and Mrs Church, who lost their son during the
          Hillsboro igh Disaster. A copy of Mr Benton's letter is attached
          at Annex A for convenience. Also attached, at Annex B, is a
          letter fr on) Liverpool city Council which similarly requests a
          meeting w Lth the Home Secretary (and the Attorney General) . Wc
          understand1 that this latter correspondence was transferred to the
          Departmeni: of Heritage to consider, but we think it appropriate
          for a Pri\tate Secretary reply to go to the Chief Executive of the
          Council ^plaining Why this was so.


          l i j sln g

          2. Ho dea< 1line as such, but it would seem appropriate to reply
          as soon a$ possible.


          Summary


          3. Mr Be rton has requested the meeting to discuss difficulties
          which hie constituents have faced in seeking answers to questions
          about, the r son Gary's death during the Hillsborough Disaster.
          The Liverjb>ool City Council ask for a meeting to press the case
          tor an ind.apendent inquiry. Both letters refer to matters raised
          in a rece:rit "Cook Report" concerning the Hillsborough disaster,
          The Home secretary no longer has responsibilities which are
          relevant to " what appear to be the areas of concern.
14 JUL '94 16=54 HOME OFFICE -F8- 071 273 4284                               P.4/23




          Recomroeiru at,inn

          4. That the Hone Secretary should not agree to meet Kr Benton
          and Mr 3jnd Mrs Church nor representatives of Liverpool City
          Council for the reasons given in the draft replies at Annexes c
          and D.


          gonsideri tion


         S. The comcerns raised by the “Cook Report" programme related to
         the tine of death fixed by the coroner and to allegations that
         some witness statements were altered under police pressure to
         conform t»> the agreed time of death. The Report alleged that the
         Coroner    esponsible for the inquest into the deaths in- the
         Hillsboro ugh disaster fixed the time o f death in the face of
         evidence to the contrary, at least as far as some victims were
         concerned     It was also alleged that West Midlands Police put
         some pre: ure on witnesses to alter their statements to conform
         to the t e of death set by the Coroner.

         6. From t inquiries which have been made, we understand that there
         have been no complaints by the Church family against the South
         Yorkshire Police (whose responsibility it was for policing the
         match     .t day) nor against the West Midlands Police (who
         investiga1 ted Hillsborough).
         7.   We vuji<derstand that a number of parents of those who lost
         their ii4 es during the disaster have written to the Attorney
         General (ps is required) asking him to authorise an application
         to the H gh court under section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988
         seeking a direction that there should be a fresh inquest.        We
         understan i that the Attorney General declined an application by
         several o f the families (none of which was the church family)
         of the < eased becausc he concluded that an application to the
         High Courf would have no reasonable prospect of establishing that
         it was ne oessary or desirable in the interests of justice for a
         fresh inqijniest to be held, since the Attorney General's decision,
         there ha\ e been proceedings in the Divisional Court on an
         applicatiu n for judicial review in relation to the inquest. The
         Divisional Court took the 3ame view as the Attorney General on
         the centr.i 1 issues and refused the application.

         8 . Folio* m g the "cook Report" there have been renewed attempts
         by Liverp^'Ol MPs to seek a fresh inquest. However, the Attorney
         General    ik informed them that there ie no basis for a further
         applicatiA:n to the High Court for this. We are informed that in
         some cases it has not always been clear whether the MPa were also
         raising t le possibility of a further public inquiry.       It is
         clear, however, from the correspondence from Liverpool County
         council, T:hat they do wish to press for such an inquiry.
         9. 'X'hougi1 the Home Secretary is responsible for coroner's law,
         they are independent judicial officers over whom the Home
         Secretary has no authority. As for the allegations against the
14 JUL '94 16:55 HOME OFFICE -F8- 071 273 4284                                .5/23




         policc wh ich were contained in the Cook Report, the Church family
         should     in the first instance, make a complaint, to the Chief
         Officer \pder Part IX of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act.
         Tf it is the case, that a further public inquiry is What Mr
         Benton and Liverpool, city council seek, then this would be a
         matter fa>r the Secretary of Sate for National Heritage to
         consider since he now has responsibility for safety at sports
         grounds,    (At the time of the Hillsborough disaster this was a
         matter fo r the Howe office and it was for this reason that Lord
         Justice 'faylor was appointed by the then Horae Secretary to
         conduct h is Inquiry. His terns of reference were "To inquire
         into the events at Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground.        and
         to make uecommendations about the needs of crowd control and
         safety at sports events.")

         10. 'rherfe is accordingly no case for the Home Secretary to meet
         either Mr Benton »nd his constituents or Liverpool city Council.



         H a n d lin g


         11.     Ther i arc no special handling issues.




                                                  Mrs B H FAIR
14 JUL '94 16:55 HOME OFFICE -F8- 071 273 4284                                                 P.6/23




                                                                           Annex C


         DRAFT LEVTBR TO MR OTOE BENTOS KP FOR THE HOME SECRETARY' S
         SIGNATURE




         joe Bentofi Esq, JP, HP
         House of lommons
         London swlA QAA




         Thank      yo\i   for   your   letter    of   27   June    on   behalf    of   your
         constituents Mr and Mrs church who lost their son during the
         Hillsborough tragedy. You asked for a meeting to discuss the
         difficulties which have been faced by your constituents in
         getting answers to questions surrounding Che tragic death of
         their son         You did not say what these difficulties have been.


         You also referred to a recent "Cook Report" which dealt with
         events surrounding Hillsborough.              As I understand it, the concern
         of   the    programme     related   to    allegations      that    some     witness
         statement:; were altered under police pressure to conform to the
         agreed tine of death. Should Mr and Mrs Church have a complaint
         to malce concerning police behaviour in this respect, it should
         be made,      in the first instance,           to the Chief officer of the
         relevant ijorce under Part IX of the Police and Criminal Evidence
         Act 1984.


        Although       |I am responsible         for   coroner's    law,    coroners    are
         independert judicial officers and Home office Ministers have no
         power to interfere in their decisions.              The Attorney General has
        power under section X3 of the Coroners Act 1988 to authorise an
        applicati.cn to the High Court seeking a fresh inquest but I am
        aware that the Attorney General has declined such applications
        because he concluded that they would have no reasonable prospect
        of    establishing       that   it was     necessary   or    desirable       in the
        interests o f justice for a fresh inquest, to be held. I am further
        aware that! a number of Liverpool MPs have been in touch with the
14 JUL '94 16:55 HOME OFFICE -F8- 071 273 4284                                .7/23



         Attorney General aslcing him to reconsider his decision and that
         he has i.indicated that he remains of the view that there is no
         basis for such an application to the High court,    I understand
         that tile Divisional Court, in considering an application for
         judicial review relating to the inquest, took the same view as
         the Atto;rnley.


         There has as you know, already been an independent inquiry into
         the Hills:borough disaster- Lord Justice Taylor, as he is now,
         was appointed by the then Home Secretary to undertake this
         inquiry because at the time of Hillsborough, the Home Office had
         responsib L *ity tor eafety at sports grounds.            However,
         responsib L■lifcy
                    .      tor this matter now rests with the Department of
         National Heritage and any decision to re-open the Inquiry would
         now be a natter for them to consider.

         I apprecic te the depth of feeling of those like Mr and Mrs Church
         who so tre i
                    gically lost members of their family at Hillsborough,
         I can only express my sincere condolences to them. I am afraid,
         however, tpiat for the reasons given above, there is no action
         which I Cc n properly take in this matter and consequently I do
         hot think a meeting would serve any useful purpose.
14 JUL '94 16=56 HOME OFFICE -F8- 071 273 4284                                 P.8/23




                                                                  Annex D
          DRAFT L E!ir;
                      ?BR TO CHIEF EXECUTIVE OF LIVERPOOL CITY COUNCIL FOR
          PRIVATE tECRETAR* SIGNATURE



         The Homo Secretary has asked me to thank you for your letter of
         28 June 2 equesting a meeting with him following a recent "Cook
         Report" coi•noeming the Hillsborough disaster- I understand that
         you wrote in similar terms to the Attorney General and that you
         have reee ived a reply from his Private Secretary on 7 July.


         As I unde;:r£tand it, the concern of the programme related to the
         allegatio1is that some witness statements were altered under
         police      ssure to conform to the agreed time of death. As far
         as this idsue is concerned, should the families of those who lost
         their rel ativcs at Hillsborough have new evidence of police
         misdentean'tors they should be reported, in the first instance, to
         the Chief Officer of the relevant force under Part IX of the
         Polico and Criminal Evidence Act 1984.


         The  Attor hey General's Private Secretary has explained the
         Attorney Ceneral's position in relation to this matter and there
         is nothing the Home Secretary can add to this since it is purely
         a matter for the Attorney General to decide whether an
         applicatie;n should be made to the High Court for a fresh inguest
         to be held


        There has, as you know, already been an independent inquiry into
        the Hills b>:trough disaster- Lord Justice Taylor, as he is now, was
        appointed by the then Home Secretary to undertake this inquiry
        because   a - the time of Hillsborough the Home Office had
        responsibi lity for safety at sports grounds.           However,
        responeibi Lity for this matter now rests with the Department of
        National H aritage and any decision to re-open the Inquiry would
        now be a m otter for thejn to consider. I have therefore passed
        your lette      to that Department.
14 JUL '94 16=56 HOME OFFICE -F8- 071 273 4284                                .9/23



         In -these circumstances, the Home Secretary has asked jne say that
         he does n:at think a meeting with a delegation of city councillors
         in relati on to Hillsborough would serve any useful purpose.
14 JUL '94 16:56 HOME OFFICE -F8- 071 273 4284                                                                      P.10/23
                                                                           <r<t      "S.

                                           JOE BENTON, j.i\, m*                                    29 m
                    L< tBOUR MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT, BOOTLE CONSTITUENCY
                                         PersonalAssistant: Mrs. Ann McCartney
                                               Agent: Kevin K. Ctuskey
               Londoi Office:                                                  Constituency Office;
               House*ifCotmnons,                                               2-*a,OXFORD ROAD,
              Louden,                                                          (entrance via Worcester Road)
               SW1A JAA.                                                       BOOTLE, L20 9HJ.
              Tel:0712196973                                                   Tel;051933 8432
              Fax:071219 3*95                                                  Fax:051 933 4746

              Rc£     rB/AMC/0067/1.9                                                                 Cc.

                                                                                l^^oiLoQc (*i
                                                                                                            ttv ,
                                                                                        u                   T tH ^
              Rt* non. Michael Howard Q.C., M.P.
              The Secretary of State,                                                    2s\(fi
              Tha Home Office/
              SO t (lueen Anne's Gate,                                                                      (U flJ c
              London.                                                                                       tLc
              SH1H SAT

              27 Jine 1994.
              Dear Home Secretary,

              Mr. S Mrs.             Church,
              Liver pool

              My cicnscltuents named above tragically lost their
              son      Gary   Christopher    Church,   through   the
              Hillsiporough disaster.     Since then, they have been
              tryin 3 to pursue some form of justice through the
              legal system but without success. By justice/ I
              mean answers to questions that would bring forth
              the reasons for Gary's death and identify the
              cause     and negligence if any/ which brought about
              his d i duh •

             My cc nstituents are honourable and worthy people
             genuiplely seeking answers as anyone worthy of the
             name parent would seek to do.

             Withou t    going into any detail at this      stage
             conceT nxng the frustrations, prevarications and
             lack of cooperation they and I have experienced
             from /arious members of the legal fraternity in so
             many fliferent ways, 1 am asking you to consider a
             reque / which I now formally make to you, namely
             to gr »nt a meeting with myself, nr. & nr s. Church
             and their chaplain and spiritual adviser/ the
             Rever« nd Ray Hutchinson of.Christ Church « St- Mary
             in Wa tjerloo, Mecseyslde.

                                                  Continued over / .....




$   a   >                                           Kfprzssnting:. -
                    O vrch, Derby, Ford, Lmaa™, IMmriand, Hclhfrton, OnxU and Si. Oswald x Wants
• 14 JUL '94 16:57 HOME OFFICE -F8- 071 273 4284                       P.11/23




               Conti nued /


               Reverend Ray Hutchinson of Christ Church &   St* Mary
               in Waterloo, Merseyside.

               This ^ request has not just been prompted by
               television’s recent edition of the Cook Report/ but
               obvio asly that programme does bring many new
               questions requiring answers to the surface.
               The H Istory and details behind that which Mr. &
               Mrs. -hurch have had to endure are very lengthy, so
               much so, I felt it more appropriate to ask for this
               meeti^vtg so as you may hear at first hand the
               dread ul manner in which my constituents have been
               treatyd.

               I do hope in an attempt to seek Christian justice
               you w: 11 give my request favourable consideration.

               In co nelusion, I take this opportunity to mention I
               ■shaTT'be'Tabllng an'Kafl^Day'MoTIoHi'n the Commons"
               oalli ig upon you to initiate a Judicial Review in
               the 1 ighc of recent events which do have further
               beariiigs on the Hillsborough disaster.

               EDM : This House, in the light of the recent TV
               editiei:n of the Cook Report and the increasing
               concex ns and consternation of the relatives of the
               victin)s of the tragic Hillsborough disaster calls
               upon     the Rt.   Hon.  Home Secretary to order
               immedi atcly a Judicial Review into all aspects of
               the cljwaster including recent events which have now
               emerg ed through the said Cook Report programme.

               Z look forward to your response.




                      incerely,


              J <U Be uton, a.p.,   M.P.,
              Bootle
14 JUL '94 16=57 HOME OFFJCE -F8- 071 273 428fPJWR.                             071 211 6143                p .12/23


                                                                                          s           P h > '/\h
                                                                                        ' 'LA
                                  The CityofLiverpool
                                  B B E B B B sn
                                  Ptftrltom ds

                                  PO Do* 88, Municipal Buildings, Dale Street, ijverpoM LS9 3 0 H.
                                  Tel:051-2252334/5 Far 051-2252924




          Our Bef: CB/AA/LF
          Date;    28 June 19S4

                                                              *£7
                                                                  n/^ALLY
                                                                       J ljt 1394
                                                                                                     s iUL IS94
                                                                                                               ■■u se


                                                                                                      'Nsrwiic-noivs



          Rt. Hon ijlichael Howard Q .C .        m.P.
          Home Seci'etary
          50 Queen Anne Gate
          London
          SW1E 9A1

                                                                                   M u$



          Dear Mr. Howard,

          Re:   Hillsborough Disasters           /
                                            \r
          I underst and that many local M.P.s have written to ^ou in relation
          to a r4cent television documentary "The Cook Repiirt'1 concerning
         the Hillssjborough disaster. As a result of that programme an
         extraordi, nary meeting of the City Council was held on 24th June.
         X ertcios* f o x your consideration a copy of the minutes of that
         n e ttin g . In particular, 1 would draw your attention to paragraph
         A.! and pa ragraph C of the Motion detailed therein.
         In accorciJance with the terms of the Motion which w<as carried
         unanimous iy, I would request Lhat a cross party delegation of City
         Counci11o rs with the support of Merseyside M.P.s me«:t with you in
         oxdec to press the Council's case for an independent inquiry. It
         would be of great benefit to all concerned if Lhe meeting could be
         held with in the next seven days.

         I look forward to hearing from you in respect of * suitable date
         for the meeting as a matter oi urgency.

         Youjtc ainserely,




         CHISF EXEl !UTIVE
' 14 JUL '94 16:58 HOME OFFICE -F8- 071 273 4284> DMil           PI71   211 £143   P.13/23




          *H



                                       Ct'HX OF IdlVKRPOOL


                                         2 4 th   June,   1994




                tit. an Extraordinary Meeting of the City Council held

          on 24th   Jtin.&t 1994 at 3.00 p.m. in the Town Hall..




         ai/cttoc/cc /fina.litiin//z24 0f)9a
• 14 JUL '94 16=58 HOME OFFICE -F8- 071 273 4284' W H                     0?1 21). eid«i      14/23



                                                                            24th Juno, 1994

                                                  47 -

   *p                                        PRESENT

                                      THE LORD MAYOR
                                (Councillor Roger JobnsLou)

            coimciLL<p:iRS; Alderson, Alien, Anderson, Bann, Ben­'J'oBullock,
                                                                      v im ,
                  Bes     Bolland, Dawn Booth, Bostock, Brennan,
            Ccardwell Carrick, Chinn,               24ar«jar«t. Clarke, Janet
            Clcin, P.i,'ul Clein,   Flor* Ol.ncas, Concepcion,    RoeeRwry
            Coopex, fuventry,      Coyne, Curtic,  Dean,   Eileen  f t n v a t i e y , Joe
            Oevaney, Downham, Ellison, Marilyn fielding* Pitza.'-sanons,
            Beatrice Fr*«nkel, Dorothy Cavin, Gibbons,             Har.VistL,
            Uanratty Ian Harley, Phillip Hxrv^, H e r n t y ,
            Ann Bi-in® s Maxy Juliuston, Lady Doreen Jon^e,
            Kenny, ff*ances
                      e.       Kidd, Knibb, Joan Lang, Joe Lang,
             Petrona Lashley, Livingston, Jacqueline McCarthy, tlcCauley,
                                                                                 Kelson,
             Marie Me Siveron, Pauline McKibbin, Mb-ll&a, Murphy,
                                                                Quinn,
                                                                                   M -nn.
                                                                              Radford,
             Sarah Ho trKnan, Ow«rt, Phillips. Prendergast/
             Richard Roberts, Scott, Siaith, Springs, Stanley, Stewart,
             Storey, D.B.E., Eliy.Hhet.li Thomas, Tyrcr, and Woodruff-


             Apoloyic     ior absence were subnu I.I.hc] from Councillors
             j . BaeJeh ous«, E.M. Clein, C. Curry, Julie GoeXing,
             Theresa Griffin, C a t h y Rancox, S- Komp, L. HuCfhes, Elaine
             Kinahan, B,. Lancaster, Erica Plant, H. Rimmer C.B.i- ana
             P * Tyrr ell.


                                     COUNCIL MINUTES

             The mini tes of the Annual Meeting of the r.it.y Council
             on the 7th May, 1994 were Ktihmi ttftd and signed by the Lord
             Mayor.
                                     HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

             By p ® m .j.ssion of the Couucii Ms. Sheila^Colman, a
                      her who has worked extensively with families
             a±tcctc£L by thft Hillsborough tragedy and Phil Ha»i:ond,
             SAfirfita ■y uf the Hillsborough Families Support Grcup
             address :d the malting.



             Mot ion j y Councillor J. Spring*,
                     ;«nded by Councillor Peter Millea,




           al/cttee/=c/finalmin/324 0694
                                                                                                          MMIlhlK
* 14 JUL '94 16 =58 HOME OFFICE -F8- 071 273 4284’ PXB                               071   2 1 I 0140   P.15/23




         24th June,        1994

                                                    - 48

           That *
            IAJ   I n v i e w of tl>* diaturbift-J •v i ? ? n c * „ fif-8 L -d i p S ? * . I r v by
            W     S e JiU.b««sh                          Horkxn, forty “ t« * £ g n
                                           i S U S S t & * « * » > « * -
                  jS S !M ,    con==,..in, the cir?u m s t » c . s
                  the deaLlis ci£ several of the v £';       ? . relation to
                  Hilliiborough d i s a s t e r , ana p a r t i c u l a r Y mnn^il —
                  S i Tellh there of Kevi n W i l l i e Uu.« C i t y t o u n o v l

                   <1>    Dema nds that the At torne y G e n e r a l O r d e r s
                   (       m d scrupu lousl y independent i n q u i r y t o in ves t i g a t e
                           ;his eviden ce and related m a r t y r s as s o o n as
                           possible?

                           > l ls on:~
                    I*)
                             (1) The City'3 M.P-'s in particular?

                           (ii)    A n y o t h e r M.P.'s W h o s e constituents           «cre
                                   directly affe^l.ed by this disaster,

                           fiii] The Homa Affairs Spokespersons of the Labour
                                 and Liberal Democrat Parties? aud

                             liv) The Association of Metropolitan faitheritiee;

                           to fully support, this demand.
                         Calls on the Trustees of the BillMWrough
                     (35 Trust Fund, which was set up by the City Council,
                           to meet vi^h the Ch* ir and Opposition Spok^pexson
                           of the Hillsborough Disaster «°xVjng Party to
                           investigate the possibility of those *u^ds
                           remaining in the Trust Fund b e i n g used to he^p
                           finance the fiqht of the victims families to
                           establish the U u t h of exactly what did happen a
                           Hillsborough on April 15th 193S; and

                         s Council deplores rccent news coverage in i;he
                (B) Thi ted States, and in particular the Broadcast; by CD.
                    Uni
                    N<S<*• on 3 1 s t Mf cary , th*
                                                 1 0 5 4 , v h i c h r\ r *PorLj “S ° * h  Lhe
                                                       World Cup, h as i m p l i e d th-*C uae
                    pre
                       .Jlebojccugh D i s a s t e r v « s causort by KooVujan b .th a v io u t
                    Hi.'

                Amendment by Councillor 0. Knibb,
                    du..y
                       -■y seconded.
                Thar th e M otion be v a r i e d by th* a d d i t i o n o f t h e t a l l o w i n g
                paragt•;iph:•*
                      (C Asupport
                            cross narty delegation lobby Westminster with the
                                  of Merseyside m -P-'s to meet witn Cn®
                             Attorney Gejinial and the Home Secretary to pi<*ss
                             for an inquiry.

             al/cfcfc«e/cc/£it<Hliflin/Z24C694
• 14 JUL '94 18:59 HOME OFFICE -F8- 071 273 4284' »NH-        071   ? 1 1 S143      16/23

•      ■;
                                                                2>lth June, 1.994

                                                  -    49


            During i-* h course of the debate the Amendment, was    ccep ted
            and becaai'e the Substantive MnMnn.

            The Subst antive Motion was rat-tied unanimously and it was
            resolved accordingly.


            The Council then rose.




            a.1/rr.r.p.fi/nr. f f ina licin /Z240694
JUL '94 1 7 ' 01 HOME OFFICE -F8- 071 273 4284                          Pi?JL6280593    P. 22/23
tfyj*. W IR U !   H i : A T T O K N S V GENERA         TEL:1)7isma^s                     P, 005




                                                 TUC LEGAL SECRETARIAT TO THE LAW OFFICERS

                                                             ATTORNEY CsfcNfcRAL'S CHAMBERS

                                                                       0 BUCKINGHAM GATE

 cjonwai Mtaiumac n7i-s28 spec                                            LONDON SW IF ftjp
 Dir*** line      071-028        1721



       Peter Bounds Esq.,
       Chief Exccut xve,
       The City of Liverpool,
       P.O.Box 88,
       Municipal Bu ildings,
       Dale Street,
       Liverpool, L69 2DH                                              7 July 1994




      Dear Mr Bounds,

        have been isked by the Attorney General to thank you Tot yqur
      letter of 2 June 1994 and to reply on hie behalf.             He
      recognises the strength o£ feeling of the families who have seen
      so tragically bereaved and once again expresses his sincere
      condol ences :o all of them.

      it must how4•V6.r^ be rccognised that the role of the Attorney
      General iti r lat±on to this tragedy is confined to that provided
      by section 1H of the Coroners Act 198ft.    That provision enables
      an applicatiom to be made to the High Court on specified grounds
      by interested parties seeking thaL the High court direct a fresh
      inguest .   Th>te making of sueh an application must be authorised
      by the At tor ncy General.     The question of any further public
      inquiry is n,<>t a matter for the Attorney General.
     rt w i n     als_ be recalled that there has already been an
     independent xnguiry into the disaster by Sir Peter Taylor (as he
     t h e n was)  now the Lord Chief Justice, who was appointed by the
     Home Secretai ■y-    Any question of a further independent inquiry
     is also a m itter for the Home Secretary.         The relatives of
     several of th* vxctins did tcaJso a formal application to the
     Attorney Gene rax xn 1992 f.or his consent; under .ejection 13 of the
     19Q8 AcL Lo a ri application to the High Court.    That application
     was careful! and sympathyieally considered but the Attorney
     General cone} uded that this was not an appropriate cas« for
     consent.
    The Attorney eneral has mad* 11 clear in tne context of the Cook
    Report that, h ! would consider a renewed application if supported
    by slgnlficac                f^esh evidence in proper form.    But
    at present if seems _ikely that the rcaterial presented to the
    City of Live; pool Council as d«srtibed at paragraph A of the
    minutes, is substantially t h e same <ls that examined in 1992
    Despite tbG |>rees and media reports to the effect that fresh
, .»   . a   i   t   i y* .   ...   « A    4 ■I1,l l   • SI   f . t ' 4 f kU   .   • t, I   * H . • $ /X I* i 4 J   t,i'mv
]>Jl4.JUL '94 17:16 HOME OFFICE -F8- 071 273 4284-“L -                                                                   P. 2/2
r * * * ™ " 1" " 1                    .... .




             evidence is a\■ailable, rioAe has in fact baen presented.
             In these cirnu instances the Attorney Gener&l must 3<SviS® you tiiiit
             there is unlilf:ely to be any further act ior. he car. properly take
             and he cannor. therefore see that a raeeting with a delegation of
             city councillors s in relation to the Hillsborough Disaster would
             be appropriate or serve any useful purpose.
                 Yours sincere:.y.




                 S. J . WOOLfift

                 11/6/04
