Mr Vaughan



FOOTBALL LICENCING AUTHORITY   : POLICY ON ALL-SEATING STADIA


Mr Atkins has seen Mr Baden's minute of 23 November attaching
a copy of the FLA's statement on all-seating stadia.

The Minister agrees that you should indicate to the Home
Office that he is content with the position outlined.




Teresa Vokes
PS/Mr Atkins

26 November 1990
cc: Mr   McDonald
    Mr   Baden
    Mr   Ellingford
    Mr   Snowdon
                                                                S'
                                                             Cj&




                                                                             V
                                                                     T ~

                                                                       2^L*/
                                                                          / kj>
1,
2,           kins



FOOTBALL LICENCING AUTHORITY: POLICY ON ALL-SEATING STADIA


1.   The Minister will have seen today's report in "The Times"
reporting the FLA as having agreed that in sonre circumstances the
all-seating deadline for Division 1 and 2 clubs of 1994-5 could
be put back.    The article also reports the FLA as not having
finalised its policy for Division 3 and 4.      Norman Jacobs has
sinced apologised to ourselves and the Home Office to explain
that the article was based upon information given in confidence
to John Goodbody and that it was his firm intention to put the
FLA decision to     Home Office Ministers and Mr Atkins before
making any press announcement.

2.   The FLA have now produced a statement of their position for
consideration by Mr Atkins and Home Office Ministers (attached).
The Minister's attention is drawn to the following points:

     - The FLA wholly supports the principle of all-seated stadia
       and does not question the reasonableness of the Taylor
       timetable;

     - There may    be exceptional     circumstances  however,    at
       individual grounds where the*f|. are compelling reasons for
       granting some limited dispensation in the timetable.      The
       FLA make clear that thesemay be very .hard to, come,^by;.
                                     /y   IT   /y
3.   We see no reason why 7the position as outlined above should
not be acceptable although/jLt goes further than the relaxation to
the interim timetable announced by Lord Ferrers.   If the Minister
agrees we will report this to the Home Office and the next step
will be to clear with the Home Office a press statement by the
FLA clarifying the position.




A R BADEN
SARD C
P3/165
Extn 0675
23 November 1990



cc   Mr McDonald
     Mr Ellingford
     Mr Snowdon
•Kuri M K t s t K v i m s - i n i r t u i u k h i t / r t u                   i i , L ■.'■, i / / a   iv *ti      i! v , i J       I ,




            football licensing authority

            All-seated stadia
            The Authorit/ well understands its position on seating
            football stadia under the Football Spectators Act 1989,      The
            policy is set by Government, and indeed by its acceptance of the
            Taylor recommendations the policy has already in general been
            set.   It is the role of the Authority to advise and assist
            Government in the detailed implementation of that policy and
            perhaps also on the timing.

            Within this context the Authority has considered the Taylor
            recommendation                     as       to    all-seated    stadia             and      the    Government
            response.               It has examined the issue as a matter of principle and
            endeavoured to weigh all the factors and arguments. It has done
            this not because the Authority had doubts about the validity of
            the move to all-seated stadia but because others have expressed
            doubts and if the Authority is to be the principal agent for
            implementation then it must have thought carefully about the
            issue and all its members should be committed to its achievement.


            At its meeting on 21 November,                                 the Authority concluded this
            examination   of  principle  and   unanimously  accepted  the
            recommendation of Taylor and the view of Government that all­
            seated stadia were, on overall grounds of safety, discouragement
            of hooliganism and the comfort and well-being of spectators, to
            be preferred to stadia that were either wholly or partly
            comprised of standing terraces. It therefore wholly supported
            Government policy on this issue.


            In examining the issue of implementation and in particular the
            timetable, the Authority did not question the reasonableness of
            the deadlines of August 1994 for First and Second Division clubs
            and August 1999 for Third and Fourth Division sides* It had no
            proposals to make to extend these dates.



                                                                                                                               1
in.un rinc jtiwil-lj imriur.Hit/r til




       The Authority was aware that some clubs had already indicated
       that although supporting the principle nevertheless, for one
       reason or another, they expected difficulties in meeting the
       deadlines and that Government Ministers had acknowledged that in
       some cases there could well be real difficulties.            The Authority
       considered this issue in the round {not in relation to specific
      circumstances at individual clubs) and concluded that there was
      no basis for altering the proposed timetable or for considering
      exemptions from the programme at this time.    It took the view
      that all clubs must look to meeting the timetable but that the
      Authority should look at the individual circumstances at each
      club.    It proposed to discuss this with, the Home Office,           it had
      in mind that after consultation with the Horne Office and the
      Department of the Environment to ask each club to state exactly
      how they were meeting the Taylor recommendations and how they
      proposed to meet the all-seated stadia deadline.             If as a result
      of a detailed examination of the circumstances at individual
      grounds, the Authority concluded that in any particular case or
      cases there were compelling reasons for granting some limited
      dispensation, then at that stage the Authority would discuss with
      the Home Office whether and how some flexibility might be
      allowed.


      At present, without any factual evidence it is impossible to
      speculate what these circumstances might be.                The Authority,
      however, wishes the principle to be implemented and the programme
     met    and   will    expect    the   need   for   some   flexibility   to   be
     considered in a limited number of cases. It does not wish to see
     a club forced out of the game (or out of business) by
     difficulties which it has done everything possible to overcome.
     Equally, it will not hesitate to refuse -a licence in a proper
     case.


     It will be seen therefore that although individual statements
     made in The Times article of 23 November are either basically
     true or have some element of truth as regards the Authority's
     position, the wnole tenor or the article fails to record either


                                                                                 2
fKU['I 11Kt jtKVilti irortLIUKH! t/rtu                li,i.j,i..   iu-iw




        the    strong      endorsement   of   the    Authority      for    all-seated
        accommodation or its recognition that avoidance of the general
        rule will be hard to come by.         It is also incorrect in stating
        that if certain planning or contractual arrangements are made the
        Authority will allow flexibility.           That would be a foolish path
        to take.   The Authority concluded that it must consider all
        aspects of a club’s proposal and be satisfied beyond reasonable
        doubt that it was impossible for the club to achieve the
        objective of an all-seated stadium by the due date before it was
        willing to go to the Home Office.

        The Authority is in no doubt about its commitment to all-seated
        accommodation in football stadia.


        Football Licensing Authority
        23 November 1990




                                                                                   3
