h s .8.7/talkfla.peb



FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY

Notes of a talk given by Mr P E Bolton to a Football League
conference at the Albany Hotel, Birmingham on 2 August 1990

Opening remarks: apologies for the absence of Mr Jacobs: answer
the criticisms by the Chairman of the "Bloody Noses" remarks
attributed by the press to Mr Jacobs by saying that they were
taken out of context.

The purpose of the talk is to explain the role of the Football
Licensing Authority. I propose to do that but I would like first
of all to explain something of the Home Office role in the field
of public safety and remind you of the developments which led to
the creation of the Football Licensing Authority because I think
that it will help to put things into context.

My perspective might be slightly different from yours. For you
the response to the Taylor report is a unique problem: but there
is nothing unique in principle about protecting the public from
safety and other emergencies which can occur at those places when
they are gathered together in large numbers.

I am Head of a Division within the Home Office responsible for
a range of public safety issues: not hooliganism which is dealt
with by our Police Department though we work closely with them.

The Home Secretary has always had, apart from his law and order
responsibilities, a wide range of responsibilities for public
safety.   At various times over the last 50 or 60 years my
Division or its predecessors have housed parts of what is now the
Factories Inspectorate; the Consumer Safety Unit of the
Department of Trade and Industry and we have also been involved
in work on the prevention of drowning accidents.

Nowadays we deal mainly 2 areas of work:

     safety from fire, particularly in places where people
     congregate to work, for entertainment or to sleep - such as
     hotels and

     safety in sports grounds.

We are responsible for the Fire Precautions Act 1971, the Safety
of Sports Grounds Act 1975, the Fire Safety and Safety of Places
of Sport Act 1987 and Part I of the Football Spectators Act 1989
which includes the arrangements for setting up the Football
Licensing Authority.

There is a certain similarity between   our work on fire safety and
on safety at sports grounds. In both     cases nearly all the major
steps forward to improve safety, with   a possible exception of the
Fire Precautions Act, have come about   not because of any long and
careful deliberation of the problems but in response to specific
tragedies.

This results in laws which the Fire Service refer to cynically
as tombstone legislation.   However unfortunate that phrase may
be, on the fire side there are a number of particular fires, such
as the Keighley Mill fire, the Henderson's Department Store fire
and more recently the King's Cross fire each of which have led
to specific provisions in legislation to provide fire safety in
those premises.

In fact the latest publication from my Department, which is a
guide to safety in places of entertainment, was itself a direct
response to a fire in the Stardust Disco in Dublin. It replaces
a manual produced by the Home Office on safety in theatres which
was published as long ago as 1934.      I mention this because
coincidentally I was looking at the 1934 manual only yesterday.
Almost inevitably it starts, just like the Taylor Report, with
a catalogue of the tragedies which had occurred in theatres over
the preceding 30 or 40 years.   But even more coincidentally it
was the first national guidance on theatres which specified that
with certain exceptions, the audience should be seated.

The intention of this talk was not to give you a lesson in fire
history but merely to point out that in relation to sports
grounds and football grounds in particular, the Government's
position on safety is not significantly different in principle
from its position in relation to other places to which the public
resort.   Perhaps the impact is greater for you because sports
grounds came under control later in the day. And because they
start from a different base the position is uncomfortable because
more is being expected of you over a relatively short period.

Appendix 4 of the Taylor Report reveals that it was the Home
Office which set up the inquiry into the disturbances at the cup
final in 1923 but for practical purposes we can regard the
current approach to sports ground safety as having its origins
in the Wheatley Report which followed the Ibrox tragedy.     The
Wheatley Report led to the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
which introduced the safety certificate procedure and also the
first edition of the document which has now become known as the
Green Guide on safety of sports grounds.   Both the Act and the
Green Guide are based on the concept of reasonable safety.    No
thinking person believes that       it is possible in these
circumstances to ensure absolute safety.

The Green Guide has been amended on a number of occasions and
both the Guide and the legislation were amended in 1987 to
reflect the conclusions of the Popplewell Inquiry into the
Bradford fire.

Until Hillsborough happened, we were reasonably content that the
package was just about right:      sensible guidance to ensure
reasonable safety and a workable system of local authority
supervision in respect of the larger sports grounds.    Our view
was if the provisions were properly applied, the concept of
reasonable safety would be achieved.
So that before Hillsborough happened in April 1989 the main areas
of Government concern in relation to football grounds was not
safety as such but hooliganism and football related criminal
offences. And before Hillsborough the Football Spectators Bill,
as originally presented to Parliament, was concerned firstly with
controlling entry to particular types of football matches by
means of the Football Membership Scheme and also (in Part II)
arrangements for dealing with those who committed football
related offences.

All I want to say about Hillsborough itself is that it must be
clear to anyone who has read the interim report of the Taylor
Inquiry that the Green Guide was capable of being either
misunderstood or not properly applied and that the safety
certificate procedure could not always be relied on.

The Government's immediate reaction, apart from initiating the
Taylor Inquiry, was to extend the scope of the Football
Spectators Bill to include 3 matters concerned specifically with
safety.

The first of these is what is now section 11 of the Act which
gave the Home Secretary power to direct the Football Licensing
Authority to include in any licence the condition imposing
requirements on the seating of spectators at designated football
matches. Note that it is the Home Secretary and not the Football
Licensing Authority who has this power in the first instance
though he cannot exercise it without consultation with the
Authority.

Second, the Authority was upgraded to the status of a
non-departmental public body, in other words a quango.

Third, the Authority was provided with a power to direct local
authorities in connection with the terms and conditions of safety
certificates. And it was in this form that the Bill was enacted.

You know that Taylor expressed strong reservations about the
national membership scheme and that the Government decided in
January that it would not introduce it. Taylor's view was that
the future lay in the improvement of behaviour by the improvement
of facilities which included in particular the move towards all
seated   accommodation.       The   Government   accepted   these
recommendations and decided that it would create the FLA because
the football licensing scheme provided a means by which Taylor's
recommendations on all seated accommodation could be achieved
and also because Taylor recommended (recommendation 6) that there
should be a national inspectorate and review body, a role which
the Act permitted the FLA to undertake.

It must be said that the decision to proceed in this way caused
some practical problems.      The proposal that the Football
Licensing Authority should be set up to exercise what were only
considered originally as subsidiary powers and not its primary
function was unusual. Our lawyers were not entirely certain that
such a selective use of the Football Spectators Act could
properly be made, but it was done.      I must say that it is
difficult for a layman to see which parts of the Act have been
implemented and those which have not.    It was necessary to act
quickly because certain parts of the Act, in particular the
section permitting the Secretary of State to designate particular
types of football match and part II were wanted so that they
could be effective in time for the World Cup. At that time we
thought that it would be possible to create the Football
Licensing Authority from 1 June.

In practice Ministers did not agree formally to the transfer of
responsibility for setting up the FLA from the Department of the
Environment to the Home Office until mid-May, and for purely
practical reasons we did not meet the 1 June deadline.      This
caused some criticism and suggestion that the Government was
prevaricating on moves which were necessary if football clubs
were to reduce standing capacity at the beginning of the 1990/91
season. But much of this was based on the misunderstanding that
it was the Football Licensing Authority which had to take the
initiative in responding to the Taylor recommendations on seated
accommodation and not the clubs, something which I hope was put
right by the letter which Lord Ferrers, the Minister of State at
the Home Office responsible for these issues and in fact for all
police and fire matters, wrote to Arthur Sandford, the Chief
Executive of the League in June.

As to the Authority itself, the Act enables the Secretary of
State to appoint its Chairman and not less than 4 nor more than
8 other members. You know that the Chairman is to be Mr Norman
Jacobs (describe Mr Jacobs' background).    I hope that we shall
know the names of most of the other members within a week or two.
As to what sort of people they will be, I ask you to bear in mind
that the Authority will have a regulatory role in relation to
local authorities and to have credibility for that purpose it
will be necessary for some of the members at least to have the
kind of skills which are exercised in the local authorities
themselves in respect of sports grounds safety and the control
of hooliganism.   Others we hope will have special knowledge of
professional association football or other skills which are
judged to be of value for the purpose of carrying out the
Authority's functions.

The Authority is not expected to have a large headquarters staff:
a Chief Executive and a number of others. Where the headquarters
will be situated has not been finally decided.       The original
intention was that it should be in the North possible Leeds
Manchester or Merseyside but it did not follow that the Authority
itself would necessarily meet at that place. The League itself
finds it possible to operate with its administrative headquarters
separate from its Chief Executive and with modern means of
communication, many things are possible.

The Authority will have 2 basic responsibilities, as I have
indicated; the operation of the football licensing scheme which
will provide the mechanism, if necessary, for enforcing the move
towards all seated accommodation; and the function of keeping
under review the discharge by local authorities of their
functions under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act.
The purpose of the licensing scheme, as described in the long
title of the Act, is to provide for the safety of spectators.
The Government will expect the authority to use the scheme to
ensure that the standard of safety, including the level of
amenities for spectators (to the extent that that is relevant to
crowd behaviour and safety in the light of Taylor) and the
arrangements for preventing the commission of offences are
satisfactory.

It will exercise these responsibilities at grounds where
designated matches are played, which means in practice all league
grounds and any designated grounds, (designated under the 1975
Act) at which international matches are played.      (Mention the
anomaly of Berwick Rangers.)

The Act requires that in granting amending refusing or revoking
a licence the FLA shall have regard to whether equipment
provided, procedures used and other arrangements enforced at the
premises are such as are reasonably required to prevent the
commission or minimise the effects of offences; and such other
considerations as the Secretary of State determines from time to
time. At the present time no such other considerations have been
identified.

In some cases it will be appropriate for the Authority to
exercise its responsibilities by means of the licensing
conditions, but in many cases if it is dissatisfied with safety
arrangements, it would be more appropriate for it to require the
local authority to change the terms and conditions of safety
certificates.

To assist it, the Authority will have an inspectorate, not yet
recruited, who, we expect, will be people who have had particular
experience in local authorities or the emergency services in
connection with safety and public order at sports grounds.

I mentioned briefly the letter which Lord Ferrers had sent to
Arthur Sandford from which I understand has been circulated to
all member clubs. That letter indicates that it is for clubs to
take   the  initiative   in moving    forward   on   the  Taylor
recommendations.     The Home Secretary has power to issue
directions in connection with all seated accommodation at
specific grounds, but he is required to consult the licensing
authority before he does so. I hope that you will therefore be
able to look upon the licensing authority not simply as a
regulatory authority, but as the avenue by which you can express
your reservations or observations about all seated accommodation
in particular circumstances. I am not trying to suggest that the
Government has suggested that it is prepared to move away from
the Taylor recommendations (that is certainly not the case) what
I am pointing out is that if, for example, you thought in a few
years time that the requirement for all seated accommodation was
unreasonable in respect of a third or fourth division club with
a very low attendances, it would in principle by open to you to
use the Football Licensing Authority as a means of making those
representations.
That in a nutshell is more or less what the Football Licensing
Authority is about.   I hope that makes the position clearer.
I also hope that you will bear in mind my observations about
football grounds not being treated, in principle, significantly
different from other places to which the public resort for
entertainment. They for the most part have had to achieve safety
standards at their own expense and, given the concessions which
were made to the industry in this year's budget, my own advice
is that you should think carefully before coming back to the
Government for more money too quickly.
