 s




                                                     HOME OFFICE
                                            Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                    Direct line .071-273 3322
                                                  Switchboard0 7 I-273 3000


Our reference:
                                                    19 December 1990
Your reference:



     John Vaughan Esq
     Department of the Environment
     Room P3/167
     2 Marsham Street
     LONDON    SW1P 3EB




      a^ \   r   J^Vv\^
     STRATEGY FOR IMPLEMENTING ALL SEATING

     Thank you for your letter of 14 December enclosing a note from
     the All Party Football Group on progress towards all seated
     accommodation at football grounds and raising the issue of
     whether there should be an overall plan for implementation.

     I do think that there is a case for bringing together the parties
     most closely concerned in order to turn the Taylor proposals and
     timetable for all seating into an implementation plan. This is
     an area in which there is still, it seems to me, a considerable
     amount of misunderstanding. Taylor did not suggest that all the
     accommodation at all football grounds should be transformed into
     seated accommodation.    He pointed out that very few grounds
     regularly had capacity crowds and he clearly envisaged that his
     recommendations could be implemented not simply by the addition
     of seats, but simply by reducing the use of the standinq
     accommodation — ----— ----                 —)
                                                                     *

     F°r their own reasons, many football clubs are interpreting
     Taylor as a requirement to convert the whole of their stadia to
     seated accommodation. Even the paper setting out the results of
     the survey by the All Party Football Committee talks about
       converting to seated accommodation".          The position has
     w               been comPlicated by the general consensus expressed
       Y .,  f°0-tball authorities and others that seating accommodation
     w      only be satisfactory if it is covered accommodation.

     It is true that if we look at the Taylor recommendations in a
     wider perspective, we would not expect seating accommodation to
     be provided which in effect creates a poorer standard of amenity
   for spectators than the standing accommodation which was there
   originally.    Nor would we wish to see the installation of
   inadequate seating accommodation which, whether for reasons of
   comfort or design, does not encourage people to remain seated for
   each half of the match. _The problem here is that while we can
   say that we would not wish people to be seated in areas from
   which they do not have an unrestricted view of the pitch,
   positive recommendations on good design of seating accommodation
   can only come from the Advisory and Design Council (in relation
   to new constructions and adaptions) or from the Football
   Licensing Authority, in the light of experience.

   The Football Licensing Authority tell us that they do not expect
   that it will be practicable to introduce the licensing scheme
   before the beginning of the 1992/93 football season.      That is
   therefore the earliest point at which we could require the
   introduction of terms and conditions in licences relating to
   seated accommodation.    I think our starting point must be that
   we shall expect to find in August 1992 that all football clubs
   have made the progress towards reducing standing accommodation
   envisaged by Lord Justice Taylor in his final report by one means
   or another. We are of course required to consult the FLA before
   directing them to include relevant terms and conditions in the
   licences of particular clubs, but from our point of view it makes
   little difference whether additional seating accommodation has
   been provided so long as the proportion of standing accommodation
   has been reduced.

    This, however, is all an initial and rather personal reaction to
    your letter.   X think what is really required is some further
    statement of Government policy which will provide a clearer lead
   Ato the FLA, to the clubs and to the Football Trust about what is
jy/ required of them and which might provide the basis for a
    discussion at a meeting.   We will therefore draft something to
    put to the FLA (and to the Trust) but we may need to clear it
    with Ministers first of all. I will let you see it in draft.

                                            Yours sincerely




                                            P E BOLTON
                                            (Fire and Emergency
                                            Planning Department)
E.R.
