of Special Joint Meeting - Home Affairs/Sport

Room 12 at 6.00 pm. on Monday 24th April,   1989



  John Carlisle took the Chair and welcomed everybody present,
  including the Secretary of State for the Environment, Nicholas Ridley,
  and the Minister for Sport, Colin Moynihan, together with the
  Chairman of the Home Affairs Committee, John Wheeler.

  Nicholas Ridley was invited to address the Meeting which he did,
  underlining the need for the Football Spectators Bill in order to
  separate the football fan from the hooligan.

 The disaster at Hillsborough was discussed at some length and the
 meeting advised that Lord Justice Taylor had set up an enquiry with
 a wide brief and that the delay in the Bill completing its course
 through Parliament was to enable anything in his findings that
 required action to be incorporated in the Bill.

 Nicholas Ridley underlined the fact that the Government's Bill was
 an enabling Bill and once again the point was made that Lord Justice
 Taylor's early findings could be incorporated.  It was pointed out
 that the Popplewell Report had taken only nine weeks and if the
 current enquiry took a similar time it would be possible for the
 findings to be made public by the end of June enabling the Bill to
 complete its progress, albeit during the overspill into the Autumn.

  Nicholas Ridley stated that he hoped designated stadia would be all-
  seater and was pleased to see that Liverpool were taking such action
  anyway.  It was hoped that other Clubs would do so on a voluntary
  basis but if necessary the Government would legislate.

  He underlined the importance of the FMA in setting up a scheme
  acceptable to him and to football and stated that he was quite
  determined to stop hooligans travelling abroad.  Part two of the Bill
  would not work on its own.

  Nicholas Ridley pointed out:-

  a.   Only last Saturday at the West Ham game there had been 24
       arrests and 24 ejections whilst at the recent Chelsea game
       there had been 9^ arrests and 28 ejections.
  b.   300 people had been killed since the end of the War.
  c.   5,000 policemen were on duty every Saturday.

  Consequently the Government was quite determined to find a solution
  to a problem that was unacceptable to the vast majority of people.
  He stated too that public opinion was on the side of the Government,
  being the Party of law and order.

  He felt that fundamental changes had to be made and that the
  Football Authority had not acted responsibly and that unless they
  took voluntary steps to resolve the situation the Government
  would legislate.
Several speakers made specific points to the Secretary of State.

a.   Rhodes Boyson said in many inner cities half the classrooms
      were empty through truancy and it was a new problem in society
      overall.  He therefore felt the Membership Scheme should be put
      on a back-burner, as it were, until Lord Justice Taylor had
      reported.  Nicholas Ridley pointed out that an I.D. card was
      completely different to the proposed Members card and he informed
      Rhodes Boyson that in his view the tragedy at Hillsborough had
      occured before the Members Scheme and it would have been much
      better for the proposals to have been implemented some time
      ago.
b.   William Powell said he was not a strong supporter of the Football
      Spectators Bill but having looked at Hillsborough he had
      completely come down on the side of the Government since he was
      sure that the disaster would not have occured had the Football
      Spectators Bill been in place.   He felt the cause of the
      disaster was people travelling without tickets and being late
      in arriving and he felt one of the main reasons was insufficient
      parking facilities in and around the Ground.   Some people had
      no option but to park in the main road and walk four miles to
      the Ground and he felt the licencing facility should incorporate
      car parking.
c.   Jim Lester said he felt that whilst it was important to try
      and do the right thing, Part One of the Bill was devisive and
      he felt insufficient time had been given to examine the problems
      properly.
d.   Richard Alexander felt that there would be insufficient time
      after the end of June and therefore no time existed for a
      proper debate before the recess.   Nicholas Ridley said that
      the debate could take place during the recess and amendments
      added as necessary.
e.   Alistair Burt felt that the Government had missed an opportunity
      to explain to the public about congestion outside Grounds and
      thought football fans should be brought into the discussions.
      Colin Moynihan pointed out that those who alleged to represent
      fans were in fact a left-wing organisation who did not
      represent the vast majority of fans.   Alistair Burt thought the
      reasons for the problems at Hillsborough were people
      without tickets, arriving late and drunk, and the police
      unfortunately as had become custom and practice allowed them
      in.
f.   Michael Shersby thought we should have reserve powers for
      certain games and if clubs misbehaved then Home fans only
      should be imposed on a selective basis.
g.    Jim Pawsey said he did not think Membership Cards would work
      at all.
h.    Michael Clark said he had been in favour of the Bill but after
      Hillsborough was now against it and could not see how Membership
      Cards would have prevented the tragedy.   Nicholas Ridley advised
      him that Membership Cards would mean people travelling without
      a ticket would not be allowed into the Ground which would have
      become custome and practice rather than the present situation.
Nicholas Ridley stated that attempts will undoubtedly be made to
break the system initially but they would have to be resisted, and
he accepted that heavier and better policing outside grounds would
be required at the start of the scheme which he had agreed with the
Home Secretary.  At the heart of the matter was the fact that fans
must be persuaded that an all-ticket game meant exactly that.

Ivan Lawrence said that he believed most people wanted the Government
to proceed with the Football Spectators Bill and clean up a game
that was becoming embarrassing to everyone.  He felt if severe
congestion existed then additional turnstiles would have to be
installed.

Many others spoke along similar lines and at the end John Carlisle
announced that nine had spoken for the Bill and three against.

The meeting concluded with a Vote of Thanks to the Secretary of
State for attending and for explaining the Government's thinking
with regard to the Football Spectators Bill.
