       HOME OFFICE
       Queen Anne's Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                     Direct line 01-273   2582
                                    SwitchboardOl-273 3000



                                                          Your reference


                                                             Our reference

                                                          FEP/9035/48/1 39
                                                          Date
                                                               17 May 1990




Dear

Thank you for your recent letter to Mr Moynihan
which has been passed to this department in view of our
responsibilities for the Safety of Sports Grounds Act.  I
apologise for the delay in replying to you.

Thank you for expressing your concern over the cost of
Introducing all seated accommodation at football league
grounds, particularly those in the lower divisions.  However,
the cost incurred by these clubs may not be quite so severe as
it might initially seem.  As you may be aware the Chancellor
announced in the recent Budget that the government would be
reducing the pools betting tax therefore making available
£100 million to the football industry over the next five
years.  The Football Trust expects to provide clubs with a
further £75 million over the next ten years, in addition to
almost £26 million provided each year by television and pools
companies.  Consequently there is a considerable amount of
money available to football clubs to make the necessary-ground
improvements.

A further reason for the cost incurred by the clubs being less
than may be expected is that current attendances at many
grounds are well below the maximum capacity of the ground.
Lord Justice Taylor commented, in his Final Report, that a
small scale redevelopment possibly involving only part of the
ground, might be sufficient in some cases.

                                                             Yours sincerely




                                                             MR S BILBE
                                                             (Fire and Emergency
                                                             Planning Department)
   21 February 1990

( )Colin Mo yn aha n M.P.
   House of Commons,
   Westminster,
   London

   Dear Sir,
   I am writing to you to object to the g o v e r n m e n t ’s plans to make all
   league football clubs have all seater grounds.
   I do agree that we need better grou nds in this c o u n t r y .F o o t b a l 1 plays a
   part in many peoples lives and peop le need safe grounds to go and watch
   Football. In this country even W e mb ley isn't very good compared to
   grounds in other countries such as I t al y.C on seq ue ntl y we will not have
   much chance of staging such majo r events as the world cup.
   However I do not think that it is right to tell clubs to convert their
   grounds to all se aters.This would be alright for for most first division
   clubs but many other clubs couldn't afford it.
   The government may say that the money spent on players could pay for the
   change.I agree that the t r an sfe r fees paid today are inflated but when
   was the last time clubs like Hartlepool Utd, C h es ter City, Exet er City,
   Rochdale, Lincoln City and many other clubs paid one m i ll ion poun ds for a
   player. The answ er is they never have!
   The clubs that survive ch anging their stadiums to all seater grounds
   would have to charge ludicrous prices to the fans to come and wa tc h the
   g a m e s . They would have to do this to try and recoup mo ne y they had spent
   on conv ert in g their grounds. Then I along with th ousands of others
   wouldn't be able to go and watch the game we enjoy b e c a u s e we couldn't
   afford it!
   I see no other way of m a ki ng all clubs in the in the league turn their
   grounds into all seaters without the tax payer funding it.
   Near ly all people are great supporters of football and I can see many
   peop le will not vote for the present government if they start killing of
   clubs and prevent p e op le wa tc h i n g the sport they love.

   Yours faithfully
                      {'Vob^jvv'}            fo ^ C -C -C V       (jU j     StvwyXUx           Club},




BRISTOL Rovers could fold as a result                                        By Peter Godsiff
of the Taylor Report on safety at                             such a limited capacity?” asks Dunford. "Cm you
football grounds.                                             charge £10 each for spectators to sit in the rain?
                                                                 "The cost of seats would be so high you would alienate
  That is the stark warning from chairman                     many of your real fans.”
Denis Dunford today.                                             He explained th at it was impossible simply to erect
   "Unless we get a new ground in Bristol in a relatively     seats on terracing. A form of scaffolding is required.
short period, we may have to close,” he said. •■ - ■■■           "As two people sitting occupies the- space of four
   And he predicted that some smaller clubs — even            standing, spectators, it’s easy to see how seats will
those who own their grounds — would also face                 drastically reduce the capacity of all grounds,” he
extinction.                                                   said.                                                '
   The report commissioned by the Government follow­             Bath City are looking into the possibility of selling
ing the Hillsborough tragedy recommends that all              Twerton Park and using the proceeds to fund a purpose-
designated stadiums (including rugby and cricket) be          built stadium elsewhere in the city.
all-seater by the turn of the century.
   This should be tackled by the introduction of 10 per
cent more seats each year.
   If this were to happen a t the club’s present home at
Twerton Park, the capacity would be reduced from
 9,500 to less than half.
   "How can you run a League club a t a ground with
