R
From:   M J Addison                     cc       Ms Adams
        FI Division                              Mr Yates
        Extn 3743                                Mr Chilcot
        19 May 1989                              HMCIC
                                                 Mr Boys Smith
                                                 Mr Malone-Lee
                                                 Miss Edwards, LAB
                                                 Mr Sandi-F''-,,vq
                                                 Mr Nagle
                                                 Mr Whall
                                                 Mr Arche
                                                    Rans ford



HILLSBOROUGH : COSTS OF INQUIRIES BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
1.   I have now been informed that, following the meeting on which
I reported in my submission of 18 May, the Clerk to the South
Yorkshire Police Authority has spoken to his Chairman, Sir Jack
Layden, and as a result the authority would like an early m^ing
with Ministers.   A letter formally conveying this request will
arrive shortly.

2.   I recommend that Lord Ferrers sees them and, if this is
agreed, would be grateful if Ms Adams would get in touch direct
with the Clerk (telephone number 0226 285996) about dates.
3.   I mentioned in paragraph 8 of my note of 18 May my feeling
that we needed to make an early approach to the Treasury.        I
understand that Finance and Manpower now have this in hand.      I
suggest that the meeting with South Yorkshire is arranged for a
date after the late May Bank Holiday Recess and that Finance and
Manpower Departments do their best to extract a favourable reply
from the Treasury by then.  (We shall not I think be in a position
to satisfy the West Midlands on 25 May but separate briefing for
that meeting is in hand).



                                             A

                                         M J ADDISON
E.R.
   From:     M J Addison                     cc   Ms Adams
             FI Division                          Mr Yates
             Extn 3743                            Mr Chilcot
             18 May 1989                          HMCIC
                                                  Mr Boys Smith
           J ^ L r doJj                           Mr Malone-Lee
                                                  Miss Edwards
                                                  Mr Sandiforc'
                                                  Mr Nagler
                                                  Mr Whalley
                                                  Mr Archer—
                                                  Ms Ransford

   Ar Storr

   HILLSBOROUGH : COSTS OF INQUIRIES BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE

   I met the Clerk and Financial Officer of the South Yorkshire Police
   Authority, Mr Johnston and Mr Watson, Assistant Chief Constable of
   the South Yorkshire Police, today. Representatives of the Police,
   Fire, and Finance and Manpower Departments were also in attendance.
   2.   We had a fairly full discussion of how the South Yorkshire
   Police Authority and force saw the situation but it was not
   possible to reach agreement that the bill for the inquiries by the
   West Midlands Police fell in the first instance to South Yorkshire
   to pay. The next step is therefore likely to be a request from the
   South Yorkshire Police Authority to Ministers to receive a
   deputation.

   3.   The Clerk accepted that the West Midlands Police had been
   called in by the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire. But this had
   been in the general public interest rather than from any need to
   investigate the actions of his force.   In any case the request to
   the West Midlands had been overtaken by events.    Mr Dear was not
   reporting in any sense to the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
   but direct to Lord Justice Taylor.    Moreover the inquiry by Lord
   Justice Taylor was far more concerned with the general principles
   of safety at sports grounds than with the events of one day at
   Hillsborough.
   4.   Mr Watson also accepted that Mr Wright had thought that it
   would not be right for his own officers to conduct the inquiries
   following Hillsborough.    But HMCIC and the Home Secretary had
   identified Mr Dear and only then had Mr Wright asked him in. Then
   the public inquiry had been decided upon, following which the Chief
   Constable of South Yorkshire had had to set up his own inquiries
   with his own officers and counsel in order to supply evidence to
   the West Midlands police, who were operating under the instructions
   of Counsel appointed by Lord Justice Taylor and of Treasury
   Solicitors.

       5.   Mr Watson went on to comment that the scope and direction of
       the inquiries by the West Midlands police had gone far wider than
       had been envisaged at the time that they were called in but South
E.R.
   Yorkshire had no control over this nor was South Yorkshire deriving
   any benefit from the inquiries.      Moreover the costs had been
   greatly increased by the decision to supply an interim report from
   Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry in time for the next football season.
   Since both the scale of the inquiry and the need for such speed
   seemed dictated by reasons of national importance and by the
   demands of the public inquiry, there was a strong case for the
   whole cost to be met from central government funds.
   6.   My colleagues and I made it clear that we were not convinced
   by any of these arguments.     The inquiries by the West Midlands
   police had been initiated by Mr Wright. It was by no means unusual
   for prior discussion to take place with HMCIC when a Chief Officer
   wished to ask a Chief Officer from another force to oversee
   inquiries.   And once such a decision had been taken, it followed
    rom the very need for independence that the Chief Officer of the
   Home Force lost a great deal of his normal ability to direct and
   control the operation.    As we saw it, therefore, the arguments
   advanced by South Yorkshire went to the scale of the costs and to
   whether these threatened the efficiency of the South Yorkshire
   police rather than to the principle that the responsibility in the
   first instance lay with South Yorkshire.        I suggested that,
   although the Home Office had no authority to offer special payments
   on miners' strike lines, such a payment in this case would, if the
   case were successfully made out, reflect the kind of balance
   between national and local considerations to which Mr Johnston and
   Mr Watson had drawn attention.
   7.   It was agreed that I should report all this to Ministers and
   that Mr Johnston would report back to his Police Authority. I said
   that, if his Police Authority did not accept that their correct
   course was to put in a case for a special payment, they might wish
   to explore with Ministers the scope for an alternative approach
   (presumably a direct payment to the West Midlands). Mr Johnston
   thought that his police authority would almost certainly seek an
   early meeting with Ministers and I said that the sooner this was
   done the better.
   8.   I understand from Mr Nagler that the Treasury have indicated a
   strong determination to resist any Government contribution of any
   kind in addition to the 51% police specific grant. It seems to me,
   however, that the case for some assistance to South Yorkshire if
   only on the grounds of the scale of the expenditure being run up by
   the West Midlands Police is extremely strong.    My feeling is that
   we should put the case formally to the Treasury after Lord Ferrers
   has seen the West Midlands Police Authority on 25 May. Depending
    on the timing, this might put us in a stronger position when, as
   seems likely, he meets the South Yorkshire Police Authority at a
   later date.

                                                                  (




                                             M J ADDISON
