cea.jh/dec90/l.14
                                     c c Pm
                                        «.   ^,
                                             7
                                                           Parliament Street
  HM Treasury                                              London SW1P 3AG
                                                           Telephone 071-270 5203


   Sir Terence Burns
   Second Permanent Secretary                         be    Mr   Mortimer
   Chief Economic Adviser                                   Mr   O'Brien (IR)
                                                            Mr   Gaw (C&E)
                                                            Mr   Baden (DOE)
Mr Arthur Sandford                                          Mr   Walker
Chief Executive
The Football League Ltd
City House
Maid Marian Way
Nottingham
NG1 6BH                                          18 December 1990




Thank you for your letter of 21 November.
I can understand that a move to full cost charging for policing at
football matches could cause difficulties for some clubs. As I
explained when we met on 1 November, however, it is difficult tor
me to influence thinking in this area since responsibility rests
very much with the Home Office. For this reason, I believe that
the best approach would be for you to raise your concerns directly
with them.
You wonder whether payments to clubs as part of an ear-marking
scheme might be regarded as capital money, and hence exempt fr°m
tax. I am not sure exactly what type of scheme you have in mind,
though we did discuss various possibilities^at our meeting on
1 November. It may be that you are wondering whether, for
example, TV money paid to clubs on condition that it is spent on
ground improvements might be ignored for corporation tax purposes^
If so, then I think the answer is that it could not. Payments oi
TV money would be regarded as income in the hands of the clubs a**d
would therefore increase corporation tax liability, though the
capital works financed by the money might be eligible for capital
allowances.
 In the last paragraph of your letter, «     .you mention a rather
 different scheme. This would entail a levy of 50p or £1 on
 admission prices. It would be made clear to spectators that this
 levy would be for ground improvements, and clubs would not be free
 to use the income in any other way. You express the hope that the
 levy would be free of VAT so that the whole amount could be
 applied to ground improvements.
 I think I am right in saying that, with a scheme on these lines,
 the levy would still be subject to VAT and would also be taken
 into account in calculating corporation tax liability. The point
 here is that the levy would still be regarded for tax purposes as



        Switchboard 071-270 3000   Fax 071-270 5653           Telex 9413704
cea.jh/dec90/l.l4



part of the entrance charge, even though it was ear-marked for
ground improvements. Any other outcome would require fresh
legislation.
Generally I have to say that I think it unlikely that the
Chancellor will want to make further significant additional tax
concessions for football.     The reduction in pool betting duty
announced last March should be worth around £100 million to
football over the next five years, and the previous Chancellor
said that a decision would be taken at an early stage on whether
to prolong the cut in duty for a second five year period. These
are generous concessions. As the previous Chancellor said on a
number of occasions it must now be for football to contribute on a
significant scale out of its own resources to the work that needs
to be done.
If you wish to consider further the tax implications of a specific
ear-marking scheme, I am sure the Inland Revenue would be happy to
give their view of the law if you would set out in detail what you
have in mind. I am sorry I cannot be more helpful.

                                     \ '




                                           T BURNS
