J
                                   From:     A R Baden
                                             SARD C

                                   Ext:      3060-6371

                                   Date:     12 May 1992

                                   Copy:     PS/Parliamentary
                                              Secretary
                                             Miss Stewart (or)
                                             Mr Ellingford
    Secretary of State

           MEETING WITH NORMAN JACOBS OF THE FLA AT 6.00PM TODAY
    1. An outline of the functions of the FLA and brief biographical
    notes on its members including its Chairman Norman Jacobs are at
    Flag A. In brief the FLA is an NDPB set up under the provisions
    of the Football Spectators Act 1989, with two main functions:

               to issue licences to admit spectators at designated
               football matches, which can contain, as necessary,
               conditions directed by the Secretary of State on seated
               accommodation; and

               to   keep  under   review   the  discharge  by   local
               authorities of their safety functions under the Safety
               of Sports Grounds Act 1975.

    All-seatina

    2. The main issue which Norman Jacobs is certain to raise is of
    course all-seating. Last week we had a useful meeting with the
    Chief Executive of the FLA, John de Quidt, and Home Office
    officials to discuss review options. We are currently drafting a
    submission on review options with a draft announcement setting
    out the terms of the review. It seems that the FLA1s preferred
    position is likely to be in order of acceptability:

              no change in the existing policy;

              retention of the all-seater requirement for the Premier
              Division clubs with some relaxation of the deadlines in
              exceptional circumstances for the Second, Third and
              Fourth Divisions; and

              retention of some standing capacity in the Third and
              Fourth Divisions provided that the FLA have the power
              to require terracing to be brought up to a sufficient
              standard.

    3.   In discussion you may wish to raise the following points:

              understand that officials have had a most constructive
              discussion with John de Quidt about policy options and
              that you would appreciate a letter from the FLA, if
              possible by the end of the month, setting out the
              FLA1s formal view on review options;


                                                                     1
          no wish to undermine the position of the Premier League
          clubs who    have   spent  large   sums   of money     in
          implementing    the   all-seater    requ i re m en t, and
          conversely rewarding the few who have made very slow
          progress. However, there may be very exceptional cases
          where a Premier League club has definite plans to
          relocate but cannot do so by the August 1994 deadline.
          In these cases the FLA may be prepared to consider an
          extension of the deadline;

          helpful to have the FLA's views on the Second Division.
          We have received differing representations on these.
          There are those who take the view that it should be
          viewed as a feeder division to the Premier League and
          should meet the same safety standards. There are
          others, however, who take the view that since last
          season there were at least seven clubs in the Second
          Division who had attendances of 7,000 or less it is
          difficult to relax the requirement for all-seating in
          the Third and Fourth Division grounds without doing the
          same in the Second Division. Furthermore, the very
          creation of the Premier League is likely to reinforce
          the division in football between the rich and the poor
          clubs, making it increasingly difficult for the smaller
          Second Division clubs ever to make it into the new
          Premier League;

          for the smaller clubs there seems to be a choice
          between letting the FLA decide where standing capacity
          should be allowed or letting the clubs decide by having
          a fixed capacity threshold, 10,000, above which clubs
          must go all-seating.

Other related matters

4.    In any review of all-seating the ability of the FLA to
enforce the new policy has to be examined. The FLA has been
fighting a running battle for over a year with Home Office
lawyers to establish what it can do under the very inadequate
licence powers of the Football Supporters Act 1989. Indeed one
option may be to abandon the licensing power of the FLA, which
was primarily there to enforce the proposed national membership
scheme, and turn it into a safety authority which would require
legislative improvements to the existing system of safety
certification. Two issues here, however, are the need to avoid
local authorities surrendering their safety responsibilities to
the FLA and where such a change in role would leave the FLA's
public order responsibilities. The latter arise in connection
with the proposed national membership scheme where the FLA was in
issuing licences to have regard to whether the arrangements in
force were reasonably required to prevent offences at designated
football matches.




A R BADEN
Rm 3.63
Santuary Buildings

                                                                 2
