    HOME OFFICE
    Queen Anne’s Gate London SW 1H 9A T

                                Direct line 071-273     3 1 33
                               Switchboard 071-273 3000



Miss A Stewart                                       Your reference
SARD
Department of National Heritage                      O ur reference   ///
Sanctuary Buildings
Great Smith Street
LONDON SW1P 3BT                                       4 June 1992




RE-EXAMINATION OF THE ALL SEATER POLICY                                     ^ ^
                                                                              /
Although responsibility for policy on safety at sports.has                        /
passed to the DNH and my involvement now remains that of                      f
caretaker until my staff are formally transferred, I of course
remain in close contact with the subject.     Thus, while I
realise the bodies being consulted in connection with the
review of all-seating h a # t o be limited to those with
authority who are most closely involved, I hope you will not
think it impertinent if I provide my own personal views, and
advice at this time.

2-     Personally, I am pleased that the re-examination is
underway.    I hope it leads to the retention of standing
provided that any terracing which remains is to the standards
specified in the Green Guide.    There is nothing inherently
unsafe in standing and as you will find, some bodies are
firmly of the view that in some cases, it is safer than
seating.    I also consider standing to be less uncomfortable (I
choose these words carefully) than sitting, on the typical
British winter afternoon or evening with the pervading damp
and chill rapidly making life miserable for stalwart fans
perched on their allocated hard (and often small) plastic
seats.   Should there be driving rain which enters the covered
area, this serves to compound the misery.    At least with
terracing one can usually move around to a limited extent to
encourage the blood circulation or seek some shelter although
I accept that seeking shelter may lead to localised
overcrowding with its attendant dangers.

3.   However, the main point of this note concerns the FLA and
its continued existence.   Should it transpire that the FLA
continues, as seems to have been decided, I recommend you take
the opportunity to consider whether licensing should go ahead.
It has become clear in recent months that licences cannot
impinge on safety matters.   Safety should be covered by safety
certificates.  What then will the licence be for? Following
the collapse of the membership scheme the purpose of the FLA
was to implement the all-seating policy.   But if this is to be
radically changed and confined only to the First (Premier) and
Second Division clubs, or possibly only to Premier Division
clubs - most of* whom have firm plans and should be all-seated
shortly - what purpose will the licence serve?

4.   While long term, agreement with Treasury still has to be
negotiated as to how much of the FLA's costs should be
recovered by the licence fee, we know they would like to have
full cost recovery (ie £1 million pa).   Were this to be
confined to the 22 Premier Division clubs it would work out at
£45000 each per year.   And when they are all-seated what will
this be for? Even if the idea of licensing all clubs in the
four Divisions remains and the licence fee is thereby reduced,
it will be difficult to clearly explain what the purpose of
the licence is meant to be.   There is a danger that it will be
just another tax on football, the payment of which is financed
either indirectly by Government money paid out for
improvements via the Football Trust or more directly, by
increased admittance charges paid by spectators.

5.   My advice would be to extend the re-examination of the
all-seater policy to consider whether the FLA should continue
and if so, whether it should do so indefinitely or only for a
limited period.  If the FLA is to continue (long-term or
temporarily) to re-examine its purpose, especially as regards
licensing, and to consider dispensing with plans to licence
grounds although, if the FLA is to continue, this would
necessitate a change of name.

6.   I hope these views are helpful.




                                        D A PETERS

                                        (Fire and Emergency
                                        Planning Department)


cc   Mr Miles
     Mr Baden
     Mr Webb
