                                  2



                           Sport and Recreation Division
                     2-4 Cockspur Street, London, SW 1Y 5DH.
                             Telephone: 071-211 6084
                              Facsimile: 071-211 6149




sunaeriana
SR2                                                             21 July 1994




Dear M r


HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER 1989: TAYLOR INQUIRY


Thank you for your letter of 3 June to M r R M Whalley of the Hom e Office about the
photographs which you supplied to the Hillsborough Inquiry. Your letter has been
passed to me since Central Government responsibility for safety at sports grounds now
rests with this D epartm ent

W e have carried out a thorough search of all the files on the Hillsborough Disaster files
which w e hold. Unfortunately, we have not been able to find the            15photographsand
negatives which you seek, i am afraid I can only suggest that you           follow the advicein
M r Whalley's letter of 10 June, and see whether your photographs form part of the
W e s t Midlands Police records on the Hillsborough Inquiry.

I am sorry that I cannot be more helpful.

I have sent a copy of this letter to David Peters in the Home Office, for information.



                                                                    Yours sincerely,
       HOME OFFICE
       Horseferry House DeaiijRvle^treet London SW 1P 2AW
       Direct line 071-217
       Switchboard 071-217 3000



                                                            Your reference
Mr D Webb
Department of National Heritage
                                                            Our reference
SARD "D"
2-4 Cockspur Street (Gnd Floor)
                                                            Date
L ON DO N SW1Y 5DH
                                                            14 June 1994

                                 ft




                                   I:
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER 1989: TAYLOR INQUIRY

We spoke earlier today about a letter (copy enclosed) which
Mr       of |                          I Sunderland recently
sent to Bob Whalley, who was Secretary to the Taylor Inquiry,
requesting the return of 15 photographs and negatives relating
to the Hillsborough disaster.

As you will see Bob Whalley has advised Mr             that he has
since changed jobs and does not have the material sought,        He
also explained that responsibility for sportsground safety has
p a s s e d to your department and suggested that the photographs
m a y be in the possession of the West Midlands Police in
connection with the part they played in the proceedings.
However, I should be glad if you would see whether Mr              |s
p ro p e r t y is with the old Inquiry files transferred to DNH in
1992 and if so, if you would return them to their 'rightful
o w n e r ' . Perhaps you would be so kind as to let me know the
result of your search.




                                                  D A PETERS

                                                  Fire Safety Division       (G2)
                                                  (Fire and Emergency
                                                  Planning Department)




                                                                                    S 361
 ' Immigration and
   Nationality Department
    Lunar H ouse 40 Wellesley Road
    Croydon CR9 2BY
    T e le p h o n e 0 8 1-760
    (CTN 3822)

                                                       Your reference

                                                       Our reference

                                                       Date
                                                                 8 June 1994




        auna e n a n a
        SR2




        D-Q-cr
        T h a n k you for your letter of 3 June, which has been sent on to
        me here in the Home Office Immigration and Nationality Department
        wh er e I now w o r k .

        I am afraid that I have personally kept none of the papers for
        the Hillsborough Inquiry so I do not myself have your photos or
        negatives.   On completion of my work as Secretary of the Inquiry,
        I left all the papers in the records of the Home Office Fire and
        E mergency Planning Department.      I am sending a copy of this
        letter to the Head of that Department, Mr W J A Innes, and I am
        sure he will cause enquiries to be made if he thinks it might be
        helpful.   I should add, however, that responsibility for safety
        at sports grounds passed some two years ago from the Home Office
        to the Department of National Heritage.

        If your photographs formed part of the material collected by the
        W est Midlands Police for Part I of the Inquiry,        and your
        reference to June 1990 (? 1989) suggests that this may be the
        case, it is possible that they are now being kept with other West
        Midlands Police records on the Inquiry.   I am therefore sending
        a copy of this correspondence to the Chief Constable, in case he
        is able to assist you.

        I am sorry I cannot myself help you further, but I do hope you
        are successful in your search for your photos.




                                                  R M WHALLEY




2 iSl
                      BS |it--)

,%>vW 19^

                                                                        o




                                     X   dm   i Oft

ICCla hK£
e fP m e   ia   (liiA fi     © 30    ^   w                 ft
                'J
                                    A                           i axu


                                    1 h e loco

                                                      au        CO'
