                              26 OCT
66-10.AH
From        F J Smith                       cc     Mr    Storr
            F8 Division                            Ms    Snow
            Ext 2952                               Mr    Goddard (0/ 0)
            25 October 1989                      •
                                                 — Mar   Bolton-... .
                                                   Mr    Lee, DoE


1.     Ms Rex
2.     Mr Storr


DENIS HOWELL HP: FOOTBALL CORRESPONDENCE

Denis Howell HP has written a further letter, in reply to the
Home Secretary's of 3 October, about Aston Villa supporters
detained on the platform of Nottingham railway station by the
police because Nottingham Forrest's ground was full.


2.    A draft reply is attached for the Home Secretary's
signature. The Home Secretary may wish to send the letter this
week, to reach Mr Howell before Report and Third Reading of the
Football Spectators Bill on Monday 30 October.


3.   British Transport Police were left carrying the can on 19
August for what to do with 300 or 400 supporters until a return
train arrived, since Nottinghamshire Police confronted them with
a refusal to let the supporters out of the station. BTP were not
pleased, and raised the matter with Mr Anderton's ACPO sub­
committee on violence at sporting events. Mr Anderton accepts
the situation on 19 August was undesirable and has circulated
Chief Constables asking them to make contingency plans to cope
where similar circumstances recur.


4.     The Minister's case file is attached.




                                       F J SMITH
QPE/89 52/3/116
PO 23519/89
Thank you for your further letter of 12 October about the visit
of Aston,Villa football supporters to Nottingham on 19 August.

My letter of 3 October sets out the legal position on this and
I would not wish to comment further on that aspect, except to say
I am glad you accept it is for the courts to decide whether the
police acted correctly.


I do assure you that I inquired carefully into events before
replying before. I would not suggest that the afternoon can have
been anything other than a sizeable disappointment and
inconvenience for the fans who were unable to reach the ground.
By all accounts they accepted the circumstances without undue
complaint.


The two main reasons they could not be allowed to continue to the
ground were that the: area reserved for visitcSrs was full, aiSd1
that some Aston Villa fans already locked out of the ground were
attempting nevertheless to gain entry.   It would not have been
a responsible decision, or one with any useful purpose, to have*
allowed further fans to travel to the ground to join those
already locked out. A return train was provided at the earliest
possible moment and I gather arrangements were made to refund
train fares and match tickets.


Please do bear in mind that this- was the first= S&tulrday6f thfe
football season and all concerned - clubs, spectators and the
police - were adjusting to the very recent changes following Lord
Justice Taylor's interim report.      In the case of Nottingham
Forest, ground capacity had been reduced from 36,000 to 31,000.
On the day the police had some quick decisions to make and the
improvised arrangements may well have had some rough edges. I
am sure that is regretted and that lessons have been learned for
the future.



                                                   PO 23519/89
                                               QPE/89 52/3/116
