                                                                 2 0 SEP 1989 l o l O S

    E.R.                                                                          ©
                                                     cc.   Ms Craig
                                                           Ms Rex
                                                           Ms Nicholson
                                                           Mr Yates
                                                           Mr Chilcot o ! / ~
                                                           Mr Hammond
                                                           Mr Turney, o/r
                                                           Mr Boys Smith
                                                           HMCIC
                                                           HMCIFS
                                                           Mr Mower
                                                           Mr Clayton
                                                           Mr Goddard
                                                           Mr Bolton, o/r
                                                           Mr Whalley
                                                           Mr Mnul ri >
(   \                                                      Mr Lidington
                                                           Mr Yeo




        Mr Moriartv


                    HILLSBOROUGH:   PROGRESS ON IMPLEMENTATION


        Mr Edey telephoned me this morning to say that he had received
        my letter of 18 September and did not find it a satisfactory
        response.  He had two main queries:

           (i )   there was no mention of the statutory power open
                  to the Home Secretary to enforce the Taylor
                  Report's recommendations (he referred to section
                  6 and in particular sub-section 2 of the 1975
                  A c t ) . He said that this gave the Home Secretary
                  overall authority to ensure that the correct
                  safety certificates were issued, that he had a
                  clear duty to lay down regulations for safety at
                  sports grounds and that because this had not
                  been done, the situation at grounds was still
                  dangerous, as illustrated by a recent Observer
                  article about the Coventry v Everton game on
                  19 August and an article in the Times which said
                  that only 12% of grounds had a doctor present;

         (ii)     he wanted to know which Department, the Home
                  Office dr the Department of Environment, would
                  be responsible for the football licensing
                  authority insofar as it might supervise safety.



                                                           12.
E.R.
                                     2.




      2*  I promised that I would write to him as soon as possible
      with answers to these questions, but he said that he was
      c o n s i d e r i n g a writ of mandamus against the Home
      Secretary without'-waiting for my further letter.  He also said
      that it was unsatisfactory that the Taylor Report had not yet
      been subjected to Parliamentary scrutiny as it had been
      delivered during the recess.   He said that if anything went
      wrong, the Home Secretary would be in great trouble.

       3.  The letter which I sent to Mr Edey deliberately omitted
       the passage about consideration being given to the enforcement
I   | of the R e p o r t 1s recommendations by means of a Statutory
     x Instrument, for the reasons set out in the first paragraph of
    J my note to Mr Mould of 19 September.        Mr Mould has now set in
       hand a survey of local authorities to find out which, if any,
       have not implemented the asterisked recommendations of the
       Taylor Report, and if so why.       The Home Secretary needs to
       have advice quickly on whether he should consider using his
       statutory powers, and this can only be on the basis of as
       accurate a picture as possible of progress of implementation
       of the Taylor Report by local authorities.

      4.  I should be grateful for advice and a draft letter to send
      to Mr Edey as quickly as possible and for urgent advice on how
      we should handle any application by Mr Edey for a writ of
      mandamus, in consultation with Mr Hammond and Mr Mower.




      Private Office                             MISS C J BANNISTER
      20 September 1989                          Private Secretary
