From : J L Goddard                                        cc Ms Craig
       F8 Division                                           Ms Spencer
       Ext 3314                                              Mr Yates
                                                             Mr Hammond
         11 July 1990                                        Mr Faulkner
                                                             HMCIC
                                                             Mr Boys Smith
                                                             Mr Angel
                                                             Mr Norris
                        tUJ                  '      r,                  ards, LAB

        r> r                                       djjJ     Mr Cogbill
      - \tA»             M                                  Miss A Edwards, F2
  ^                          6 «*■                          Mr Fulton
                                         JW V *             Miss Goose
                                                            Mr Grant
                              f                             Mrs - Lee
                                                            "
                                                            Mr Nagler
                                         * ,                Mr Kinney
                                        6. I I '            Mr J B Taylor
                                                                Crawley, SHHD
                                                                McClelland,NJ
                                                                      (2 copies!
                                                                              Do e
                                                                       § ory, DE
                                                                          DTI
1. Ms Snow

2. Mr Storr



TAYLOR REPORT: RECOMMENDATIONS FOR NEW OFFENCES AND PENALTIES:
(i) TICKET TOUTING OFFENCE    [70]
(ii) OFFENCES IN THE GROUND    [71]
(iii) USE OF ATTENDANCE CENTRES [72]
(iv) USE OF ELECTRONIC TAGGING [73]


This submission considers recommendations 70-73 of Lord Justice
Taylor's final report into the Hillsborough Stadium disaster and
makes recommendations on what the Government's response to them
should be.     The offence of ticket touting at football matches is
we believe acceptable.        So too, we think, are the three specific
offences in designated grounds, subject to varying degrees of
reservation set out below.           ACPO and the Crown Prosecution Service
both support the creation of these four offences.                  As to
penalties, we believe that attendance centres should continue to
be used for offenders aged under 21 (combined with exclusion
orders for suitable offenders) but that their use should not be
extended in the way Taylor suggests. Electronic tagging, subject
to cost effectiveness, will provide the courts with a means of
supporting curfew orders, which it will be possible to use as a
penalty for football related offences.


2.    The argument for creating these new offences is, partly, that
the present law may not catch all of the behaviour found
objectionable;    partly, that offences specific to football grounds
may have a valuable deterrent effect on spectators; and, to an
important degree, that in the highly charged atmosphere of
football, provocative or unpleasant behaviour, which may be widely
seen on television or reported in the media, has particularly
harmful consequences.     There is also the political consideration
that these offences have been recommended by Taylor and broadly
welcomed by the Opposition.


3.   This submission now examines     each of the recommendations in
turn.


(i)   TICKET TOUTING OFFENCE [70]


Scope:    football only


4.    Taylor recommends that ticket touting at football matches
should be an offence.     He singles football out from other events
on the basis that touting leads to undesirable consequences at
football grounds not repeated elsewhere.     It encourages fans to
travel to grounds without tickets.    The fans then may cause
obstruction or, when they cannot get tickets, become disorderly;
and touting undermines the policy of segregating fans from rival
clubs.    Touting more generally raises issues of ethics or
economics rather than issues associated with public order and
safety.   Taylor suggests several ways in which touting at football
matches could be made an offence but recommends that the offence
should be "to sell tickets for and on the day of a football match
without authority from the home club to do so".
ACPO's view


5.   ACPO support the recommendation for a substantive offence and
favour Taylor's recommended formulation rather than any of his
other suggestions because it offers a straightforward offence more
easily capable of proof.   They see a need for a power of arrest
and a power of seizure if the measure is to be effective.     They do
not believe that such an offence would necessarily mean having to
devote more police resources to touts than they do at the moment.


CPS's view


6.    The CPS endorse Taylor's view that the current law is
stretched by the police (and themselves) when dealing with touts
and believe that specific provision should be made.   They, too,
favour the recommended Taylor offence rather than any of his
alternative suggestions.   They and ACPO draw attention to the need
to make the definition of "sell" sufficiently wide and to require
written authority of the home club to sell tickets.   The CPS point
out that if the offence takes place only on the day, ticket touts
who sell tickets before then could still have some effect in
reducing the effectiveness of the policy of segregating rival
supporters.   The resource implications of the offence for the CPS
are unlikely to be significant.


Our view


7.   On the basis that a new offence should apply only to football
we think that the offence is acceptable.   Care will need to be
taken in drafting the offence and in setting a penalty which is
sufficient to deter.   Such an offence could bear on a genuine
ticket holder who through illness, for example, found himself
unable to attend and who would then commit an offence if he sold
his ticket to a friend on the day of the match.   Although such
cases are unlikely to be significant numerically we shall probably
have to seek the agreement of clubs to give refunds in these
circumstances.   Powers of arrest and seizure seem essential.
These are matters to which we will give further consideration
before submitting detailed proposals to Ministers, if they agree
the offence in principle.


(ii) OFFENCES IN THE GROUND [71]


8.    Lord Justice Taylor recommended that at a designated sports
ground there should be specific offences of:


       (i)   throwing a missile;
      (ii)   chanting obscene or racialist abuse;
     (iii)   going onto a pitch without reasonable excuse.


This is slightly at variance with     Mr Justice Popplewell's report
which recommended a simple offence of disorderly conduct at a
sports ground.     His intention was to deal with the three specific
activities aimed at by Taylor's recommendations and any others
which could affect crowd safety.     Taylor recommended three exactly
defined offences on the basis that hooligans who knew precisely
what was prohibited would be more likely to be deterred than by a
more generally formulated offence.     These three offences are
recommended by Taylor because he does not believe that current law
catches adequately the activities of missile throwing, chanting
obscene or racialist abuse, or going on the pitch without
reasonable excuse.     In themselves some of the activities involved
may be no more than minor misdemeanours, and outside the context
of football it seems doubtful that the criminal law should be
brought to bear on them.     There is some likelihood that there will
be pressure to extend these proposed offences, particularly that
of chanting obscene or racialist abuse, so that they apply beyond
football grounds.     However, it can be argued, convincingly we
think, that football is a special case because of the unruly
behaviour of a significant minority of attenders and the
provocative effect that such behaviour has on the rest of the
spectators and, maybe, on those who see their behaviour on
television.
9.    ACPO generally favour the making of three specific offences
although within their ranks there are also some who think that the
existing law is adequate and others who think that a general
offence might be preferable to the specific three.    The CPS
favours a general offence of disorderly conduct with the three
specific activities highlighted by Taylor being examples of such
conduct.    The strength of the CPS suggestion lies in its
flexibility; its weakness is that it would provide a very low
threshold for an enormous breadth of potentially criminal
behaviour, the scope of which would be uncertain.    There seems to
us to be a risk of mere exuberance being caught by over-vigorous
policing.   On balance, we think that three specific offences are
preferable.


10.   Legislating in the way proposed to deal with bad behaviour in
football grounds will provide the police with the means to act
more readily than they are able at the moment.   That is the
purpose but there are attendant dangers for police community
relations if, for example, some heavy-handed arrests are made.


Throwing a missile


Existing law


11.   Sections 4 and 5 of the Public Order Act 1986 cover missile
throwing provided that there is a victim or that there is someone
within the sight or hearing of the activity who is likely to be
caused harassment alarm or distress.   In the case of section 4 the
definition of violence (set out in section 8 of the 1986 Act)
explicitly includes the throwing of missiles of a kind capable of
causing injury even if they do not hit or fall short.   And in
section 5 it has been found in the case of DPP v Orum that in law
a police officer is someone who can be caused harassment alarm or
distress.


12.   Taylor suggests that adducing evidence of a victim or a
person likely to be caused harassment etc may be very difficult
and believes that it should be sufficient merely to show that a
missile was thrown at a football match.


ACPO's view


13.   ACPO consider the proposed offence to be simple and
straightforward lending itself to ease of detection and proof.
They point out the obvious difficulties of extracting perpetrators
from a crowd and the possible reaction to such an attempt.      They
feel that officers would have to use their discretion on whether
immediate action was feasible. If it was not, video evidence
obtained at the match and post-match arrest would have to be used
to make sure the law was effectively applied.      These tactics are
used with increasing success in relation to existing offences at
football grounds.


CPS 1s view


14.   The CPS favour the proposed offence but emphasise the need
for the use of video evidence to get over the problems of taking
individuals out of crowds and proving that they were responsible.
With video equipment now available at football league grounds the
necessary technology to make enforcement of the offence a
practical proposition is in place.


Our view


15.   The offence of throwing a missile would    catch behaviour at a
football ground which anywhere else might be     regarded as
innocuous.     We would wish to exclude, by an appropriate definition
of "missile" such innocuous activities as throwing a paper dart or
throwing a hat in the air in jubilation.     UEFA have recently said
that they wish supporters would get back to throwing flowers at
players.      (We might use the "... missile ... capable of causing an
injury" formulation adopted in section 8 of the 1986 Act.)     We
should want to try to include the practice, which we understand
goes on, of throwing bananas at black players.     Apart from the
dangers from the missiles themselves it is the potential at a
football ground of provoking more general disorderly activity
which makes this behaviour a menace and which Taylor believes
requires a criminal sanction.     ACPO and the CPS support the
creation of the offence.      Although it could well be viewed in
some quarters as somewhat heavy-handed we recommend that Ministers
accept the recommendation.


Chanting obscene or racialist abuse


Existing law


16.   As with missile throwing sections 4 and 5 of the Public Order
Act might be applied against chanting obscene or racialist abuse
but again the element of a victim or someone likely to be caused
harassment etc would either be difficult to prove or be absent.
And Taylor points out it is not certain that such chanting is
likely or intended to stir up racial hatred as required by section
18 of the Public Order Act.     For the most part this chanting is,
he suggests, more likely to cause offence, embarrassment or
disgust.


ACPO1s view


17.   ACPO favour creating an offence of chanting obscene or
racialist abuse while pointing up the difficulties of immediate
enforcement and the need for technical back-up in the form of
video evidence and post-match arrests.     Use of these tactics
presents no particular problem (see paragraph 13 above).


CPS's view


18.   The CPS believe that existing law is not adequate but that
considerable difficulties could arise in proving the proposed
offence.     It may be obvious from visual evidence that a spectator
had been shouting something but it may be hard to prove it was an
obscene or racist chant and not "'ere we go" or "God save the
Queen".     The chant will have to have been heard by the police
officer or other witness.     The CPS have reservations that the
witness could assuredly indicate that the person in the dock was
guilty of the offence and not simply a person in a group of people
from whom racist chanting and abuse was heard.     This is apparently
a practical difficulty with the application of the existing law in
these circumstances.     The difficulty of obtaining evidence will
not be overcome by providing a new offence.


Our view


19.    Causing offence, embarrassment or disgust is somewhere below
the threshold of an offence under section 5 of the Public Order
Act 1986 which requires the causing of harassment, alarm or
distress.     In most contexts it might be regarded as a case of bad
manners rather than criminality but the collective nature of the
behaviour and the public context of a football match make the
behaviour particularly objectionable.


20.    If Ministers decide to go ahead with the offence it may be
that pressure will increase for similar offences other than in
football grounds.     This pressure could be resisted on the grounds
that football grounds present a special case (for the reasons set
out in paragraphs 2 and 8).     But this line may prove difficult to
hold particularly if, as seems likely to be argued, the offence
should apply to football spectators on their way to and from
grounds.


21 .   The problem of effective enforcement of this offence seems
more acute than in relation to the other two.     However, it is
probably the most socially offensive of the three targeted
activities.     It would be presentationally difficult to proceed
with offences against missile throwing and pitch invasion and not
with this one.    We suggest acceptance of the recommendation.
Going on the pitch without reasonable excuse


Existing law


22.   Existing law may catch this activity if, for example, it is
likely to cause harassment, alarm, or distress, or if it is likely
to lead to a breach of the peace.    But Taylor suggests that at
football matches the activity itself should be criminal partly
because its purpose could be to attack someone; partly because
whatever the reason for the encroachment it encourages others to
do the same; and partly (and importantly) to introduce sanctions
to ensure that the lowering of the level of perimeter fences,
which is another of his recommendations, is not abused.


ACPO's view


23.   ACPO also favour the adoption of this offence but suggest
omitting the "reasonable excuse" defence.    We think that their
suggestion must be unacceptable because, as Taylor says, a defence
is necessary if people need to escape a hazard on the terraces by
going onto the pitch.


CPS's view


24.   The CPS foresee difficulties of enforcement but believe that
the present law is inadequate to cope with the activity.    They
seem to think that running on at the end of a game may not be the
target of the offence but in some circumstances that seems to us
to be likely to be as bad as running on at the start or during a
match.     They see no difficulty in proof although they expect a
large number of "reasonable excuses" to be put forward.


Our view


25.   Taylor seems to suggest that running onto the pitch as an act
of ioie de vivre at the end of a game should somehow not be caught
by the offence.     Desirable though that may be he cites running
onto the pitch as behaviour which often provokes and is the
prelude to disorder.     It seems to us that it would be difficult in
law to distinguish a benign incursion from a malign one.       We
suggest that Ministers should accept Taylor's recommendation for
an offence but we believe that a workable provision will probably
have the consequence of outlawing running onto the pitch in
jubilation.     This consequence would have to be justified as
necessary for the greater good.     We also suspect that the
"reasonable excuse" defence suggested by Taylor may better be
replaced by a defence of "fear of personal safety or illness etc".
But these are matters which we can consider in more detail if
Ministers agree to the offence in principle.


General considerations relating to offences in the ground


26.     The offences themselves are straightforward but there are
risks that enforcement problems could make them ineffective.        If,
for example, a large number of spectators undertook any of the
activities en masse the police would be seen at the time to be
powerless. But given ACPO and the CPS support for the Taylor
proposals we may be over-sceptical.


27.     ACPO are unable to assess the demand on their resources if
these offences are implemented but think they may make no greater
demands.     The resource effect on the CPS will depend on the degree
of enforcement by the police.


28.     The gravity of the offences will be unlikely to justify a
custodial sentence but both the police and CPS believe there
should be associated powers of arrest.     These are matters to which
we will give further consideration and make recommendations to
Ministers if they decide in principle to proceed with legislation.


(iii)        USE OF ATTENDANCE CENTRES


29.     The Taylor report recommends extending the scope of
attendance centre orders as a means of enforcing exclusion orders
made under the Public Order Act 1986 for those convicted of
football-related offences.      Attendance centre orders may not be
imposed on offenders aged 21 or over.      The report suggests
removing the upper age limit, and increasing the maximum length of
orders from 36 to 72 hours for football-related offences.


ACPO's view


30.     ACPO support the recommendation, but have reservations about
the resource implications.


CPS 1 view


31 .    The CPS see value in a power for courts to order football
offenders to attend at a particular place when football matches
are taking place and which could be combined with an exclusion
order.     However, they see practical difficulties in using
attendance centre orders, and would prefer a requirement for
offenders to report to a police station.


Our view


32.     We do not recommend extending the scope of attendance centre
orders.      Attendance centres offer more than a temporary
restriction of liberty.      They try to provide constructive
activities designed to help young people make better use of their
time.     As they operate at present, they offer most to offenders in
their teens and are unsuitable for older, more difficult
offenders, who might have a disruptive effect.      Many new centres
would be needed, at considerable cost, simply to provide the
nationwide service that Taylor envisages on Saturdays (when most
centres now open).      There would be even greater practical problems
and costs to make provision for mid-week matches.


33.     For offenders aged under 21, convicted of imprisonable
offences, attendance centre orders may already be combined with
exclusion orders.      We suggest that the best way forward is to
concentrate on those under 21 and to issue a circular reminding
courts of the powers they already have and to encourage them to
consider linking attendance centre orders with exclusion orders
for suitable offenders.


(iv)     USE OF ELECTRONIC TAGGING


34.    The Taylor report recommends that consideration should be
given to the use of electronic monitoring in the sentencing of
offenders convicted of football-related offences.


ACPO's view


35.    The majority view was that monitoring could be helpful,
subject to assurance that the technology works and the caveat that
the task of checking on curfew violations could involve additional
work for the police.


CPS 1s view


36.    The CPS had few comments; as in the case of attendance centre
orders they thought a condition of reporting to a police station
at the time of a match might be equally effective at less cost.


Our view


37.    Ministers have already indicated their wish that the Criminal
Justice Bill should include provision for courts to make curfew
orders as a penalty following conviction which could (subject to
the outcome of the electronic monitoring trials) be enforced by
monitoring.    If the courts have curfew powers then they will be
able to apply them in cases of football-related offences.    The CPS
are correct in suggesting that in most cases, if what is desired
is to keep offenders away from the opportunity of creating trouble
at a match and, as a punishment, deprive them of seeing a game on
Saturday afternoon, then a requirement to visit the police station
when the match would be on is probably a more cost effective way
of achieving it.   If it is felt that a stronger punishment is
merited then a curfew order perhaps generally restricting the
offender's weekend social activities might be imposed and
electronic monitoring could be used to enforce the curfew.


SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS


38.   Ministers are invited to agree that in accordance with
Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations each of the following
activities should be made an offence:


      (a)   selling tickets for and on the day of a football match
            without authority from the home club to do so. (paras 3-
            6)

      (b)   at a designated sports ground


            (i)     throwing a missile;


            (ii) chanting obscene or racialist abuse; and


            (iii)    going on the pitch without reasonable excuse
            (paras 7-26).



39.   We do not recommend extending the scope of attendance centre
orders as Taylor suggests (paras 27-31).


40.   Subject to the evaluation of the cost effectiveness of
electronic monitoring (on which a submission reporting the outcome
of the field trials will be coming forward shortly), courts will
be able to support curfew orders with electronic monitoring.        It
will then be for the courts to decide whether the imposition of a
curfew order as a penalty for a football-related offence would be
justified by the seriousness of the offence.      If it is, the times
of the curfew could be fixed to keep the offender away from
football matches.
HANDLING

41.   If Ministers agree to the creation of the four offences we
shall need to seek policy approval in H Committee and identify a
legislative vehicle.   This will depend in part on the outcome of
the Home Secretary's discussions yesterday with the Lord
President.




                               J L GODDARD
