                FROM: ROBERT G. H U G H E S MP (Harrow West)         ; i 9 FEB 1390




                            H O U S E OF C O M M O N S
                                                                 ec IWs fMfcUAi 7 V \
                                LONDON      SW1A OAA
                                                                    (la ■ tcri v
  13 February 1990                                                   i/U'.

  Martin Brandon-Bravo Esq MP
  House of Commons
  LONDON SW1A OAA
                                                                                      ir/z.


• jLrtU:,
  R e : Hillsborough Family Support Group



  Trevor Hicks, who is the Chairman of the above Group, is one of my
  constituents and he lost two teenage daughters in the Hillsborough
  disaster.

  Mr Hicks and the other members of the Hillsborough Family Support Group
  recently met with the Leader of the Opposition, Neil Kinnock MP. Mr
  Hicks has now approached me with the possibility of meeting with one of
  the Home Office Ministers, preferable the Home Secretary the Rt Hon
  David Waddington QC MP.

  The Group are very concerned to obtain justice and they are keen to put
  forward their views about the disaster. Nevertheless, their overriding
  interest is to ensure that such a disaster never happens again.   I have
  met with Mr Hicks on several occasions and although his circumstances
  are very close to the issues, his comments are thoroughly thought
  through and he can and does discuss the Group's objectives logically.

  I strongly believe that the Hillsborough Family Support Group should be
  afforded an interview by the Home Office and indeed the Party. For your
  information I am enclosing some details regarding their objectives which
  I have been passed by the Group.

  With best wishes




                                                             ;     •cA ■- '
                                                      Trevor & Jenni Hicks




House Of Conmons,
London,
SW1A OAA.

f.a.o: Robert Hughes MP (Harrow West)                    7th February 1990.




                         re: Peter Wright Article

further to our discussions I enclose copies of the "Sheffield Star"
newspaper that carried the interview with Peter Wright.

     You will see that despite Taylor and all the conflicting evidence to

«    contrary he insists on claiming drink was a major factor in the
disaster.The families find this outrageous and offensive to the memories of
our loved ones.
     He also claims that     "additional evidence, particularily about the
effect of alcohol on fans will present a different picture at the Coroners
Inquest." This is alarming families and again is most offensive.

It is wrong that Mr. Wright should infer/' use confidential information (if
indeed he has it!) to deflect the critiscsym that he justly was subjected
to.He is abusing his priviledged position.    His comments beg two further
questions

1)why was all the evidence not given to Taylor /West Midlands Police?

2)It could be argued that this-act of "disclosure" could well
prejudice the Coroners Inquest/ Jurors.

At the Inquiry, Andrew Collins QC became so vexed at the Police Barrister's
( Mr.Woodward QC) attempts to use this smear tactic that he released blood
alcohol levels of the victims in an attempt to stop it. Now here we go
again.
I would welcome your views on how we can stop it once and for all and
obviously a statement from Mr. waddington supporting Taylor would be one
way.
•
M X L L S B O R O U G H
                           1
                                    F Z\iyi X I_,V           S U P P O R T        G R O I J F>




                                  O B J E C T          X X/ES



    To support and assist each other.



    To seek justice.



    To press for a National Body to standardise and supervise the Safety
    Certification process.



    To    improve safety at all          sports         stadia by revision of            ’’The Green
    Guide"    and    the       introduction       of    such     other    recommendations        from
    Lord Justice Taylors Reports as are necessary.



    To     press    Parliament        for     the       introduction         of    the    necessary
    legislation to ensure (4) above becomes mandatory.



    Press    for    immediate      improvement          of    the   Administration       of   Justice
    Act    1982    ( incorporating          the    Fatal       Accident   Act     1976   ) and    for
    the introduction of "non - liability" compensation legislation.
