FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL

NATIONAL MEMBERSHIP SCHEME FOR FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS




BACKGROUND MATERIAL



FRONT TAG FOLDER

The Report of the Minister for Sport's Working Party
The Football Spectators Bill
Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report




FLAGGED PAPERS


A    Brief on Possible Areas of Interest to Lord Justice Taylor
B   Submission Re: Procedure at Turnstiles
C   Bull Point Brief: The Bill and the Scheme
D   Football Licensing Authority - Extract from Commons Committee
                                                           Hansard
E   Minutes of FA/FL Joint Working Groups Meetings
F   DoE Paper Submitted to Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry
G   H Committee Paper: Football Hooliganism
H   Existing Membership Schemes at Derby, Luton and Tottenham
I   The Football League
J   The Football Association
K   The Dutch Membership Scheme
L   Italy: Anti-Hooliganism Measures
Mr Owen




BRIEFING FOR PRESENTATION TO LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: 17 OCTOBER

I enclose revised and up-dated versions of the earlier flagged
papers:


     A    Brief on possible Areas of Interest to Lord Justice Taylor
          based on FA/FL recommendations (item c isrevised)
     H   Existing Membership Schemes   at Derby,Luton   and Tottenham
     I   The Football League
     J   The Football Association
     K    The Dutch Membership Scheme (a copy of the bull point
          briefing on this is also attached)




A R BADEN
SARD C
Rm P3/165
Extn 0675


cc   Mr McDonald    (without bull point briefing on K, already
                                                   circulated)
                                       It                It
     Mr Kinghan          It

                         It            It                It
     Mr Lee
                                       It                It
     Mr Smith            It
BRIEFING ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION AND
FOOTBALL LEAGUE: PHASE II OF THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY



1.     The attached briefing on the recommendations of the
Football League and the Football Association on phase 2 of the
Taylor Inquiry: Wider Issues, concerns:

     (1)   Their criticisms of the Football Membership Scheme;
     (2)   the proposed seating requirements at football grounds;
     (3)   the proposed reduction in the rate of pool betting tax;
     (4) and (5) recommendations concerning capital allowances for
          ground improvements and Government assistance towards the
          construction of new grounds;
     (6)   the proposal for restricting ticket sales on match days to
           official clubs selling points;
     (7)   the recommendations concerning    alcohol   consumption
           primarily a Home Office matter;
     (8)   the Green Guide recommendations - entirely a Home Office
           matter.

2.         The paragraph references are to the report of the FA/FL.




SARD C
16 October 1989
1. Criticisms of the Football Membership Scheme


a) It will cause additional congestion outside the turnstiles (7*3)

   Line to take

   Potential suppliers of the technology say that some systems would mean no
   extra time would be necessary to check the card at the turnstile. It could
   be done in no more than the time it presently takes to part with tickets or
   to pay for them.

b) It will lead to the loss of occasional supporters ( 7 A )

   Line to take

   It is a requirement of the Football Spectators Bill that the scheme must
   include provisions allowing for temporary membership.   Joining a scheme
   will be a simple process involving completing a single form with a few
   personal details and providing two photographs.

c) It will involve major policing problems, in particular of removing those
   who attempt to enter illegally (7-5)

   Line to take

   a) If the technology failed entirely, the police would simply allow the
   crowd into the ground.

   b) If cards were damaged (likely to be few in number) entry would be
   permitted, the card confiscated and a temporary pass issued.

   c) If cards were invalid, the police would arrest the holders. If in the
   early stages of introduction of the scheme large numbers of fans attempted
   to gain illegal entry by means of forged or stolen cards or because they
   were banned from the scheme, an example would be set of those who were
   arrested.   This should deter future attempts at mass disruption of the
   scheme.

   Where a spectator is not authorised to attend because of a previous
   conviction but nevertheless obtains illegal entry and subsequently
   misbehaves inside the grounds, he would be charged with both the criminal
   offences of being there illegally and for his misbehaviour.

d) It does not address the problem of hooliganism away from grounds (7*6)

   Line to take

   It is not true that hooliganism is no longer a problem inside grounds. Over
   k5% of arrests in the 1988/89 season were inside football grounds.   In the
   case of the First Division, the arrest figures inside and outside grounds
   were almost identical.

   The scheme would end football as a focus for hooliganism outside as well as
   inside the ground.   It would remove the match as a central focus for the
   activities of hooligans.   If they cannot get into a match they will not
   travel to one.
• The Safety of Sports Grounds Act should be amended to make the achievement
  at English Football League grounds of a, stated ratio of seating to ground
  capacity compulsory within a stated time-scale (5♦ 3.4)


 Line to take

 This is a matter    under the Football Spectators Bill for the Secretary of
 State to take the   advise of the Football Licensing Authority. The FLA will
 no doubt wish to    consult the local authorities for the grounds concerned
 and the football    authorities.  It is likely that different grounds would
 require different   solutions over varying time-scales.

 The Secretary of State is not bound by the FLA recommendation but he may by
 order direct the FLA to make it a condition of a licence to admit
 spectators, that the ground or grounds named should replace terracing by
 seating as specified in the order.
The Government should give financial assistance to football by effectively
reducing the rate of pool betting tax from its present ^ 2 . 5 % and ensuring
that the entire benefit of the reduction was passed to football (5*25)


Line to take

The pool betting duty is a tax on gambling, not on football. Channelling
of a fixed proportion of this tax to football would amount to a
hypotheration of revenue. It is a basic principle of the tax system that
receipts from taxation are treated as belonging to a central pool from
which resources are allocated according to public expenditure priorities.

The pools promoters through the Football Trust and the Football Grounds
Improvement Trust already provide substantial financial assistance to
football, about £9.5® a year. This assistance is not affected by the level
of pool betting duty since they are found from the proceeds of the Spotting
the Ball competitions on which duty is not charged.


[If required on comparison with horseracing levy.

The horseracing levy board was set up in 1961 when off-course betting shops
were legalised and this drew money away from the courses.    Football pools
betting does not, of course, have a comparable effect on the income of
individual clubs.]
 The Government should make    capital   allowances   available   for   ground
improvements (5*26)

Central and local government should be      encouraged   to   assist    in   the
construction of new grounds (9»6)                        '


Line to take

Football is a prosperous industry which should pay for the measures needed
to secure the reasonable safety and comfort of its customers.    It should
not look to the Government for assistance to enable it to discharge its
responsibilities to its customers.      The Government does not provide
financial assistance of this sort to any sport.
The sale of tickets on match days other than at official club selling
points should be made illegal (8.3)


Line to take

While we have every sympathy with the objectives behind this proposal we
doubt that there is a practicable and enforceable legal remedy to the
problem.   The proposal if implemented would prevent the legitimate last
minute sale of spare tickets or tickets which an individual was no longer
in a position to use, to a friend.     Moreover, there would still be the
danger that the 'professional* touts would continue their activities
underground and demand yet higher prices.
7* Recommendations on alcohol consumption:


a) The sections of the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol, etc) Act. 1985
   dealing with the consumption of alcohol at grounds should be repealed (9*5)

  Line to take

  This is primarily a matter for the Home Office but our view and that of the
  Home Office is that the measures to control alcohol introduced in 1985 have
  unquestionably played a part in improving the situation inside grounds in
  respect of drink related disorder.    We see no reason for relaxing these
  measures now and it is far from evident that the provision of alcohol on
  the grounds will encourage the hard core of spectators who stay in the pubs
  until the last minute to leave early.


b) The Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol, etc) Act. 1985 should be amended
   to require coach operators carrying football supporters to matches to carry
   supporters direct to grounds and to prevent the consumption of alcohol both
   in the coach and en route (9*5)


   Line to take

   The Home Office position is that there is no evidence that coach operators
   are not abiding by the spirit as well as the letter of the 1985 Act under
   which it is an offence to consume alcohol on coaches going either to or
   from matches.
8. Green Guide recommendations:


a) It should be a condition of the issue of a Safety Certificate that certain
   specific requirement of the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds are met (6.3)

   Line to take

   This is a Home Officer matter.

   Background

   The Home Office position is that the Green Guide is there to provide
   guidance on safety at sports grounds to be drawn upon by local authorities
   as appropriate according to the circumstances of the case. Whether or not
   there should be certain standard safety requirements to be a condition of
   the issue of all football ground Safety Certificates is a matter for the
   Inquiry.


b) A Working Party should be set up to draw up these requirements of the Guide
   which should be satisfied as a condition of the issue of a Safety
   Certificate (6 .5 )

   Line to take

   This is a Home Officer matter.


c) Various amendments and additions to the Guide should be made (6.6 to 6.11)

   Line to take

   These are Home Office matters.

  Background

  The Home Office has not yet formed a view on all these specific
  suggestions.    In some cases they can be supported or indeed are
  self-evident, such as the suggestion that each tumstile/group of
  turnstiles should give access to one designated area of the stadium.

  The key issue for the Home Office in relation to the FA/FL comments on the
  Guide is the question of perimeter fencing.    The advice in the Guide on
  this stemmed primarily from considerations of prevention of disorder rather
  than public safety although the two are of course inextricably linked. The
  Home Office are still considering the line they should take if pressed by
  Taylor.
