                                          jjz-                        -




1. Mr Ljee
2. Mr Kinghan




BRIEFING FOR THE TAYLOR INQUIRY: RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE FOOTBALL
ASSOCIATION AND FOOTBALL LEAGUE ON THE WIDER ISSUES

1.     I attach briefing on the recommendations of the Football
League and the Football Association on phase 2 of the Taylor
Inquiry: Wider Issues.

2.         The briefing covers:-

     (1)   their criticisms of the Football Membership Scheme;

     (2)   the proposed seating requirements at football grounds;

     (3)   the proposed reduction in the rate of pool betting tax;

     (4) and (5) recommendations concerning capital allowances for
          ground improvements and Government assistance towards the
          construction of new grounds;

     (6 ) the proposal for restricting ticket sales on match days to
          official clubs selling points;

     (7)   the recommendations  concerning   alcohol   consumption
           primarily a Home Office matter;

     (8 ) the Green Guide recommendations - entirely a Home Office
          matter.

3.         The paragraph references are to the report of the FA/FL.

4.     As you know I am most concerned at our defence on allowing
football hooligans to enter grounds with invalid membership
cards.   What we seem to be proposing is a scheme under which
hooligans don't have to pay anything to enter football grounds
apart from the cost of obtaining forged membership cards! This
hardly seems a way to prevent hooligans from attending football
matches or from engaging in misbehaviour outside the grounds.

5.     When the briefing is cleared I would like to send a copy
of David Mould at the Home Office.




A R BADEN
P3/165 - x0675

28 September 1989

cc     Mr Smith
       Mr Ellingford
Criticisms of the Football Membership Scheme


It will cause additional congestion outside the turnstiles (7-3)

Line to take

Potential suppliers of the technology say that some systems would mean no
extra time would be necessary to check the card at the turnstile. It could
be done in no more than the time it presently takes to part with tickets or
to pay for them.


It will lead to the loss of occasional supporters (7**0

Line to take

It is a requirement of the Football Spectators Bill that the scheme must
include provisions allowing for temporary membership.   Joining a scheme
will be a simple process involving completing a single form with a few
personal details and providing two photographs.

There should indeed be an increase in attendance as a result of the scheme
by those who would otherwise not attend because of the threat of violence.
In particular we would expect more families to attend.


It will involve ma.lor policing problems, in particular of removing those
who attempt to enter illegally (7*5)

Line to take

Where a card is rejected it will be retained by the turnstile operator, the
spectator given a receipt and allowed in and the investigation will follow
later - eitherduring the match or the following day.         We accept the
practical policing difficulties of attempting to investigate all rejected
cards either at or immediately after the turnstiles. Reasons for rejection
would include, faulty machinery, damaged and forged cards or because the
card was declared banned, lost or stolen.

Where a spectator is not authorised to attend because of a previous
conviction but nevertheless obtains illegal entry and subsequently
misbehaves inside the grounds, he would be charged with both the criminal
offences of being there illegally and for his misbehaviour.


It does not address the problem of hooliganism away from grounds (7-6)

Line to take

It is not true that hooliganism is no longer a problem inside grounds. Over
k5% of arrests in the 1988/89 season were inside football grounds. In the
case of the First Division, the arrest figures inside and outside grounds
were almost identical.

The scheme would end football as a focus for hooliganism outside as well as
inside the ground. It would remove the match as a central focus for the
activities of hooligans. If they cannot get into a match they will not
travel to one.
. The Safety of Sports Grounds Act should be amended to make the achievement
  at English Football League grounds of a stated ratio of seating to ground
  capacity compulsory within a stated time-scale (5 .14)


 Line to take

 This is a matter    under the Football Spectators Bill for the Secretary of
 State to take the   advise of the Football Licensing Authority. The FLA will
 no doubt wish to    consult the local authorities for the grounds concerned
 and the football    authorities. It is likely that different grounds would
 require different   solutions over varying time-scales.

 The Secretary of State is not bound by the FLA recommendation but he may by
 order direct the FLA to make it a condition of a licence to admit
 spectators, that the ground or grounds named should replace terracing by
 seating as specified in the order.
The Government should give financial assistance to football by effectively
reducing the rate of pool betting tax from its present *12.5# and ensuring
that the entire benefit of the reduction was passed to football (5*25)


Line to take

The pool betting duty is a tax on gambling, not on football. Channelling
of a fixed proportion of this tax to football would amount to a
hypotheration of revenue. It is a basic principle of the tax system that
receipts from taxation are treated as belonging to a central pool from
which resources are allocated according to public expenditure priorities.

The pools promoters through the Football Trust and the Football Grounds
Improvement Trust already provide substantial financial assistance to
football, about £9.5m a year. This assistance is not affected by the level
of pool betting duty since they are found from the proceeds of the Spotting
the Ball competitions on which duty is not charged.


[If required on comparison with horseracing levy.

The horseracing levy board was set up in 1961 when off-course betting shops
were legalised and this drew money away from the courses. Football pools
betting does not, of course, have a comparable effect on the income of
individual clubs.]
k.    The Government should   make   capital   allowances   available   for   ground
     improvements (5*26)

5. Central and local government should be encouraged           to assist in the
   construction of new grounds (9*6)


     Line to take
     Football is a prosperous industry which should pay for the measures needed
     to secure the reasonable safety and comfort of its customers. It should
     not look to the Government for assistance to enable it to discharge its
     responsibilities to its customers.      The Government does not provide
     financial assistance of this sort to any sport.
The sale of tickets on match days other than at official club selling
points should be made illegal (8.3)


Line to take

While we have every sympathy with the objectives behind this proposal we
doubt that there is a practicable and enforceable legal remedy to the
problem.   The proposal if implemented would prevent the legitimate last
minute sale of spare tickets or tickets which an individual was no longer
in a position to use, to a friend. Moreover, there would still be the
danger that the 'professional* touts would continue their activities
underground and demand yet higher prices.
Recommendations on alcohol consumption:


The sections of the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol, etc) Act, 1985
dealing with the consumption of alcohol at grounds should be repealed (9.5)

Line to take
This is primarily a matter for the Home Office but our view and that of the
Home Office is that the measures to control alcohol introduced in 1985 have
unquestionably played a part in improving the situation inside grounds in
respect of drink related disorder. We see no reason for relaxing these
measures now and it is far from evident that the provision of alcohol on
the grounds will encourage the hard core of spectators who stay in the pubs
until the last minute to leave early.


The Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol, etc) Act, 1985 should be amended
to require coach operators carrying football supporters to matches to carry
supporters direct to grounds and to prevent the consumption of alcohol both
in the coach and en route (9*5)


Line to take
The Home Office position is that there is no evidence that coach operators
are not abiding by the spirit as well as the letter of the 1985 Act under
which it is an offence to consume alcohol on coaches going either to or
from matches.
8. Green Guide recommendations:


a) It should be a condition of the issue of a Safety Certificate that certain
   specific requirement of the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds are met (6.3)

   Line to take

   This is a Home Officer matter.

   Background

   The Home Office position is that the Green Guide is there to provide
   guidance on safety at sports grounds to be drawn upon by local authorities
   as appropriate according to the circumstances of the case. Whether or not
   there should be certain standard safety requirements to be a condition of
   the issue of all football ground Safety Certificates is a matter for the
   Inquiry.


b) A Working Party should be set up to draw up these requirements of the Guide
   which should be satisfied as a condition of the issue of a Safety
   Certificate (6.5)

   Line to take

   This is a Home Officer matter.


c) Various amendments and additions to the Guide should be made (6.6 to 6..11)

   Line to take

   These are Home Office matters.

   Background

   The Home Office has not yet formed a view on all these specific
   suggestions.    In some cases they can be supported or indeed are
   self-evident, such as the suggestion that each turnstile/group of
   turnstiles should give access to one designated area of the stadium.

   The key issue for the Home Office in relation to the FA/FL comments on the
   Guide is the question of perimeter fencing. The advice in the Guide on
   this stemmed primarily from considerations of prevention of disorder rather
   than public safety although the two are of course inextricably linked. The
   Home Office are still considering the line they should take if pressed by
   Taylor.
