Edward Leigh Esq MP
Parliamentary U nder Secretary o f State
for Industry and Consum er Affairs



  A J Street Esq FITSA                                                               D e p a rtm e n t o f
  Chief Trading Standards Officer                                                    T ra d e and Industry
  Nottinghamshire County Council
  Trent Bridge House                                                                 Ashdown House
  Fox Road                                                                           123 Victoria Street
                                                                                     London SW1E 6R B
  West Bridgford
  Nottingham NG2 6BJ              DES MIN/SP
                                                                                     D irect line
                                                           M R                       071-215 5147
                                                           ADVICE           INFO*/
                                                                                     D T I Enquiries
                                                                                     071-215 5000

              eptember 1991                                 C
                                                            a
                                                            E
                                                            i
                                                            £
                                                            S




                         l/jr                                    /
  Thank you for your letter of 19 August enclosing a copy of
  your report to your Council's Public Protection Committee on
  ticket touts.
  There have been various representations asking that declaring
  the face value of tickets before selling them be made
  compulsory, using the powers available under Part III of the .
  Consumer Protection Act. I understand that the question will
  be addressed in the report of the committee established to
  monitor the present regime governing misleading price
  indications, which I expect to receive shortly, and I shall
  consider carefully any recommendations they may make.
  There is however a significant difference between this
  proposal and calling for it to be an offence to sell the
  ticket above its face value. The latter proposal is outside
  the scope of the CPA and could close off or restrict the
  legitimate channels through which tickets are redistributed
  from consumers who do not want them, or are unable to use
  them, to those who do. Any question of making ticket touting
  a criminal offence is a matter for Home Office Ministers, who
  also have primary responsibility within the Government for the
  safety and public order issues.




                                                    dti
                                           the departm ent for Enterprise
As you will appreciate, the points raised in the report
surrounding the FA's allocation and distribution procedures
are for the FA themselves to resolve.
I am copying this letter along with yours and the report to
Kenneth Baker, the Home Secretary and for information to
Robert Atkins, the Minister for Sport.




                       \




                              EDWARD LEIGH




WH9.272




                                    dti
                           the departm ent for Enterprise
                              X o 11i n g h a 211shire
                                                                = dx =.caa .Vest 3r cg '-rc
                              C ounty C ou n cil                \cttm g ham NG2 6 3 -

                              Trading Standards                 Telephone
                                                                Nottingham (0602) 8 2 3 8 2 3
                              Chief Trading Standards Officer   Telex 3 7 8 3 8 3 call back code NCCTBH G
                              A j Street ~!TSA                      '0 5 0 2 ' -5 5 5 9 8
                                                                Direct Line (0 6 0 2 )




                                                                Your ref
Edward Leigh
Minister for Consumer Affai                                     Our ref
Dept, of Trade & Industry                                                  AJS/CR
Victoria St                                                     Please ask for
London                                                          Tei extension     Mr A Street
                                                                                    823380
                                                                Date
                                                                           19 August 1991




Dear Minister,

I enclose for your attention a copy of report to my Council which I believe
is self-explanatory.

In particular, I draw your attention to what my Council-now accepts as an
omission in the law which if-corrected, would be of considerable benefit to
consumers. Perhaps it is relevant that I-should emphasise that the proposal
would strike at those engaged in selling tickets as part of their business and
would not affect the sales of one private individual to another. I understand
your office has contemplated this proposed amendment to the Consumer
Protection Act before and I therefore hope that our findings will persuade you
to consider implementing the change.

Yours sincerely,                                                  copies to
                                            For ADVICE
                                            DRAFT REPLY lr
                                            APPROPRIATE)
                                            PLEASE B Y :

A J Street
Chief Trading Standards Officer
                 report



                 m eeting       PUBLIC PROTECTION COMMITTEE


                 date           14 AUGUST 1991          agenda item number   M



          REPORT OF CHIEF TRADING STANDARDS OFFICER


         TICKET TOOTS       -    THE FINAL WHISTLE?


         Background

          1.       Whenever an important national event is held, whether it be sporting,
                   cultural, or whatever, it is rare - if ever - that public demand for
                   attendance can be met. Arising from this fact comes the opportunity for
                   certain people to exploit the situation and secure high profits - such
                   people have over the years, become known as 'touts'.

         2.       Annually the FA Cup Final provides a golden opportunity for the tout to
                   make a small fortune, often at the expense of some fervent supporters who
                  may not be able to sensibly afford the high asking price, but it will
                   always be at the expense of other particular supporters of the two
                   finalist teams. In recent years the. capacity of the ground where the
                   event is held has been reduced as more seating is introduced and improved
                   safety measures installed. Whilst such moves are welcomed it does
                   accentuate the problem of meeting public demand, especially that of the
                   followers of the teams involved. Nevertheless the Wembley stadium can
                   hold 78,000 - a gate which any football club would desire to have at
                   every home game.

         3.       Over the last three years the Liverpool Trading Standards Department has
                   undertaken surveys outside the ground on Cup Final day in order to
                  determine the level of activity of touts and the extent to which
                   supporters were being exploited. It then analysed the findings and used
                  them to make recommendations to those who control the event and then
                   subsequently monitor any improvement the following year. The objective
                  of the entire exercise was to attempt to secure a fairer deal for the
                   average football supporter - an aim with which the CTSO could readily
                  identify and support. Before summarising the findings of the past years,
                   the CTSO would wish to place on record the debt of gratitude the
                  Department owes to colleagues in Liverpool for their help and advice in
                  making the survey for 1991 possible.


         1988 Liversocl v Winrbledon

         4.       Despite the enormous gulf in the size of support of the finalists, each
                   club was allocated 25,000 tickets (51% of the then 98,000 capacity) which
                  meant that 48,000 tickets went to other league and non league clubs plus
                  various County and distinct Football Associations, the Football




NCC'Cl*S>4*0'7
     Association and Wembley stadium. Touting was widespread and resulted in
     an estimated 10,000 Liverpool supporters paying a conservatively
     estimated £250,000 over face value for their tickets to see the game.
     Apart from the commercial aspect of this activity, public safety was
     endangered as many of these Liverpool fans found themselves in the
     Wimbledon end of the stadium. Ticket related violence was also in
     evidence at and around the stadium.

5.   The 1988 report concluded that the FA allocation of tickets was unfair
     and unsafe and called upon the Football Association to:

      (a) Allocate more tickets to the two finalists;

      (b) Consider comparative home attendances when apportioning the tickets
      to the two finalists;

      (c) Ensure all tickets are stamped to identify their origin; and

     (d) Conduct their own investigation to identify the source of the touted
     tickets to take their own disciplinary action, and to make public such
     action.

     This report was also submitted to the Director General of Fair Trading
     who, under the Fair Trading Act 1973, must keep under review any
     commercial activity which might act against the economic or safety
     interests of consumers.


1989 Liverpool v Everton

6.   The initial FA response to- the 198& report was to make no change to their
      1989 allocation system, apart that is from reducing the allocation to the
      finalists to a total of 42,000 as the stadium capacity was reduced that
      year to 85,000. After the Hillsborough disaster however, the FA made a
     one-off decision to allocate 70,000 of the available tickets (82%) to the
      finalists. If nothing else, this clearly demonstrates that the FA can
      quickly and easily vary the ticket allocation without, apparently,
      causing significant public outcry from elsewhere in the Country.

7.   The 1989 survey then found that the value of the level of touting
     estimated at £88,000 revealed an 83% drop on the previous year. This
      again supports the view that the best way of restricting touting is in
      the hands of the FA themselves who quite clearly, have only to allocate
      the bulk of thetickets to the supporters of the finalists, i.e. people
     who actually want to attend the match. It is understood that the FA did
      carry out investigations following the 1988 and 1989 reports, which
     resulted in a wide variety of clubs, associations, organisations,
     officials and individuals receiving ticket bands and associated fines.
     The reason why such decisions cannot be more positively reported is that
      the FA chose not to make public the result of their enquiry and actions,
     not even to theLiverpool Trading Standards Department who had provided
      the FA with the evidence for them to utilise.

8.   Despite the clear lessons to be learnt from this more equitable system of
     ticket allocation, the FA perversely reverted to their former ways in
     respect of the following year's final by deciding to allocate just over
     53% of the tickets to the two finalists. They did accede to
     recommendations by allocating tickets to the two finalists in proportion
       to their average home attendances and by making the tickets themselves
       identifiable. Nevertheless, nearly half the tickets would again be
       distributed to clubs and organisations around the Country which had no
       direct involvement in the Final itself.

 9.    The Director General of Fair Trading, whilst declining a legal remedy to
        the problems highlighted in the reports was, broadly speaking, in
        agreement with the conclusions drawn and the recommendations made.


 1990 Manchester United v Crystal Palace

 10.   The 53.7% allocated to the finalist teams was apportioned according to
        level of support with Manchester United receiving 27,000 tickets and
        Crystal Palace 15,000 tickets. Consequently, 36,000 tickets were
        available to feed a potential buoyant market of the ticket tout.

 11.   Sure enough, the survey for that year showed that the level of touting
        increased on the previous year by 63% and this represents an estimated
        £350,000 worth of touted tickets. On this occasion the largest number of
        touted tickets appeared to have originated from the number allocated to
        Manchester. Whilst this might seem contradictory, it has to be
        remembered that the average home gate at Old Trafford is 39,000 and this
        created a huge local demand which could not be met without resorting to
       over the odds deals. This considerable shortfall could have been averted
        by a more realistic ticket allocation by the FA which simultaneously
       would have restricted the touts' market.

12.    It can therefore be seen that although 1990 touting was considerably
        increased on the 1989 level, there was a 73% reduction in 1990 when
        compared to the 1988 figure. There is little doubt that this reduction
        had been achieved by the FA adopting a policy of allocation to finalists
        in proportion to home attendances. It is also believed that the
        increased awareness now being monitored by Trading Standards Officers,
       with the threat of subsequent action by the FA, was additionally having
       an impact.


1991 Nottingham Forest v Tottenham Hotspur

.13.   As a result of Nottingham Forest reaching this year's Cup Final, it was
       decided to mount an operation in an attempt to protect the
       Nottinghamshire public from the activities of ticket touts. Wide
       publicity was given to the fact that the Department intended to have a
       strong presence of Officers outside Wembley stadium on the day of the
       game, intending to talk to the attending public to glean information as
       to source of tickets in a similar way to that undertaken by Liverpool in
       previous years. The Officers were duly in position outside the stadium
       from 9 am that Saturday morning and remained there until 3 pm - match
       kick off time. Literally thousands of fans were approached and asked for
       information relating to the source and cost of their tickets.

14.    The operation, however, was severely hampered by a rubber of—constraints.

       (a) The Metropolitan Police published a notice in the match programme
       warning people not to show their tickets to anyone. This was intended to
       put the public on their guard against potential mugging incidents but had
       the effect of discouraging them from showing their tickets to anyone
 including clearly identified Trading Standards Officers.

 (b) The FA issued a sheet listing "conditions of issue" to every
 purchaser of a ticket at a legitimate outlet and this warned that anyone
 paying an enhanced price for their ticket might be refused entry to the
 ground.

 (c) The warning mentioned in (b) above, was repeatedly broadcast over the
 huge Wembley PA system from 10 am until 2.30 pm.

 (d) The same warning was continually relayed to the approaching public by
 means of a massive visual display screen outside the stadium and near the
 head of "Wembley Way".

 Not surprisingly, the majority of fans were not keen to divulge the
 relevant information, despite the reality that warnings to refuse entry
 were entirely hollow. Cross examination at the turnstiles would have led
 to long delays which, in turn, would have caused frustration and
 annoyance. Exactly the same kind of conditions that Lord Taylor found
 existed on the day of the Hillsborough disaster. It is also reasonable
 to assume that no-one in their right mind having paid, say, £100 for a
 £12 ticket was then going to admit that fact, only to be refused entry.
 The ticket holder might just as well throw the £100 away. Even where the
 stadium officials might have gained knowledge of a tout sale (by virtue
 of observation) to attempt to deny access would inevitably lead to
 confrontation at the turnstile and possibly violence.

 What had begun as a difficult task then became almost impossible as the
 masses of supporters, though generally polite, were impatient to get into
 the ground and continue to enjoy their special day. No Officer was
 challenged that the Trading Standards presence was unnecessary and
 indeed, information was given from a number of sources that touts were
 telling clients not to talk to Trading Standards Officers, as that would
 result in their tickets being confiscated. Total regard was had to the
 wishes of fans at all times and proper liaison was maintained with the
 Police in order to avoid any difficulty.

 Nevertheless, and in the face of daunting odds, the job was completed
 with determination by the staff involved.   Media interest in the efforts
 remained high and resulted in favourable nationwide exposure for the
 Department. The information concerning tickets supplied by touts at
 inflated prices is       detailed in Appendix A.

 When the people in       question were contactedsubsequent to the   event, in
 order to complete the circle of proof, a disappointing number of people
 responded. This additional information is necessary because in previous
 years Trading Standards Departments had chosen to deal only in totally
 substantiated facts and whilst maintaining confidentiality, they could
 withstand any challenge as to the accuracy of the findings and claims. A
 list of the instances where the Department has such proof is to be found
 in Appendix B.


usions

Despite the publicity both prior to and after 18 May, which identified
the Department's objective the public were not forthcoming in providing
the level of proof which the Department had set for itself and which
would be necessary to persuade the FA of the need for reform to what is
clearly an unsatisfactory system of allocation of Cup Final tickets. The
FA, perhaps unwittingly, proved to everyone in 1989 after the
Hillsborough tragedy, that the simplest and easiest way to beat the tout
and thus provide a fairer, safer system for the public, is to simply
allocate a higher proportion of the tickets to the two competing teams in
the Final.

The CTSO does however, level some responsibility at the door of the
football fan. Much more evidence could have been made available before,
during and after the event but the apathy of those who could have
assisted in the enquiries is strangely marked despite the fact that the
Department had done all it could to publicise its intention and to make
the opportunity of contact as simple, cheap and as confidential as
possible. .

The one area which did seem to generate stronger and more emotive
responses was in connection with a published allegation that a privatised
Electricity Board had spent significant sums of money in acquiring
tickets which were then given to selected persons. The complaints
generally fell into one of two categories. On the one hand, members of
the public objected to the way in which such monies were being spent. On
the other, there were those who accepted that the use of hospitality
facilities was a legitimate practice in business life, but objected to
the Electricity Board adopting such a practice because there was no
alternative left open to the consumer should he wish to take his business
elsewhere.

The CTSO would also comment on the high level of rumour and speculation
which was to be heard over the period leading up to and beyond the Cup
Final day. It is said that names of players and others associated with
the Clubs who had access to tickets were freely named in debates in
public houses and other social gatherings. All these rumours could have
been avoided in the first place by the FA and the clubs themselves
stating plainly and categorically what the allocation would be and how
these would be used at a local level. The simplest way to remove
speculation is to state the facts at the outset.

It is impossible to avoid making some comment on the position of
promotional agents. The agent may be found in one of two guises. There
are those who offer commercial organisations the opportunity to entertain
customers, or potential customers, at prestigious events. Commercial
hospitality is a well established form of advertising, promoting and
marketing goods and services. Sports in particular have gained
significant advantage from the result of such activities and it would be
foolish to avoid recognising the benefits. That being so, it is the
CTSO's view that the organisers of the event should make, wherever
possible, special provision to meet market demand but equally, should^
control carefully the number and availability of tickets. As most agents
pay over the face value for tickets, consideration should be given by the
organisers to charging for those tickets at a special rate.

The other form of agent is commonly known as a ticket agent and such
persons seek to meet public demand for a whole variety of events, but
particularly theatre and concert tickets. Again, their existence and
role in the market place cannot be ignored and should be practically
acknowledged. The results of this year's survey indicate that many
overseas visitors use the agencies to obtain tickets - the demand is
          clearly there and could be met, if not entirely, in an open and
          commercially acceptable way.

    25.   What then, might be the practical answers? The Annual Report of the
          Director General of Fair Trading for 1990 reveals that he agrees with the
          suggestion made by the CTSO for Liverpool, that tickets for supporters of
          teams in the FA Cup Final should be shared between them in proportion to
          their average home league attendances. The DG further hoped that the FA
          would give careful and sympathetic consideration to the allocation of
          more tickets for the finalists when both had large, regular followings
          but in any event, such matters should be left to the FA and its
          associates. The DG also acknowledges that short of a change in the law,
          there was nothing that could be done to require the FA to distribute
          tickets in a particular way but he urged the FA to note the reports which
          identified the large drop in ticket touting. He also asked the FA to
          consider whether the measures it took following earlier reports were
          enough to deter the re-selling of tickets for Cup Finals in the future.

    26.   On the assumption of a capacity of 78,000 people, the FA could arrange
          for 60,000 of those tickets to be made available to the two teams
n         involved in the Cup Final. This allocation represents something
          approaching 75% of the ground's capacity. In addition, the allocation to
          the clubs would have regard to the average home gate and would positively
          reflect those facts. On that basis, in 1991 Nottingham Forest and
          Tottenham Hotspur would have received 30,000 tickets each - an increase
          of 8,500 tickets per club. The FA must also recognise the fact that on
          most occasions, the Final will involve two First Division clubs who, with
          but rare exception, will have home gates of at least 20,000, _ The FA
          should also require the finalist clubs to publish their intentions of how
          the ticket allocations are to be distributed locally - how many to
          players and officials, season ticket holders, sponsors, members, etc.

    27.   If the FA were to accept that proposal, it is clear that a change in the
          present distribution will be necessary. There are two areas where such
          additional tickets might be found. Firstly, by reducing the number of
          tickets made available to the football league clubs which is currently
          set at 11,000 tickets. Already some clubs voluntarily make their
          allocation available to one or both of the finalist clubs and it is
          suggested that the present allocation can be reduced to a total of 2,000.
          This would still allow 20 people from each league club to attend the Cup
          Final.

    28.   The second change would be to reduce the number of tickets made available
          to the county Football Associations currently set at 21,000 to 12,000.
          Whilst at first sight this may appear to be a draconian measure, it is
          still 40% of the total going to each finalist club and more than 15% of
          the total capacity of the stadium. It may furthermore, be possible to
          increase this allocation if the two finalist clubs are not provided with
          all the tickets which the CTSO has proposed should be set aside for their
          purpose. The FA should also require its constituent county organisations
          to make bids each year for an allocation and again, this should reflect
          variable interests having regard to such matters as size, geography and
          any other relevant feature. Again, the FA should publish the final
          ticket allocation list to these organisations.

    29.   This would then leave 4,000 tickets which could be made available to all
          the other groups which would now include ticket agents, promotional
          companies, the football associations, Wembley stadipi, etc. This number
      of tickets could again vary according to the decision on the level of
      allocation to the finalist clubs.

30.   It would be indeed a foolish person who would think that by adopting the
      above proposals, the problems would be resolved at a stroke. In order to
      complete the task, there is a clear need to impose sanctions and the CTSO
      would suggest a number of these. Most of the sanctions could and should
      be imposed by the FA. Any person or organisation who breaks the FA rules
      should be heavily penalised and identified, the latter feature being as
      much a deterrent penalty as any othe form of punishment. For
      individuals, the FA ought to consider a fine and a ban on those people
      seeking an allocation for up to five years. For organisations, with the
      exception of the clubs who may compete for the trophy, a similar penalty.
      For the 'FA clubs' the penalty would have to be a fine because supporters
      cannot be penalised in the event of the club becoming one of the
      finalists. For all other groups as detailed in paragraph 29, the FA
      would simply - in the event of malpractice - ban the supply of tickets to
      the group for a suitable period of time.

31.   The CTSO would also advocate using the Consumer Protection Act 1987 so as
       to create an offence for offering to supply or supplying tickets at a
       price higher than that stated on that ticket. Thus to offer or sell a
       ticket at a price higher than its face value would become an offence.
       Such a proposal would cover other circumstances including theatre
       tickets, pop concerts and all sporting events. Such a move would deal
      with the complaints Departments have received over the years in
      connection with such malpractices. It would also enable Trading
      Standards Departments to attempt test purchases andthen take       -
      prosecutions in the event of infringements.

32.   Above all, the fans need a document which sets out, clearly and simply, a
      number of principles which should ensure that a fairer and safer deal is
      available to all of them. It should acknowledge the recommendations
      contained in the Taylor report on the Hillsborough tragedy and put into
      print the various proposals set out in this report. In fact, what is
      needed is a FOOTBALL FANS' CHARTER - a charter which details who should
      do what for whom and when. If adopted, it would become a quality
      assurance document which would have the effect of meeting most of the
      justifiable complaints currently levelled at the existing system.


RECOMMENDATION

That the Committee agrees to press all persons and bodies who can bring into
effect:

                 (a) a FOOTBALL FANS' CHARTER which details the
                 ways in which the FA will seek to instigate a
                 fairer and safer deal for football supporters

      and

                 (b) new provisions using the CONSUMER PROTECTION
                 ACT 1987 which creates the offence of dealing in
                 tickets at a price above their face value.
                                                                                                                          V.P




                                                               APPENDIX A           o


COMPLAINANT                CLUB STAMP         TICKET NO                      FACE       PRICE    BOUGHT
                                              TURNSTILE BLOCK ROW SEAT       VALUE      PAID     FROM


                          Fin 1              A          220    1    94        £35       £250     Ticket Agency
                          Fin 1              A          220    1    95        £35       £250     Ticket Agency
                          Fin 1              A          220    1    96        £35       £250     Ticket Agency
                          Notts C.A          D          102    10   86        £18       £35      Newspaper Advertisement
                          Notts C.A          D          102    10   87        £18       £35      Newspaper Advertisement
                          Wiltshire C.A      B          118    2    41        £12        —
                                                                                                 Pub Competition
                          Wiltshire C.A      B          118    2    42        £12        —
                                                                                                 Pub Competition
                          Fin 1              C          112    35   150       £24       £150     Tube Station Tout
                          Fin 1              C          112    35   151       £24       £150     Tube Station Tout
                          Fin 2              J          146    38   89        £45       £150     Wembley Tout
                          Fin 2              B          212    3    21        £30       £150     Wembley Tout
                          Watford FC         B          118    36   26        £35       £450     Wembley Tout
                          Watford FC         B          118    36   27        £35       £450     Wembley Tout
                          Fin 1              A          220    5    149       £45       £175     Wembley Tout
                          Fin 1              C          112    36   130       £24       £225     Wembley Tout
                          Fin 2              M          228    27   160       £24       £200     Ticket Agency
                          Fin 2              K          238    31   12        £18       £150     Wembley Tout
                          K R Whalley        A          223    3    219       £45       £175     Ticket Agency
                          K R Whalley        A          223    4    203       £45       £175     Ticket Agency
                          Fin 1              E          304    2    14        £75       £200     Wembley Tout
                          Gloucs CA          B          118    14   23        £12       £100     Club In Jacksdale
                          Gloucs CA          A.         121    6    120       £18       £30      Club In Jacksdale
                          W. Riding FA       J          242    22   123       £30       £35      Bradford City FC
                          Fin 2              G          245    15   76        £35       £160     Doorman RAC Club Pall Mall
                          Fin 2              J          144    13   26        £12       £150     Tout In London
                          Sussex CFA         L          130    6    171     ♦ £12       £25      Ticket Agency
                          Southampton FC     K          233    21   33        £30       £110     Ticket Agency
                          Fin 1              C          112    35   152       £24       £175     Wembley Tout
                          Manchester CA      A          214    29   108       £18       £125     Ticket Agency
                          Manchester CA      F          202    27   52        £12       £150     Ticket Agency
                          Manchester CA      F          202    30   57        £12       £150     Ticket Agency
                          Fin 1              C          209    8    96        £30       £175     Wembley Tout
                          Fin 2              K          233    24   70        £30       £200     Wembley Tout
                          Fin 2              K          233    23   69        £30       £200     Wembley Tout
                          Essex CA           J          148    9    171       £18       £30      Local Source
                          Essex CA           J          148    9    170       £18       £30     ,Local Source
NOTE; - FIN 1 - NOTTM FOREST   -   FIN 2 - TOTTENHAM HOTSPUR
                                APPENDIX B



INSTANCES WITH FULL DOCUMENTARY PROOF •


Interviewed 18.5.91


                  Switzerland (3 Tickets)

                  York

                  Germany

                  Selston

                  Selston

                 Yorkshire

                  London

                  Ilford

                 Hucknall



Supplied Information After 18.5.91, By Post


                 Keyworth (2 Tickets)

                 Aslockton (2 Tickets)

                 Ilford
