                                                  7^                  #




PROBILL
                                 From:    MISS A J STEWART
                                          SARD
                                 Ext:     3060-6370
                                 Date:     8 July 1992
                                 cc:      PS/Secretary of State
                                          PS/Mr Key
                                          Mr Phillips
                                          Mr Wright
                                          Miss Maclean
                                          Mr Ellingford
MR HOPSON


          PROPOSED BILL ON TICKET TOUTING AT FOOTBALL MATCHES
1. You asked for a note on the pros and cons of the proposal to
legislate against ticket touting at football matches.

2.   The proposal is a direct result of Lord Justice Taylor's
recommendation in his Final Report on the Hillsborough Stadium
Disaster that it should be made an offence to sell tickets for
and on the day of a football match without authority from the
home club to do so. The arguments in favour of creating such an
offence are:-


     (i)    most importantly the sale of tickets by touts are
             indiscriminate. They are likely to sell tickets to
             'away' supporters for areas of the ground allocated to
             'home' supporters or vice versa. This results in the
            breakdown of segregation arrangements which can lead to
             trouble in the crowd;

     (ii) touts who position themselves on the routes to grounds
           can cause obstructions in what are often already
           restricted accesses;


     (iii) the resentment against touts felt by many supporters
           can result in the touts becoming a focus for public
           order problems; and



                                                                  1
      (iv)    theprospect   of obtaining tickets    from touts can
             attract ticketless supporters to games which can lead
             to public order problems if they are unable to buy
             tickets and gain admission to the ground.

3.   The arguments against the proposed Bill are:-

      (i)    there is a forceful body of opinion in the tourist and
             entertainment industries, as well as in sport, that all
             ticket touting should be outlawed. These arguments are
             based on moral objections to touting rather than those
             of public order as is the case with football. The Home
             Secretary has of course argued that we should resist
             any attempt to broaden the bill to cover touting
             generally; and

      (ii) that to legislate in the way proposed would intervene
           in the operation of market forces and constitute an
           infringement on the liberty of an individual.

4.   As you will be aware the Taylor recommendation was accepted
by the Home Secretary when the Hillsborough report was published
and the Government is under a commitment to legislate as soon as
Parliamentary time permits. This commitment was reaffirmed in the
Prime Minister's letter of 6 May 1992 to Tom         Pendry MP (copy
attached). The proposed offence is supported by       the Association
of Chief Police Officers and would be welcomed       by the football
world. To go back on the commitment now would be     awkward.

5.   On this basis I would recommend the Secretary of State to
give strong support to the principle of creating the offence.
However, in the light of the Lord President's response of 3 July
tothe Home    Secretary's  proposal I do not think the issue
justifies theSecretary of State pushing for early introduction
of the Bill.



MISS A STEWART
                                                                    2
                                         FROM:        CHRIS HOPSON
                                                      SPECIAL ADVISER

                                         TEL:         270 5891
                               (Z\>      DATE:        6 July 1992




C92\4038


MS .STEWART
                                         cc:     PS/Sos
                                                 PS/Mr Key
                                                 Mr Phillips
                                                 Mr Wright



KEN CLARKE'S BILL ON TICKET TOUTS

I have received a telephone call from No 10 Policy Unit this
morning who have reservations about Ken Clarke's Ticket Touts
Bill.   In formulating their final views on the subject, they
want to take account of the Secretary of State's opinion.  I am
aware that you have already prepared a note for the Secretary
of State; however Nicholas and I agree that it would be helpful
for you to prepare a further note setting out the pros and cons
of the Bill and a recommendation as to how strong/weak the
Secretary of State should be in his support for the Bill.

I would be grateful if you could let me have this as soon as
possible.




CHE           DN
                              lO DOW NI NG STREET
                                 L O N D O N SW1A 2AA



  T H E P RI M E MI NIS TER                             6 M ay 1 9 9 2




                                                               W

          (
            I    /W ~
           t
     Thank you for your letter of 29 April in which you asked me
to include measures to implement Lord Justice Taylor's
recommendation on ticket touting in the Queen's Speech.

     I appreciate your disappointment that we have not so far
legislated to implement this recommendation, but I am afraid that
the Criminal Justice Bill was not an appropriate vehicle. The
other three offences he proposed were, of course, introduced by
virtue of the Football (Offences) Act 1991.


       Nor, I am afraid, could I agree to include a reference in
this Queen's Speech.          The Government has a heavy legislative
programme ahead and, whilst not belittling the importance of
Taylor's recommendation, to include this in the Queen's Speech
would be to give it undue priority over other important issues.
The Government is of course still committed to legislate in this
area as and when Parliamentary time allows. I am sorry that it
could not be this session.
                                          POLICY IN CONFIDENCE

                                                                                                                  005/07/A
                                                                                          P   rivy   C   o un cil         O   ffice
tORO P*&



                                                                                     W H I T E H A L L , L O N D O N S W 1 A 2 AT


                             UcPT. Or iv.’
                          | nonci'.’; KAass ^Vew^wt                            |
                          | uV        ' as cvpjwc^wv <U~e . j  i                                          3 July 1992
                          I FO.i;.s-; . . .          ~ ~ .... }
                          | p s |A /W .            M /v .   P l/w l/U p 5

                          I M at. W u a ^ W "       IV A t. / V W c L e . <5vwj;

                                              M/v. Hop5&U\
                            CNH (SH>6/7



           TICKET TOUTING IN RESPECT OP FOOTBALL MATCHES

           Thank you for your letter of 26 June proposing the introduction
           of a Bill to prohibit ticket touting in respect of football
           matches.

           I do not challenge the proposition that, in an ideal world, it
           would be worthwhile to legislate in this way, especially given
           the history of our response to the Taylor recommendations and Sir
           John Wheeler's Bill.     But the reality is that, in present
           circumstances, there is simply no possibility of accommodating
           even the very short Bill you propose. I grant that the delay in
           the Maastricht Bill has meant that we have been under somewhat
           less pressure in the Commons in recent weeks, but that period is
           now over:    we have only two working weeks until the Summer
           Recess, and face what is potentially a very busy Parliamentary
           programme when we resume in October.    All our major Bills have
           to come forward then, and we will also have to re-start the
           Maastricht Bill when appropriate. I have consulted my business
           management colleagues and we agree that there can be no question
           of adding to the programme the Bill you propose, or any other
           non-essential items which colleagues may put forward.

           I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister, members of LG
           Committee, David Mellor, First Parliamentary Counsel and Sir
           Robin Butler.



                                                                                                              |    SECRETARY OF STATE
                                                                                                                    DEPT. OF NATIONAL
                                                                                                              i
                                                                                                              '
                                                                                                              l        HE£JI£GE
                                                                                                              IC o a a i
                                                                                                              .s', * jr

                                                                                                              I - ^ 5"H
                                                                                                              £               U   ••



                                                                                   TONY NEWTON


           The Rt Hon Kenneth Clarke QC MP
           Home Secretary
           50 Queen Anne's Gate
           London SW1



                                          TkAT T A \ F   TVT
