The Rt Hon Kenneth Clarke QC MP
Secretary of State for the Home
 Department
Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON SW1H 9AT




REVIEW OF ALL SEATING REQUIREMENT AT FOOTBALL LEAGUE GROUNDS
Following the decision to transfer responsibility for the safety
of sports grounds in England and Wales from your Department to
mine, and the correspondence between Kenneth Baker and yourself
before the election, I have been considering the terms of a
review of the all-seating requirement at Football League grounds
in England and Wales. In view of the expertise which your
Department still retains in this matter and the possible
implications for fire safety and public order, I thought it
helpful to give you an opportunity to comment on the terms of the
proposed review before any announcement is made.
I have come to the view that it would be right to make a public
announcement now on the terms of a review to remove some of the
press speculation about its scope and the damaging uncertainty
which this has created in football. The issues are such that it
will take a few weeks yet, however, before we are able to
announce the outcome of the review.
During the election campaign, as you know, the Prime Minister
made clear that he would consider dropping the requirement at
Third and Fourth Division grounds in the Football League, but
that he was not prepared to give way on the central
recommendations for the First and Second Divisions. The attached
draft announcement reflects the Prime Minister's reported views
with the minor qualification that in reviewing the policy for
all-seating at Third and Fourth Division grounds we will need to
ensure that no anomalies are created with respect to the Second
Division clubs in view of the low level of average attendances at
some of these grounds. Although I also intend to examine the
timetable for the Second Division Clubs, any public announcement
at this stage that the August 1994 deadline might be extended for
any or all of those clubs would undermine the progress which is
being made by some clubs to achieve it.
                                                                  1
 of the remit of the Football LiSlnsi            addressed are the scope
 transitional arrangements                    A“thorltV. whether
 promoted and if stanri-inrr        necessary for clubs which are
 the FLA needs new p o w e J ^ t o ^ e ^ r f   iS-t0 retaine<*, whether
 a sufficient standard?          re9 ^ r e terracing to be brought up to


propose to clear^h^text with\hf pt]?er ^fr e s t e d colleagues, I
means of an answer to an inspired P O ^ r 6 Ml?lster and issue it*by
and other colleagues on the o i t S o n T 1 *°uld ^hen consult you
i s s              s r t r i * r
identify the issues in


considering^whethe^a^imilar t0 -an L?ng ”ho 1 understand is
First and lecondDivision = ? n ^ eyie?kSh°Uld be carrled °ut *<>r
and David Hunt. I aB copying   thii\ e ^ e r ^ S K t L T '




DAVID MELLOR
                                                               / f




The Rt Hon David Hunt MBE MP
Secretary of State for Wales
Gwydyr House
Whitehall
LONDON SW1A 2ER




REVIEW OF ALL SEATING REQUIREMENT AT FOOTBALL LEAGUE GROUNDS
As you know responsibility for the safety of sports grounds in
England and Wales is being transferred to my Department from the
Home Office. I have been considering the terms of a review of the
all-seating requirement at Football League grounds in England and
Wales in the light of the many representations advocating such a
review, including from the All-Party Football Committee.
I have come to the view that it would be right to make a public
announcement now on the terms of a review to remove some of the
press speculation about its scope and the damaging uncertainty
which this has created in football. The issues are such that it
will take a few weeks yet, however, before we are able to
announce the outcome of the review.
During the election campaign the Prime Minister made clear that
he would consider dropping the requirement at Third and Fourth
Division grounds in the Football League, but that he was not
prepared to give way on the central recommendations for the First
and Second Divisions. The attached draft announcement reflects
the Prime Minister's reported views with the minor qualification
that in reviewing the policy for all-seating at Third and Fourth
Division grounds I will need to ensure that no anomalies are
created with respect to the Second Division clubs in view of the
low level of average attendances at some of these grounds.
Although I also intend to examine the timetable for the Second
Division Clubs, any public announcement at this stage that the
August 1994 deadline might be extended for any or all of those
clubs would undermine the progress which is being made by some
clubs to achieve it.
Among the related issues which need to be addressed are the scope
of the remit of the Football Licensing Authority, whether
transitional arrangements are necessary for clubs which are
                                                                1
promoted and, if standing accommodation is to retained, whether
the FLA needs new powers to require terracing to be brought up to
a sufficient standard.
Subject to your views and those of other interested colleagues, I
propose to clear the text with the Prime Minister and issue it by
means of an answer to an inspired PQ. In view of my safety
responsibilities for Wales as well as England, I would be
grateful if you could confirm that you are content, after the
announcement, for my officials to consult relevant organisations
in Wales. I would then consult you and other colleagues on the
outcome of the review before the summer recess.
I am writing in similar terms to Kenneth Clarke, in view of the
possible fire safety and public order implications, and Ian Lang
who I understand is considering whether a similar review should
be carried out for First and Second Division clubs in the
Scottish Football League.




DAVID MELLOR




                                                               2
                                                                  A




The Rt Hon Ian Lang MP
Secretary of State for Scotland
Dover House
Whitehall
LONDON SW1A 2AU




REVIEW OF ALL SEATING REQUIREMENT AT FOOTBALL LEAGUE GROUNDS
As you know responsibility for the safety of sports grounds in
England and Wales is being transferred to my Department from the
Home Office. I have been considering the terms of a review of the
all-seating requirement at Football League grounds in England and
Wales in the light of the many representations advocating such a
review, including from the All-Party Football Committee. In view
of the possible implications for Scotland I would be grateful for
your advice on whether it should be a joint review from the
outset.
I have come to the view that it would be right to make a public
announcement now on the terms of a review to remove some of the
press speculation about its scope and the damaging uncertainty
which this has created in football. The issues are such that it
will take a few weeks yet, however, before we are able to
announce the outcome of the review.
During the election campaign the Prime Minister made clear that
he would consider dropping the requirement at Third and Fourth
Division grounds in the Football League, but that he was not
prepared to give way on the central recommendations for the First
and Second Divisions. The attached draft announcement reflects
the Prime Minister's reported views with the minor qualification
that in reviewing the policy for all-seating at Third and Fourth
Division grounds I will need to ensure that no anomalies are
created with respect to the Second Division clubs in view of the
low level of average attendances at some of these grounds.
Although I also*intend to examine the timetable for the Second
Division Clubs, any public announcement at this stage that the
August 1994 deadline might be extended for any or all of those
clubs would undermine the progress which is being made by some
clubs to achieve it.

                                                                  1
 Among the related issues which need to be addressed aro
 of the remit of the Football Licensing A u t h o S y ! whether    PS
 transitional arrangements are necessary for clubs which are
 them?TA an^' lf standin<? accommodation is to retained, whether
 a L S c J I n f s^nd^d?"3 ^                      to be brought up to

The announcement is drafted on the basis of a possible -joint
review. It takes account of what I understand to be Sir Hector
MSnr? : \ POSltion that if there is to be a review in Scotland L
th!f fh q10? ? 1? 6*1 t0 the First and Second Division clubs and
the nrinciDle i? St<*dia Committee would first be consulted on
?    n      P %     ?   a review- If the review is to be extended
         ?ay'.1 yould naturally be grateful for your advice on the
to SbotlandTlnC1 6 ” 1“ d ^        in =° f3r aS ^    areVrSL?anthe

                views and those of other interested colleagues on
D .      .text, I would then clear the announcement with the
Prime Minister. Although drafted as an answer to an inspired PO
assuming it can be cleared quickly, I would aim tS m S ? t h ?
2“Fress
a  ? 2 S sRelease.
           ^ S L S r tlWS S e iSht?e
                      I hope         f°rm
                               that we can °f 3 letter
                                            make       t0 announcement
                                                 a joint   T°m Pendry and
                                                                       on
the outcome of the review by the summer recess. announcement

I am writing in similar terms to Kenneth Clarke, in view of the
possible fire safety and public order implications, ^ d David




DAVID MELLOR




                                                                       2
r


    DRAFT AMMOONCEKKIIT OH REVIEW OP ALL~SEATING
    ^    tv-
           , adk the Secretary of State for National Heritage, if
         there is to be a review of the all-seating requirement at
         football grounds.




         Stadium      Disaster.   Significant    i " P ™ « " tsr “ lt!atS y

                                                        ^ n e ^ t ro%ViJinfcifi


                                                 - u n u f %      ~      £     s    S

                                                                              s i s
         that we cannot afford to be complacent.
          we have decided that it would be wrong to review either the

          League)     or   at   ^mier   Division^g^ounds^m^th^ S c o t t y

          standards1 necessary to “ ^ e          i^Europe and                f^ 1
          £    can a T r b r p eroudV of1 abslewetLtte
                                                     hrthte /is? ctntLy.

          in view of the representations made and given these changed

          be    retained at any Third and Fourth Division             clubs    in the

               £ V s s ^ l e               W
          ”Jl1 S f ^ a t t e n ^ n c r s ^ = e ^ e ^ 5 s                     '^ArX
          comm^t^d, however^ to the principle of all-seating for the
          great majority of Second Division clubs.
          For the time being all Second, Third and Fourth Division
          c?ubs should continue to plan on the basis of all seating
          being a requirement by the stated dates.
          „y     Rt   Honourable    Friend      the   S-retary^of.^ta^^for
          Scotland,                      of the all-seated requirement
          a? desi^ated grounds within the First and Second Divisions
          of the Scottish Football League.
           Further representations are being ^ i t e d from a number of
           interested organisations,      and I intend
           announcement as soon as possible.

                                                                                        1
 •iNN AAA CCC DDD HHH
::113193 .4 .HHH 196 PA
 . ELECTION Football    '
  supersedes ELECTION Labour Soccer)<
  SOCCER CLUBS FACE ALL—SEAT k EPR £EVE-.
   v   j .tjv,-tj0 =   H s rd v   sn d   ; **i. •?.n   3      -    •      ~        ^ c ~     - — - —>—•/
 Ths Prime Minister is ready to throw a life-line tr: Ir^iar rivisicn ^ootbai 1
clubs Facing heay^ spending in the wane of the Hillsborough disaster    it
 mer ged today.
 It ts understood                   Mr
                      fWy o r will consider dropping tV-^e in s is t e n c e th a t all Third
and Fourth D ivision clubs : r U n c ar--:: arc Wales shoui 2 zr.stai I ai-i-saar stadiums
by tH5 snc              2 ZHE' 0!?C>?vdC5.<
 —Cf'G ( . i U . S t I C S i S V i G f" j r ^ C °          H rl :.V G.^'CC1.H t H ’d 'L O !'~d   L 1 T* J ;J S “ I Cc? , S r f i O ’I H-;? '"'3 cjs/r.t !*ts
tn t~s ■     .90v “A C:.;p ^srr::.                                might hav>-                    avoided in v.r ,5ll-^2j.r stadi;. r..
 Ureter- -      recommendations F ir s t and Second Di v i s i on c l Use rrsusfc have
<311-e e a te r grounds by August l c7<
                                      74 and Third and Fourth D ivision clu b s by August
199?..
 K*~ Major has t;:ic ■
                     i:r ia ~ □s he does not believe, it    necessary to follow :!-.g
recommentiatiens tz the letter, but h e will          give way on the central
recommendations for the Firs- and Second Divisions., <
 Ear 1ier-.today Labour promised to examine the recommendations and also hinted
that lower division clubs might not have to replace terraces with seats;
