                         U
PS/Mr Moynihan               '    I      I


MESSAGES OF SYMPATHY FOLLOWING THE HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY
                                                              L{$)
1.     You passed to me the telex and telegram           messages of
sympathy the Minister has received following the        Hillsborough
tragedy.   Those addressed to Mr Moynihan are onwards    from Flag A
beneath;   thosewhich are copies    of messages sent    to the Prime
Minister  are on the front tag.

2.     I have spoken to Neil Hammond at the FCO who is
responsible for sending the reply from the Prime Minister to
those from whom she has received messages. A copy of the PM's
reply to the UN President is beneath.   Mr Hammond has suggested
that he could also arrange dispatch of Mr Moynihan's reply to
those who had sent messages to the Minister.          Mr Hammond
explained that where these messages did not include an address of
source Mr Moynihan's reply could be sent to the appropriate
British Embassy with a request that the Embassy pass on the reply
to the person concerned.
3.     If  Mr  Moynihan   is  content   with  this   arrangement,
Mr Hammond will need a list of those to whom Mr Moynihan's reply
should be sent (Flag A) and the terms of the reply itself (draft
at Flag B).     You should send the list and agreed draft to
Mr Hammond at the Foreign Secretary's Private Office, Downing St-

4.     I have excluded from this list Juan Samaranch (President
of the International Olympic Committee) and Jacques Georges
(President UEFA) to whom Mr Moynihan might wish to send a reply
direct. We will of course provide addresses if you wish.

 5.    Many of the messages sent to Mr Moynihan express sympathy
 for thefamilies of the   victims of the tragedy.     I understand
 that following the Lockerbie disaster similar messages received
 by the Transport Secretary were forwarded to the Dumfries and
 Galloway Regional Council.    In these circumstances there would
 seem to be a good case for forwarding to Liverpool City Council
 the messages received by Mr Moynihan. I understand you were going
 to seek a view from No 10 on taking this course of action. ^ If
 they are content a draft letter which you might like to consider
 sending to the City Council is at Flag C.




  T C SMITH
  SARD C
J Z 't j April 1989

 cc       Mr Lee
DRAFT REPLY TO MESSAGES OF SYMPATHY RECEIVED BY MR MOYNIHAN




Thank you for your kind message of sympathy following the tragedy
at the Hillsborough football stadium.


I am sure the thoughts of all of us are with the relatives of the
victims of this tragedy.
DRAFT LETTER FOR PS/MR MOYNIHAN TO SEND TO LIVERPOOL CITY COUNCIL




Mr Moynihan has asked me to pass on to your Council the enclosed
copies of messages of sympathy that he has received following the
tragedy at Hillsborough.   Mr Moynihan does of course add his own
condolences to those enclosed.
