                                       C C   (yt-1 ^ — 1
                                               j £**<*! 1 s t'1'




                                From:           T A Ellingford
                                                SARD C

                                Ext:            3060-6359

                                                13 July 1992

                              ' Copy:           PS/Mr Key    )
                                                Mr Phillips ) without
                                                Mr Wright    ) attachments
                                                Ms MacLean   )
                                                Miss Stewart
                                                Mr Hopson
                                                Mr Baden

Secretary of State

                FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION AND PREMIER LEAGUE
1. You are to meet Sir John Quinton and Rick Parry of the
Premier League on 15 July. I understand that the meeting with the
Football Association arranged for 23 July has now been cancelled
and that instead Graham Kelly will join the meeting with the
Premier League. Sir John had already indicated that the main
issue he wishes to discuss is Taylor implementation. I understand
that he also wishes to discuss the Football Trust and the
League's ongoing relationship with the Department. Graham Kelly
will wish to discuss the FA's 'Manifesto for Football' published
on 30 June of which he sent to you an advance copy.   He may also
wish   to deal specifically  with the possibility   of Government
financial assistance for the 1996 European Championship Finals
and the Prime Ministers involvement in the publicity.

Tavlor Report

2.  Copies of the Premier League's and the FA's comments on the
review of all seating are at Flag A. A copy of the Press Release
announcing the conclusions of the review is at Flag B and of the
Q&A Briefing at Flag C.

3.    The Premier League expressed concerns over the current
timetable. They believe that despite the new money from the TV
deal many clubs still faced financial difficulties. They are
also   worried about clubs    such as Southampton   who wish to
relocate but are having planning difficulties. They consider
that   the all seater policy should be applied      in the lower
divisions on the basis of average attendances. They were the only
respondents who suggested this approach. The FA did not favour an
exemption for the Premier League but thought that the deadline
for Division 1 clubs should be extended to 1995 and that the
standard of terracing should be improved.

4.  In the discussion on the review of all seating you may wish
to draw upon the following points



                                                                         1
     i)    the safety of spectators at football matches has been
           paramount in the review;

     ii)   considered Premier League's view that policy should be
           applied on the basis of average attendances. However
           this would create lack of certainty and anomalies
           amongst clubs not least because average attendances can
           fluctuate so much depending upon how well a team is
           playing. Most of those consulted have signalled their
           support for all seating in Premier and First Divisions;

     iii) a clear distinction between top two and bottom two
          divisions is best option. It has certainty and clubs
          will know where they stand;

     iv)   many clubs in the Premier League have made progress
           towards converting to all seating. Essential that the
           momentum is maintained and they meet the standards
           necessary to compete in Europe making full use of
           resources available to them.

The Football Trust and RPBD Monies

5.   The Premier League will no doubt wish to discuss the
question of access to RPBD monies and the extension of the
concession.   You will recall it was agreed in March that Premier
League clubs should in principle be eligible for RPBD monies next
season.   This related to Everton, Wimbledon and Southampton who
have not yet applied to the Football Trust for grant and the
three clubs promoted from Division 2.         You wrote to Lord
Aberdare, copied to Sir John Quinton on 22 June informing them
of this decision.    The letter noted that the grant ceiling for
Premier League clubs would remain at £2m and called upon the
Trust to apply the needs and resources test with particular
stringency.    It also stressed the importance of encouraging
Premier League clubs to use their additional income for Taylor
implementation rather than fuelling the transfer market.

6.   You will recall the Chancellor of the Exchequer's decision,
conveyed in your own letter to Tom Pendry of 9 March, that he is
prepared to extend the reduction in pool betting duty for a
further 5 years.   This is provided that he is satisfied that the
Clubs have plans in place to meet the agreed deadlines for all
seating and for the finance out of their own resources of any
necessary ground improvements. You also wrote to Lord Aberdare,
the Chairman of the Football Trust, about this decision.      The
Trust have publicly stated that they will target the extra
resources at the less well off smaller clubs.   We also know that
the Trust favour grant aiding the improvement of terracing only
where it provides a basis for seating at a later date. However
Treasury   officials   have   suggested  that  the  extension  of
concession beyond 1995 might need to be reviewed in the light of
the National Lottery.

7.   The Premier League are not currently represented on the
Football Trust and it is possible that Sir John may wish to raise

                                                                 2
this with you. Representation is a matter for the Trustees but we
would have no objection to the League being so represented.

8.   In the discussion you might wish to draw up on the following
points:-

     (i)       Government has agreed that Football Trust can pay
                RPBD monies to Premier League Club's; but subject
                to ceiling of £2m per club;

     (ii)      Hope that Premier League Clubs will use of their
                additional resources to fund Taylor improvements
                rather than on transfer fees and players wages.
               What plans have the Premier League for ensuring
                this happens?

     (iii)     The   Chancellor    decided   recently   that  the
                concession would be extended for a further 5 years
               provided Clubs have plans in place to meet the
               Taylor deadlines and to finance necessary ground
                improvements from their own resources.

     (iv)      The Football Trust in welcoming this decision,
                have said that they would target resources at the
                less well off clubs.  As a result of the review of
                all seating the Trust might wish to consider using
                these resources to up grade standing accommodation
                at Division 2 and 3 grounds.

European Championships 1996

9.   We co-operated closely with the FA in preparing the bid for
the   finals  in  p a r t ic u l a r  liaising with    other Government
departments on the various guarantees required by UEFA.             The
Prime Minister also provided a foreword for the FA's publicity
brochure and a message of support for an FA exhibition mounted in
the Upper Waiting Hall of the House.          However, proposals by the
FA to involve the Prime Minister in a poster campaign in support
of the bid were rejected. "          ^

10.  In providing this support we have always made it clear that
there was no case for direct Government financial support.
However, the FA are now calling upon the Government to assist
them in the improvement of the venues for the Finals either
through direct assistance or through a further reduction in pool
betting duty.                            '    -7       "




11. On publicity the FA's PR firm have asked us informally about
the Prime Minister being involved in a poster campaign to
publicise the tournament. However the FA told us that they did
not want the matter pursued at that time.

12.  In the    discussion   you   may   wish   to   make   the   following
points:-



                                                                         3
      i)    Have supported FA bid and welcomed its success; pleased
            that England will once again be hosting a major
            football championship;

      ii)   Will continue to offer diplomatic and moral support but
            have always made it clear that there is no case for
            direct Government financial assistance, particularly in
            view of the substantial amount of new money coming into
            the Premier League.

      iii) Olympics as the world's premier sporting event is a
           special    case   coinciding with   the  Millennium
           Celebrations, Manchester is also priority area for
           urban regeneration.

      iv)   Prime Minister has provided messages of support but not
            sure that further involvement in poster advertising
            would be appropriate or justified.

FA Manifesto for Football

13. A copy of the Manifesto is at Flag D and at Flag E are lines
to take on each its recommendations. The 'Manifesto' welcomes the
improved relationship in recent years between the Government and
football as indicated by the reduction in pool betting duty,
support for the 1996 European Championships bid, the Football
Offences Act 1991 and your own appointment as Secretary of State
giving    football   a  direct    voice  in  the   Cabinet.   The
recommendations of the 'Manifesto' are suggested as a minimum
programme of measures which the FA believes the Government should
take to support moves by the football authorities to modernise
the game.

14.   None of the recommendations are very novel nor are they
particularly radical in what they seek. Many of them call upon
the Government to do things that have already been agreed or
undertaken. These include allowing Premier League clubs access to
RPBD monies next season, extending the concession for a further
five years, outlawing ticket touting and promoting football in
the community schemes. Where we are unable to go along with their
recommendations such as the call for financial support for the
1996 European Championships and exempting governing bodies of
sport from Corporation Tax the FA are unlikely to be surprised at
the line taken on them.

15. This brief covers all of the issues likely to be raised by
Glen Kirton when he meets Mr Hopson for lunch also on 15 July.

16.   Miss Stewart will be attending the meeting.




T A ELLINGFORD


                                                                  4
