SOUTH YORKSHIRE FIRE AND CIVIL DEFENCE AUTHORITY


South Yorkshire County Fire Service
H.    E. Wright, Q.F.S.M., M.I.Fire.E., F.B.I.M.                                                                               Command H.Q.,
              Chief Fire Officer                                                                                               Wellington Street,
                                                                                                                                Sheffield,
                                                                                                                                South Yorkshire S1 3FG
                                                                                                                                Telephone: Sheffield
                                                                                                                                STD (0742) 727202

Our Ref:                                                       Your Ref:                                                       Date:     24.04.1989
                                                    Chief Fire Officer                                                                      201
This matter is being dealt with b y ........................................................................................   Ext. No...........................



  Home Office,
  Queen Anne's Gate,
  LONDON
  SW1H 9AT


  For the attention of F.J. Archer, Esq.
  Fire & Emergency Planning Department


  Dear Sirs,

  I refer to your letter dated 20th April, 1989 and enclose a factual report of
  the actions of the County Fire Service which has been produced from
  information obtained to date.

  Should any point require clarification or expansion please do not hesitate                                                                               to
  contact me.

  Yours faithfully,




  Chief Fire Officer




                                        All communications to be addressed to the Chief Fire Officer.
                   SOOTH YORKSHIRE COUNTY FIRE SERVICE



INCIDENT:   SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FC, HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD, SOOTH Y»PKS
            LIVERPOOL v NOTTINGHAM FOREST - 15TH        1989
                                                 A P ^ t t .,




REPORT OF CHIEF FIRE OFFICER H»E, WRIGHT, QFSM, MIFireE, FBIM


A brief factual report of the events which involved personnel of the
South Yorkshire County Fire Service is submitted, as requested, for
your information.

As yet all personnel who attended have not been debriefed and         a    more
detailed report may be possible when this has been completed.

1.    Time of call was 1514 hours from Police Control and the County
      Fire Service reacted to the information -

      " There's been a major accident at Hillsborough Football Ground
      where the semi-final is. The crowds have forced their way in -
      they've broken fences and the gate down.   I don't know exactly
      what it is but there are people trapped. "

      Appliances attending
                                                  Time           Time in
                                                 Mobile         Attendance
      Water Tender Ladder   -   Rivelin           1517              1522
      Water Tender Ladder   -   Central           1517              1522
      Water Tender Ladder   -   Central           1517              1522
      Water Tender Ladder   -   Ringinglow        1517              1527
      Water Tender Ladder   -   Darnall           1517              1526
      Water Tender Ladder   -   Darnall           1517              1526
      Emergency Tender      -   Central           1517              1524
      Control Unit          -   Mexborough        1519              1608
      Actions of crews on arrival.

3.1   Rivelin WrT - StnO Swain in Charge

      Attended the Leppings Lane side of ground and encountered severe
      congestion that prevented immediate access to the ground.

      An immediate request for the use of a resuscitator on     a   casualty
      in the rear of an ambulance was answered.

      Rivelin 1 was made Contact Point in Leppings Lane for the incident
      with StnO Swain OiC.
      A request for resuscitation equipment inside the ground was
      received from a Police Officer. In view of this a "Make Pumps 10
      for resuscitators" message was sent. Crew members were despatched
      into the ground in an effort to make contact with Senior Police
      Officers, and ascertain the extent of the incident.

3.2   Central WrT 1 and 2 - StnO Fletcher and SubO Hunter in Charge

      Attended at the Riverside Entrance off Penistone Road at the rear
      of the South Stand.      The crews were not met or directed by the
      Police so the officers made their way onto the pitch to the area
      immediately in front of the West Stand where they found many
      casualties on the pitch who needed first aid treatment.         No
      rescues as such needed to be undertaken but it was obvious that
      bodies and casualties needed to be attended to.

      The crew members were then directed to perform mouth to mouth
      resuscitation and first aid. Two resuscitators were used by the
      crews.

      A casualty receiving area was set up at the rear of the West Stand
      by so directing T/stnO          and casualties were moved from the
      pitch to this area by crews, police and spectators.

      Approximately 20-30 persons were moved to this area. The obvious
      dead being located in a holding area at the rear of the West Stand
      and the injured removed by ambulance to         hospital.    Later
      information received by StnO Fletcher told him to evacuate
      casualties to the Gymnasium at the rear of the North Stand.

      The crews of Central 1 and 2 were joined and assisted by those
      from Darnall 1 and 2, Ringinglow 1 and the Emergency Tender from
      Central.

      When the pitch had been cleared of casualties all crews were
      directed to the Gymnasium and carried out further assistance.

3.3   Central Emergency Tender - LFm Housley in Change

      Attended at Penistone Road but could not gain access to the ground
      because of height restriction for the appliance.     Proceeded to
      Leppings Lane and the Contact Point.

      The crew then proceeded as directed into the ground via the North
      Stand and onto the pitch with a resuscitator treating casualties
      both on the pitch and later in the Gymnasium.

3.4   Ringinqlow WrT- StnO Horner in Charge

      Attended at Leppings Lane entrance.




                               2.
      The crew then proceeded as directed into the ground with a
      resuscitator and gave assistance to casualties on the pitch in
      front of the West Terrace together with the crews from Central 1
      and 2 and Darnall 1 and 2. When the pitch had been cleared of
      casualties the crew was directed to the Gymnasium.

3.5   Darnall WrT 1 and 2 - T/StnO          ind SubO            in Charge

      Attended Leppings Lane entrance.      Crews entered the ground as
      directed and gained access to the pitch via the West Terrace
      rendering assistance to casualties with two resuscitators and
      mouth to mouth resuscitation. Working with other crews casualties
      were removed initially to the casualty receiving area which T/StnO
           had been directed to establish at the rear of the West Stand
      and subsequently to the gymnasium.

      On instructions from ADO Robjohns, SubO               and his crew
      undertook a circuit of the pitch to ascertain if any further
      injured people needed assistance and get them to the Gymnasium for
      treatment. All crews were eventually located in the Gymnasium
      rendering assistance to casualties.

4.    The "make up" message from StnO Swain was received in County Fire
      Service Control at 1528 by Brigade radio.

5.    Additional appliances attending:-

                                                        Time         Time in
                                                       Mobile      Attendance

      Water Tender Ladder   -   Mansfield Road          1529          1534
      Water Tender Ladder   -   Lowedges                1529          1544
      Water Tender Ladder   -   Stocksbridge            1530          1539
      Water Tender Ladder   —   Stocksbridge            1532          1541
      Emergency Tender      -   Barnsley                1522          1537

      Actions of crews on arrival.

6.1   Mansfield Road Wrt - StnO            in Charge

      Attended Leppings Lane entrance. As directed the crew proceeded
      to the pitch giving assistance to casualties using a resuscitator
      to injured persons on the pitch and later at the Gymnasium to
      which they had been redirected.

      StnO          organised the removal of casualties by ambulance from
      the Gymnasium

6*2   Stocksbridge WrT 1 and 2 - StnO Ralph and SubO               in Charge

      Attended at Leppings Lane entrance.      As directed both crews
      Proceeded to the pitch and were redirected to the Gymnasium where
      they rendered resuscitation, first aid and were used for the
      transferring of injured persons by ambulance to hospital.



                                  3.
6.3   Lowedqes WrT - SubO James in Charge

      Attended Leppings Lane entrance. As directed the crew proceeded
      to the pitch where some resuscitation was given before further
      proceeding to the Gymnasium with a resuscitator. In liaison with
      the Assistant Divisional Officer in that area the crew undertook
      further first aid and resuscitation work in addition to which they
      were involved in the transfer of casualties to hospital via
      ambulances.

6.4   Barnsley Emergency Tender - LFm Dawson in Charge

      Attended Leppings Lane entrance. The crew entered the ground as
      directed and administered resuscitation with a resuscitator to a
      casualty on the pitch before assisting in the movement of injured
      people at the Gymnasium.

6.5   Control Unit Mexborough - LFm Walker in Charge

      Attended Leppings Lane entrance. On arrival the crew contacted
      the Senior Officer in attendance (DO III) by fireground radio and
      were instructed set up Control Point. A DO I attended and took up
      the duties of Control Officer.

      Liaison with the Police at their Control Box in the ground was
      transferred from a DO III to an Assistant Divisional Officer.

      An advance control point was eventually set up in the Gymnasium
      with a Senior Divisional Officer in Charge and an Assistant
      Divisional Officer assisting him.

7.    Senior Officers attending

7.1   Assistant Divisional Officer Robjohns - in attendance 1529 hours.

      Attended Leppings Lane entrance. Confirmed Rivelin WrT as contact
      point with StnO Swain in Charge and proceeded into the ground.

      Unable to make contact with any senior Police Officer on the pitch
      he liaised with StnOs Fletcher and Horner and having been assured
      that all casualties on the pitch had received attention he
      proceeded to the Gymnasium to co-ordinate crews and equipment at
      this casualty receiving point. Contact by fireground radio with
      DO Lockwood who had arrived was obtained and further provision of
      personnel and equipment was requested at the Gymnasium to assist
      in the first aid treatment of casualties and their transfer to
      ambulances.




                                  4.
7.2   Divisional officer Lockwood - in attendance 1547 hours.

      Attended Leppings Lane entrance. Informed StnO Swain to assemble
      all available crews and resuscitation equipment at the contact
      point to await further instructions.       DO Lockwood entered the
      ground via the West Stand tunnel, contacted StnO Fletcher on the
      pitch, was briefed and then set up direct liaison with the Police
      at the Control Box situated adjacent to the South Stand.      From
      this point movement of personnel and equipment were co-ordinated
      until the arrival of the Control Unit at which time he was
      relieved by an Assistant Divisional Officer to enable him to make
      a report on the full situation.

7.3   Additional Senior Officers attended as            follows      before   the
      situation was considered to be controlled.

        (i)   Chief Fire Officer.
       (ii)   Assistant Chief Fire Officer Hornsby.
      (iii)   Assistant Chief Fire Officer Seaman.
       (iv)   Senior Divisional Officer Smoothey.
        (v)   T/Divisional Officer I Hildreth.
       (vi)   T/Assistant Divisional Officer Green.

All but four WrT appliances and crews were released from 1651 hours,
the remainder being retained in case of further incidents and very
heavy traffic in that area of Sheffield due to spectators leaving the
ground.

All appliances were released      from   Hillsborough    at   1720    hours   and
returned to their bases.

A map of the area of the ground is included for clarification purposes.
                                                                                              ADO.
                                                                                              DO, t                             .

                                                                                              Rivaltn-I           J D a r n £ * ll“ l
                                                              Holdmq a r ia                   Rfng' n 3 low-! D a rn a \ \~ 2.
                                                              f o r foralt has                Lowgdqas - I C a.n t'ro l-S               ,
                                                                                            MariSfig'Jd fe * I SteclcsbridqC * '
                                                                                            Steefcsbnefga - Z B o r n S t e y ^
                                                                                              C o n tra I U   m    f
                                              In I ha I c a s u a lty
                                              r a c iiw m c j        a ra a




                                                                          Fool’balt 6rou>>d




                                                                                      Pelicc &
                                                                                      First-Aid-^




                        P c. n /' s fo n <l      R o a d




                                                       '     v /
                                                        J ■ No
                                                       '• -C
                                                            iV -
                                                              ° 11
                                                            \<n jj
                                                         1 "W .f1!
                                                        I' O I
                                                        i 1 9 ,i!
                                                        i
                                                        1i
                                                        l     art   ill

                                                              <j i i
                                                         i iHi I
                                                              'I

SCALE              DRAWN          TRACED        CHECKED
  1:1 2 5 0        M.CB.             H.O,                                              Sit e     P la n

S h e f f ie l d    We d n e s d a y FC, H illsso r o u g n ,
P e n /s t o n e    Road,
S h e f f ie l d ,
S o u t h Yo r k s h ir e , S S I5W____________

     SOUTH YORKSHIRE                                                      COUNTY COUNCIL
                                                                                                              C. 2088
