            fo C T ^ M X -      SQECftVo&S ACT                      S 'S   .

                                    110 (1> -
(i)   TAYLOR REPORT

Background note
1.   Lord Justice Taylor's, report on the 1989 Hillsborough
Football disaster was published on 29 January.        The report
considered what could be done to deal with the problems of crowd
control and hooliganism at sport events, and to improve safety
and conditions at sports grounds.

All-seater stadia

2. It recommended that one of the best ways of tackling these
problems would be to introduce all-seater stadia. For football
league clubs, Lord Justice Taylor proposed that the grounds of
First and Second division clubs in England and Wales and Premier
division clubs in Scotland should become all-seater by the
beginning of the 1994-95 season, and that the grounds of other
league clubs should become all-seater by the beginning 1999-
2000 season, the Government has accepted these recommendations.
Q & A briefing on all-seater stadia is attached.

3. The report recommended further improvements in other areas,
including modifying fencing, installing closed-circuit TV,
painting gangways and installing first aid rooms.

National membership scheme for football supporters

4.   Lord Justice Taylor concluded that he could not support a
national membership scheme because he did not believe that the
type of technology envisaged in an invitation to tender document
would work well enough to avoid the danger of congestion and
disorder. The Government has always made it clear that it would
not implement the scheme until it had given full consideration
to Lord Justice Taylor's report. In the light of his report the
Government has decided not to proceed with the establishment of
the Football Membership Authority which would have had the
responsibility for drawing up and implementing a detailed scheme.

Alternative strategy to combat hooliganism

5. Lord Justice Taylor has put forward an extensive package of
measures which could reduce football hooliganism.   In addition
to all-seater stadia other measures include: three new criminal
offences specifically related to football; an extension of
attendance centre orders; and electronic tagging of offenders.
The Home Secretary has said that the Government will be looking
carefully and quickly at all of these suggestions.      But the
national membership scheme will remain on the statute book in
case there should ever be a need to return to it in the future.




28.3.90
Line to take on all-seated accommodation

How will the change be achieved?
S. 11 of the Football Spectators Act provides the machinery as
regards football grounds. Grounds will be licensed and seating
will be prescribed as a condition of licence.

Will HMG discuss movement to all-seated stadia with the football
authorities


Yes, we have always made it clear we would do so.

Will 3rd and 4th Division clubs/non-League clubs have to convert
their grounds to all-seater?
The first step will be to press ahead with the conversion of the
major grounds and those grounds of clubs in Division 1 and 2.
We shall also be discussing witht he football authorities how
best to move forward to convert grounds of clubs in the lower
divisions and clubs outside the football league.


Will designated rugby league, rugby union, crpicket grounds be
reguired to be all-seater?
The Football Spectators Act does not extend to these sports. We
shall consider the action necessary, including any additional
statutory powers, in order to increase the proportion of seated
accommodation at these grounds.
What if clubs cannot meet the timetable?
This is hypothetical. Smaller clubs will have 10 years to become
all-seater. It is for the football industry to decide how it can
best make the long-overdue changes. Remember that the smaller
grounds will not need to provide more seats than the numbers of
people who normally attend matches.

Financing/costs
How much will conversion to all-seated stadia cost?
The report says that the figure estimated by the football
authorities is £130 million. But it could be less, as pointed
out by Lord Justice Taylor in paragraph 118 of the Report.

What if clubs cannot afford to convert?

This is for the clubs but a requirement to admit spectators to
seated accommodation only does not mean closure of the ground.
It requires only a reduction in the standing capacity.      They
should be considerably helped by the recent concession announced
by the Chancellor on Pool Betting Duty.
Will it mean that the terraces of many grounds will lie empty?

That depends on whether reductions are made in area or density.
It is up to the football industry to decide how best it should
proceed. Obviously the capacity of grounds will be smaller but
few grounds are in practice regularly filled to capacity.

(ii) POOLS DUTY CONCESSION

Background note
1. In his budget statement on 20 March the Chancellor announced
proposals to help improve safety and comfort at league football
grounds.
2. The main measure is a cout in Pool Betting Duty from 42% per
cent to 40 per cent for an initial period of 5 years, provided
that the revenue forgone by the Government is given to the
Football Trust to use on improvements recommended by Lord Justice
Taylor, this will channel about £100 million into football over
the five year period, after which the position will be reviewed,
■the proposed cut in duty depends on a satisfactory and binding
agreement being reached between the pools promoters and the
Football Trust that the money saved by the reduction in duty will
be used to bring league football grounds up to the standards
envisaged by Lord Justice Taylor.
3. The main and costly improvement recommended by Lord Justice
Taylor is the provision of all-seater stadia at all league
football grounds
4.   Q & A briefing is attached.
5. In addition, the Inland Revenue will clarify the rules under,
which clubs can get tax relief on ground improvements.           p
significant proportion of the expenditure needed to bring
football grounds up to the standards recommended by Lord Justice
Taylor qualifies for offset against tax. But football clubs may
be uncertain about the extent of relief svjhich are available, and
the circumstances in which they apply. |the Inland Revenue will
therefore approach the football authorities shortly to help
clarify the position.

Line to Take on Tax Concession
(i )      Why divert Government revenue to football clubs?
Exceptional, but tangible expression of Government's concern to
see Taylor report's recommendations implemented quickly. Revenue
from pool betting duty arises almost wholly from betting on
football.    Reasonable way to enable football clubs to finance
improvements without increasing public expenditure.
(ii) Clubs spend millions on transfer fees. Why not levy on
them? Not clear it would solve problem. Would hit clubs buying
ansgk selling players, but not those developing home grown talent.
Would not put any additional money into football. would put UK
clubs at disadvantage against foreign clubs.
(iii) Extend help to other spectator sports - eg Ruabv League?
Soccer's circumstances exceptional: Taylor Report focuses on
soccer. Hillsborough a soccer tragedy, right that proceeds of
football pools should go to football.
(iv)     Help other forms of leisure, eg theatres closing
down/burning down? government already supports arts through Arts
Council. £175 million in 1990-91 - increase of £20 million over
1989-90.
(v)    Why right to use money from jbetting on football. but
prevent national lottery for NHS? Pools not national lottery;
NHS lottery would be drop in ocean compared with £28 billion
already provided by Government.
