THE NATIONAL MEMBERSHIP SCHEME


INTRODUCTION

1. This paper is concerned with the Government's proposals for a
national membership scheme, as provided for in Part I of the
Football Spectators Bill now in Parliament. It summarises      the
background to the decision to introduce the Football Spectators
Bill and draws attention to Ministers' statements on the reasons
why the Government believes the scheme to be necessary to counter
hooliganism associated with football. Separate evidence from the
Home Office provides information about: the continuing problems
of crowd control associated with football matches; other relevant
legislation; and the policing of football.


NATIONAL MEMBERSHIP SCHEME" - BACKGROUND

2. In January 1986 the Committee of Inquiry into Crowd Safety and
Control at Sports Ground's chaired by Mr Justice Popplewell
recommended that:


       "Consideration should continue to be given to some form of
       membership scheme for Football League clubs in England and
       W a l e s ."


Partial membership schemes for individual League clubs were among
the measures agreed between the Government and the football
authorities   in February   1987.  Copies  of  the  press  notice
announcing the package of measures are attached.      The agreed
objective was that all clubs should introduce schemes covering at
least 50% of each ground's capacity by the beginning of the
1987/88 season. It was also agreed that the Football League would
commission a study by independent consultants on the scope, costs
and benefits/disadvantages of a reciprocal membership scheme
embracing all 92 League clubs.

3. The Minister for Sport's report to the Union of European
Football Associations (UEFA), in June 1988, at the end of the
1987/88 season, entitled "Progress on Measures to Combat Football
Hooliganism",    (attached)   recorded   that   progress  on  the
introduction of partial membership schemes had been slow; only 16
clubs had met the target of 50% ground capacity agreed in
February 1987. A consultants' study on reciprocal membership had
been commissioned, as agreed, and received by the Football League
in  July   1987;   there  had  been   no  further  action  on the
consultants' study.

4. The Minister for Sport's report to UEFA listed a number of
serious incidents of hooliganism at and around football matches
during the 1987/88 domestic season. These were followed by the
scenes  of  disorder  involving  English  supporters during  the
European Championships in West Germany in June 1988. On 6 July
1988, the Prime Minister met the football authorities to discuss
the need for further action.
5. Copies of the joint statement issued after the 6 July meeting
are attached. The Government pressed the football authorities to
introduce a national membership scheme to control access to
Football League matches. The football authorities did not believe
that such a scheme could be introduced on a voluntary basis and
the Government said that it would bring forward proposals for
legislation to give statutory backing to a national membership
scheme. It was agreed that a working party under the chairmanship
of the Minister for Sport, consisting of representatives of the
football authorities, the Government and the police, would be set
up to look at the details of the scheme.

6. The Minister for Sport's working party published its report on
9 November 1988. Copies of the report and of the DOE press
notices issued at the same time are attached. The report sets out
the working party's views on what the main principles of the
national membership scheme should be and contains a series of
recommendations for the football authorities and the Government.


THE FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL

7. The Football Spectators Bill was introduced in the House of
Lords on 16 January 1989. Copies of the Bill as introduced and as
amended to date in the House of Lords are attached. The main
provisions of the Bill are in two parts. Part I provides a
statutory framework for a national membership scheme for football
spectators. Part II gives the courts powers to impose restriction
orders on convicted hooligans to prevent them from travelling to
English matches abroad; Part II is explained in the Home Office
evidence.

8. The contents of the Bill and the Government's reasons for
introducing it are summarised in two press notices issued on
publication (attached). Among the main points made by the
Secretary of State for the Environment in launching the Bill were
the following:


      "We welcome the measures which the clubs and the police
      have taken to deal with hooligans inside football grounds.
      But their effect has been to keep the lid on the problem,
      not to cure it. At too many matches, violence remains just
      below the surface. Rival supporters have to be kept apart
      by physical barriers and by the employment of large
      numbers of police."

      "Outside football grounds, the behaviour of rival groups
      of supporters makes life intolerable both for law-abiding
      football supporters and for those who live or trade nearby
      or wish to travel by train on the same day as a football
      match."

      "The Bill proposes that everyone who attends a designated
      football match in England and Wales should be a member of
      the national membership scheme, or otherwise authorised by
      the scheme, and that designated matches should be played
      only on licensed football grounds. Those who are convicted
      of a relevant offence will be disqualified from membership
      of the scheme and the scheme itself will allow for the
      Football Membership Authority to ban others who misbehave
      at football matches."
       "For the first time, there will be an effective and
       comprehensive procedure to keep hooligans away from
       football matches. Of course there will be attempts to
       abuse the system but if the scheme is effective, those
       attempts will fail. We believe that it offers the real
       prospect of ending football hooliganism both inside and
       outside grounds. If hooligans know that they will not be
       allowed in to football matches,       they will have no
       incentive to travel to them. The link between football and
       hooliganism will be broken and football will cease to be a
       focus for violence."


9. The Government remains committed to the introduction of a
national membership scheme for the reasons given by the Secretary
of State when the Bill was introduced and by Ministers during its
passage through the House of Lords (see below). The continuing
problem of    hooliganism associated   with   football  has been
highlighted since the Hillsborough disaster by a number of
incidents at the end of the 1988/89 domestic season. The
Government believes that the national membership scheme is
essential as a means of ensuring that hooligans can be excluded
from football grounds in the future.

10. There has been a pause in the proceedings of the Football
Spectators Bill since the Hillsborough disaster but it will
resume its passage with Third Reading in the House of Lords on
Friday   16  June.  The   Opposition  have  tabled   a  "reasoned
amendment", regretting that the Government has decided to proceed
with the Bill in advance of Lord Justice Taylor's report. Lord
Justice Taylor may be interested to see Lord Hesketh's speech in
response to the Opposition's amendment.

11. Ministers are aware of the range of issues presented by the
Hillsborough disaster but nevertheless take the view that the
case for the national membership scheme has not been altered by
the disaster. They have always made it clear that the key issue
in setting the timetable for the introduction of the scheme is
the need to be satisfied about the availability of the right
technology. Suppliers have claimed that there need be no delays
at turnstiles as a result of the scheme and that checking
membership cards can be carried out in the same time as it
presently takes to check season tickets or pay for tickets. The
Government will not, however, approve the implementation of the
scheme until it is satisfied that it will work effectively and
efficiently.

12. The Football Spectators Bill has been debated in the House of
Lords on the following dates:


                                          Official Report

      Second Reading      2 February      Vol 503 No.29

      Committee           20 February     Vol 504   No's 38 & 39
                          7 March         Vol 504   No's 47 & 48
                          14 March        Vol 505   No's 51 & 52

      Report              10 April        Vol 506 No's 63 & 64
                          13 April        Vol 506 No 66.
13.  A number of speeches by Government spokesmen              may   be
particularly of interest to Lord Justice Taylor.


Second Heading           2 February

- Lord Caithness (opening the debate)            Cols 1217-1222
- Lord Hesketh (replying to the debate)          Cols 1298-1305


Committee

First Day                20 February

- Lord Hesketh (on phasing the scheme and technology)
                                               Cols 413-416

Second Day               7 March

- Lord Hesketh (on exemptions from the scheme)
                                                 Cols 1393-1395

Third Day                14 March

- Lord Hesketh (on the preparation of the scheme)
                                               Cols 88-90

- Lord Hesketh   (on the licensing of football grounds under the
  Bill)                                        Cols 139-141

- Lord Ferrers (on the possibility that the scheme's computers
  might break down)                         Cols    194-5  and
                                            198-201


Report

First Day                 10 April

- Lord Hesketh (on phasing)                      Cols 14-15

- Lord Hesketh (on exemptions)                   Cols 69-71.
