                              From:    A R Baden
                                        SARD C

                              Date:    8 May 1992
Miss Stewart

         MEETING WITH THE FLA AND HOME OFFICE AT 11.00AM

1. As you know there is a meeting at 11.00am with John de Quidt
of the FLA and David Peters of the Home Office in Room LG.83. I
hope to be there.

2.  I attach a note of a meeting of the FLA Inspectorate held on
24 April to discuss the options for review of all-seating. I also
attach a longer paper produced by John de Quidt which sets out
the problems facing the FLA in implementing all-seating and other
safety requirements under the Football Spectators Act 1989. On
the second paper I suggest we agree with the FLA that in putting
forward options for reviewing all-seating to Ministers it is
naturally essential to point out what the powers are for
enforcing them. We will need to clarify what can be achieved at
present under the Football Spectators Act 1989 and what the
longer term legislative requirements might be. The essential
immediate task, however, is to identify what the new policy
should be.

3. I suggest that we might discuss the following options in turn
at the meeting:

         no change to existing policy. Given the views of
         Ministers and the Prime Minister it is difficult to see
         how this is tenable. It would nevertheless be helpful
         to hear the FLA and Home Office views on this;

    -    relaxation of the all-seating deadline for the Second
         Division clubs. This is likely to prove essential for
         some clubs and it would be helpful to hear the FLA's
         views on the scale of the problem and whether it is
         indeed appropriate to have a blanket relaxation or a
         more selective approach to particular clubs in the
         Second Division;

         exempt all grounds in Divisions Three and Four from
         all-seating. This would be difficult to justify given
         the anomalies in that some of the clubs in Divisions
         One and Two have lower average attendances than some of
         the clubs in Divisions Three and Four. How do we cope
         with relegation from Division Two to Division Three and
         promotion from Three to Two? Do we ban matches at Third
         and Fourth Division clubs where they are playing higher
         division teams where the ground is likely to be filled
         to capacity;

         exempt all grounds apart from those in the Premier
         League. Although fewer anomalies would result from this

                                                               1
            the basic objections raised with the above option apply
            to this one as well;

            exempt all grounds where the clubs agree    to a reduced
            maximum capacity of say 6,000. How would    the capacity
            threshold be justified and does it make      sense given
            that in some grounds a 6,000 limit would     be close to
            the current maximum capacity and allowing    all or most
            of this to be terracing might be open to    objection on
            safety and public order grounds;

            require   all-seating only in relation to average
            attendances. This hardly makes sense if it means that
            where those attendances are exceeded standing on
            terraces is allowed. This is likely to be exactly the
            situation where the ground is most open to safety and
            public order risks;

            exempt all grounds where the clubs agree to a maximum
            capacity/attendance of a percentage, for example 75%,
            of the present capacity. This would be open to the
            objection that majority of the spectators could still
            be crowded in to standing accommodation with public
            order and safety consequences;

            except that with all its anomalies the Premier League
            should go all-seating, particularly in the light of the
            UEFA requirement for all-seating in club competitions.
            In the case of the Second Division extend the deadline
            either in a blanket fashion or in individual cases. It
            is up for consideration whether there might be in
            exceptional circumstances a case for a Second Division
            club to be allowed to demonstrate to the FLA that its
            standing accommodation is safe and does not give rise
            to public order co: ‘ '     ' ms. I doubt that the FLA
            will welcome this               of the Third and Fourth
            Division clubs accepting the principle that in some
            circumstances standing capacity is acceptable on safety
            and public order grounds with this to be decided by the
            FLA on a case by case basis. The FLA would need to have
            the power to require terracing to be brought up to a
            sufficient standard.




A R BADEN
Rm 3.63
Ext 6371




                                                                  2
