         INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER
                          15 APRIL 1989




                      HOME OFFICE EVIDENCE
               SAFETY AND CONTROL AT SPORTS EVENTS




Home Office
Queen Anne's Gate
London SW1H 9AT
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER


HOME OFFICE EVIDENCE : Safety and Control at Sports Events


Foreword



     This constitutes the response of the Home Office to the
Inquiry's request for written evidence. We understand that what
the Inquiry would find most helpful at this stage is a factual
account of the provisions and operation of the Safety at Sports
Grounds Act 1975 and its relationship to other relevant
legislation, together with a commentary on the Guide to Safety at
Sports Grounds (the "Green Guide"). Also included is an account
of policing and crowd control issues.


     If the Inquiry would like further information on any point
the Home Office will of course provide it where it can.




A H TURNEY
Home Office
Fire and Emergency Planning Department
June 1988
CONTENTS                                          Paragraph No

PART I - BACKGROUND AND DEVELOPMENT
Introduction                                      1
Popplewell Inquiry                                5
The Legislation                                   7

PART II - THE SCOPE AND OPERATION OF THE SAFETY
          OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975 (AS AMENDED)
General                                           19
Fire Safety and Safety of Places
 of Sport Act 1987                                20
Designation under the 1975 Act                    21
Safety Certificates                               24
Appeals                                           33
Offences                                          36
Serious risk to spectators                        41
Duty of enforcement                               44
Exercise by local authorities of
 their powers and duties                          45
Other powers of the Secretary of State            48
Power to modify the 1975 Act                      52
Statutory Guidance by the Secretary of State      53


PART III - FIRE AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987
General                                           54
Regulated Stands                                  55
Statutory Guidance under Part III                 57
Regulations under Part III                        58


PART IV - THE GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS (THE GREEN GUIDE)
Origins                                           59
Application of the Guide                          62
Popplewell Inquiry                                64
Revised Guide                                     65
Other developments                                67
Pitch Perimeter Fencing                           68
Crush Barriers                                    69
PART V “ CROWD CONTROL AND POLICING
Introudction                                        71
The Criminal Law                                    78
The Courts                                          93
The Police                                          95
Responsibility for Crowd Control at
     Football Matches                              105
Control on admission.                              110
Matches overseas                                   121


ANNEXES


Annex A: Fire Safety and Safety at Sports Venues
          Consultative document Home Office/Scottish Office
Annex B: Home Office Circular No 71/1987
Annex C: The Safety of Sports Grounds (Designation) Orders
Annex D: Home Office Circular No 72/1987
Annex E: Safety at Sports Grounds Managers' Guide
Annex F: Home Office Circular No 96/1988
Annex G: Home Office Circular No 97/1988
Annex H: Home Office Circular No 7/1986
Annex J: Home Office Circular No 68/1988

ENCLOSURES
Guide to   Safety at Sports Grounds (1973)
Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (Football)   (1976)
Guide to   Safety at Sports Grounds (1986)
PART I

BACKGROUND AND DEVELOPMENT

Introduction


1.   Specific legislation in the form of the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) for securing the safety of
spectators at sports events was introduced to implement the main
recommendations of the Report of the Inquiry into Crowd Safety at
Sports Grounds by Lord Wheatley (Cmnd 4952) set up after an
accident at Ibrox Park, Glasgow, when 66 people died. The terms
of reference for that Inquiry were:

     "To make an independent appraisal of the effectiveness of
     existing arrangements for crowd safety at sports grounds in
     Great Britain, and of the improvements which could be
     brought about within the (then) present framework of the
     law: and to consider the nature of any alterations in the
     law which appear to be needed."

2.   The accident had no relation to crowd misbehaviour, but
resulted simply from an unexpected revived interest in the game
when a goal was scored after substantial numbers of spectators
had already begun to leave the stadium, and then turned back.
Previously the only major soccer stadium disaster since the war
had been at Burden Park, Bolton, on 9 March 1946 when 33 people
died and many more were injured. The cause of that incident was
essentially over-crowding and crowd pressure which caused crush
barriers to collapse (Report by R Moelwyn Hughes KC Cmd 6846) .

3.    The main concern of the Wheatley Report was with crowd
safety in the context of the hazards of uncontrolled crowd
movement, with the measures appropriate for mitigating such
risks, and with a regulatory system to ensure that necessary
safety measures were taken.


4-   The statutory framework of the 1975 Act, providing for local
authority certification of designated stadia, follows broadly the
pattern outlined in the Wheatley Report? and the specific range
of detailed safety measures (relating to such matters as
gradients, crush barriers, gangways and flow-rates) in the
accompanying Technical Report formed the basis of the (non-
statutory) guidance subsequently incorporated in the initial
version of the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds, the "Green
Guide" first published in 1973 (see Part IV).

Popplewell Inquiry


5.   The fire at Valley Parade Football Ground, Bradford, on 11
May 1985 led to an examination of sports ground safety by the
Committee of Inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control at Sports
Grounds led by Mr Justice Popplewell (Interim Report Cmnd 9585,
Final Report Cmnd 9710).


6.   The Popplewell Inquiry commented that the 1975 Act had been
operating satisfactorily at designated grounds but recommended
changes to make the legislation more effective and for the
extension of safety controls. The Government's response was
published in a Consultative Document in June 1986 (see Annex A)
(including proposals for changes to the Fire Precautions Act
1971), which was subsequently reflected in the changes brought
about by the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987.

The Legislation

7.   The position found by the Wheatley Inquiry is set out in
detail in paragraphs 13 - 18 of its Report: in essence it was
that the patchwork of legislation then existing might have
provided some protection for spectators but was inadequate. The
procedure set up by the football associations requiring clubs
with a ground capacity of over 10,000 to submit an annual
inspection certificate and the voluntary consultations which took
place with the police over attendance levels were also considered
by Lord Wheatley to be defective, despite what was acknowledged
as the generally responsible approach of the clubs and football
authorities. The present day position is summarised below.
Outdoor sports events

8.   The main controls for securing safety of spectators at
outdoor sports grounds are those imposed by the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) and the Fire Safety and Safety of
Places of Sport Act 1987 (the 1987 Act).   Part II of the 1987
Act amended the 1975 Act with effect from 1 January 1988 (see
paragraph 20 below).


9.   Part III of the 1987 Act, which came into force on 1 January
1989, is free standing of the 1975 Act. It introduces a system
of safety controls at sports grounds which are not designated
under section 1 of the 1975 Act (see paragraphs 54-58 below).


10. Both the 1975 Act and Part III of the 1987 Act apply only to
outdoor sports grounds defined as:


     "any place where sports or other competitive activities take
     place in the open air and where accommodation has been
     provided for spectators consisting of artificial structures
     or natural structures artificially modified for that
     purpose".


(The Acts apply to England, Wales and Scotland but do not apply
to Northern Ireland. The 1975 Act and Part III of the 1987 Act
do not apply to the Scilly Isles but may be extended to do so by
Order of the Secretary of State.)

Indoor sports events

11. Public entertainments held indoors such as music and
dancing, have for some time been the subject of a separate system
of licensing under the London Government Act 1963 and the Local
Government (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1982.  (In Scotland,
the current legislation is the Civic Government (Scotland) Act
1982).

However, certain specified exceptions apart, the licensing
regime, administered by District Councils or London Borough
Councils did not extend to indoor sports.   Part IV of the 1987
Act changed this with effect from 1 June 1988 by extending the
licensing requirement to any premises used for sporting events to
which the public are invited as spectators. Except where sports
complexes are concerned, a licence is only required if the sports
event which constitutes the entertainment is the principal
purpose for which the premises are being used. Licensing
authorities may attach such terms and conditions as they think
fit.

Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974


12. Separate evidence will be submitted by the Health and Safety
Executive (HSE) of technical aspects of spectator safety at
sports grounds (eg. safety of crush barriers). The HSW Act could
also be used to enforce general spectator safety at sports
grounds. Section 3 of the HSW Act is wide-ranging in that it
places a duty on an employer to conduct his undertaking in such a
way as to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that
persons not in his employment who may be affected thereby are not
exposed to risks to their health or safety. A sports or other
entertainment 'undertaking' would fall within this category.
However, it is the stated policy of the Health and Safety
Commission that, as a general principle, they and the Executive
wish to avoid duplication of enforcement with other authorities.
The HSE would not therefore generally attempt to enforce the
requirements of section 3 of the 1974 Act when they overlap with
duties imposed by other more specific legislation where other
authorities have responsibility for policy and enforcement. The
Safety at Sports Grounds Act 1975 represents more specific
legislation and HSE does not enforce section 3 of the HSW Act to
secure the safety of spectators at sports grounds. This
arrangement is agreed between HSE and the Home Office.


13. In practice HSE are concerned primarily with the health and
safety of employees at a sports ground (eg players, ground staff,
contractors) using Section 2 of the HSW Act. HSE would normally
take the lead on the protection of spectators from the effects of
the event taking place in the arena (eg stock car and motor
racing). HSE also have policy and enforcement responsibilities
at sports events held elsewhere than at a sports ground defined
under the 1975 Act (eg motor cycle scrambles).

Building Act 1984

14. Section 71 of the Building Act 1984 makes provision for
local building authorities (District Councils and London Borough
Councils) to take action in respect of ingress and egress,
gangways and passages after consultation with the fire authority.
As identified by the Wheatley Inquiry (paragraph 13 of the report
in relation to the provisions of section 59 of the Public Health
Act 1936) the extent to which these powers can be applied to open
terracing in sports grounds is open to question. Provision is
also contained in sections 77 and 78 for a local authority to
take action to make safe buildings which appear to be in a
dangerous condition.

15. In practice, whereas Building Act powers may have been used
occasionally in respect of sports grounds they are in general not
needed because of the specific powers contained within the 1975
Act (which provides for the exclusion of sections 24 and 71 of
the Building Act to a sports ground or stand which is the subject
of a safety certificate).

Fire Precautions Act 1971


16. The Fire Precautions Act 1971 (1971 Act) (as amended by the
Health and Safety at Work etc Act 1974 and the Fire Safety and
Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987), is the main legislative
instrument for controlling fire safety in occupied buildings in
Great Britain. It is intended to provide for the protection of
persons from the risk of fire and its central feature is the
requirement for occupiers of premises, put to uses designated by
order of the Secretary of State,'to obtain a fire certificate
from the local fire authority.

17.   Under the Act a use of premises can be designated if it
falls within at least one of the following classes of use: as, or
for, any purpose involving the provision of sleeping
accommodation? as, or as part of, an institution providing
treatment or care? for purposes of entertainment, recreation or
instruction or for purposes of any club, society or association?
for purposes of teaching, training or research? for any purpose
involving access to the premises by members of the public,
whether on payment or otherwise? or as a place of work.

18. The provisions of the 1971 Act could therefore be applied to
buildings, such as stands at sports grounds. However it was
always recognised that the burden certification would impose on
fire authorities and those to be certificated meant that a policy
of selective designation would have to be followed, having regard
to the classes of occupancy which had given rise to significant
fire casualties. In the case of sports grounds it has also been
recognised that fire safety for spectators could be achieved
through the general provisions for spectator safety contained in
the 1975 and 1987 Acts set up specifically for that purposes.
PART II
THE SCOPE AND OPERATION OF THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
(AS AMENDED)

General


19. The main provisions of the 1975 Act (as amended by Part II
of the 1987 Act) are -


     a.   A power, exercisable by the Secretary of State by
order,to designate sports grounds which in his opinion have
accommodation for more than 10,000 spectators.   Once designated,
a ground will require a general safety certificate from the local
authority.

    b.    A power for the Secretary of State to vary the
          threshold figure of 10,000.

    c.    An obligation on the local authority to issue a general
          safety certificate, and a discretionary power to issue
          a special safety certificate (see paragraph 25 below).

    d.    A discretion for the local authority to set terms and
          conditions in the certificate which are necessary or
          expedient to secure reasonable safety at the ground.

    e.    A right of appeal to the courts, in relation to the
          issue of safety certificates and their contents, the
          procedure for which is set out in regulations made
          under the Act.

    f.    Rights of the police and either fire authorities or
          building authorities, to consultation, access to
          grounds and information and to appeal against terms and
          conditions in safety certificates.
     g.    A power to local certificating authorities to
           restrict or prohibit the admission of spectators to a
           sports ground (or any part of it) if there is a serious
           risk to spectators.

     h.    Powers of entry and inspection to sports grounds; and
           prescribed offences.


     i.    A duty on local certificating authorities to enforce
           the provisions of the Act and arrange annual
           inspections of designated sports grounds.


Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987 (the 1987 Act)

20. Part II of the 1987 Act amended the 1975 Act in the
following ways:-


     *(a) The distinction between a sports "stadium" and sports
           "ground" originally made in the 1975 Act was abolished
           (section 19 of the 1987 Act). This resulted in
           consequential amendment to section 2 of the 1975 Act
           which no longer provides for mandatory terms and
           conditions and the insertion of a new section 15A which
           enables modification of the 1975 Act to be made in
           respect of different classes of sports ground.

     (b)   A new power was given for the Secretary of State to
           vary the 10,000 threshold at which a sports ground may
           be designated (section 20 of the 1987 Act).

     (c)   Where safety certificates contain terms/conditions on
           police presence at a sports ground specific provision
           was made for the extent of that presence to be reserved
           for determination by the relevant Chief Police Officer
            (section 21 of the 1987 Act).

     (d)   All appeals were re-directed from the Secretary of
           State to the courts (section 22).
      *(e) A new power was given to local certificating
           authorities to issue (subject to a right of appeal to
           the courts) a notice prohibiting or restricting the
           admission of spectators to a ground, or part(s) of it,
           if there is a serious risk to their safety (sections 23
           and 24 of the 1987 Act). This power replaced the
           earlier emergency procedure.


      *(f) A duty was placed on local certificating authorities to
           enforce the 1975 Act's provisions and, for that
           purpose, to arrange inspections of designated grounds
           at least once a year in accordance with any guidance by
           the Secretary of State (section 25 of the 1987 Act).

All these changes came into effect from 1st January 1988. Home
Office circular 71/1987 (see Annex B) introduced these provisions
to local authorities.

* Denotes a recommentation of the Popplewell Inquiry

Designation under the 1975 Act

21. The power to designate a sports ground with accommodation
for over 10,000 spectators as requiring a safety certificate is
exercised by the Secretary of State by order subject to the
negative resolution procedure of Parliament. For Scotland this
is done by the Secretary of State for Scotland. For Wales, the
Secretary of State for Wales has been content that designation of
Welsh grounds should be covered in the same designation order as
English grounds. That order is made by the Home Secretary.


22.   A summary of the effects of designation of a ground on the
ground operator is summarised below.


      (a)   The management must apply for a safety certificate and
            no spectators may be admitted until such an application
            is made (s. 1(1) and s.12 (l)(a)).
     (b)   An applicant must furnish the local authority with
           appropriate information in order for a safety
           certificate to be issued (s.3 (4)(5) and s.12 (l)(a)).

     (c)   The holder of the safety certificate must comply with
           its terms and conditions (s.12 (l)(d)).

     (d)   The holder   is required to give access for entry and
           inspection   of the premises and records (s.12   (6)(d)).

     (e)   The holder is required to inform the issuing authority
           of any proposed changes which are likely to affect
           spectator safety (s.8 (1) and s.12 (6)(c)).

     (f)   If the owner/occupier is aggrieved by the inclusion or
           omission of a particular clause in a certificate he has
           the right to appeal within certain time limits
           (s.5(3)).

A breach of the requirements at (a) to (e) above can lead to the
commission of an offence under s.12 of the Act.

23. Designation was initially applied in phases, beginning with
major international stadia (eg Wembley, Twickenham) and grounds
used by football clubs in Division 1 of the Football League. The
second phase in 1979 extended designation to grounds used by
clubs in Division 2 of the Football League. Thereafter, until
1985 grounds of clubs promoted to Division 2 were designated each
year. The fire at Valley Parade, Bradford led to the extension
of designation to all football league and rugby league grounds
able to accommodate over 10,000 spectators. Designation was
later extended still further to all football grounds (ie "non-
league" grounds), rugby union, rugby league and cricket grounds
identified as having accommodation for over 10,000 spectators
(Popplewell Inquiry, Final Report, recommendation 2). A list of
designated grounds is at Annex c.
Safety certificates


24. The main instrument of control under the Act is the safety
certificate issued by the local authority. A general safety
certificate is needed in respect of every ground which is the
subject of a designation order. The certificate enables the
local authority to impose such terms and conditions as are
necessary or expedient to ensure a reasonable standard of safety
at the ground in question.

25. Safety certificates are of two kinds, general and special.
A general safety certificate is the main continuing form of
control and is issued for an indefinite period in respect of a
specified activity or activities regularly taking place at the
ground. A special safety certificate may be issued at the
discretion of the local authority for a special event or other
circumstances not covered by the general safety certificate.
Such an event might be an evangelistic rally which might call for
special arrangements if, for example, seating were provided for
the congregation on the playing area. A special safety
certificate can be issued only in respect of a sports ground for
which a general safety certificate is already in force.


26. Designation of a sports ground by the Secretary of State
requires the occupier to apply for a general safety certificate
if spectators are to be admitted to the ground. The local
authority must then determine if the applicant is a "qualified
person1' (ie someone who is likely to be in a position to prevent
contravention of the terms and conditions of a safety
certificate), and if they do so determine they must issue a
general safety certificate. In this respect the general safety
certificate is different from a fire certificate issued under the
Fire Precautions Act 1971: the latter is issued only after
necessary safety works have been completed, whilst the safety
certificate under the 1975 Act can be issued almost from the
outset and is an instrument of continuing control.   (In practice
local authorities and clubs often discuss arrangements for safety
and set voluntary crowd limits until remedial work is carried
out).
The issue of a special safety certificate, however, is left to
the discretion of the local authority because only they can judge
whether it is appropriate to issue it for the special occasion in
question.

Local certificating authorities consultation


27. The local authorities in England and Wales responsible for
the issue of safety certificates were, until April 1986, the
county, and metropolitan county councils and the GLC. They were
required to consult the police and the local authority
responsible for building control (the building authority) about
the contents of safety certificates. Following local government
reorganisation in 1986 certificating responsibilities under the
1975 Act in London and the metropolitan county areas were
transferred under section 16 and schedule 8 paragraph 7 of the
Local Government Act 1985 to the London borough councils and the
metropolitan district councils (who are building authorities).
As a result the consultation requirement was also changed, so
that in London and metropolitan county areas the certificating
authority is required to consult the police and the fire
authority. Elsewhere the certificating authority, ie the county
councils, is also the fire authority: the requirement there is
for the police and building authority to be consulted. These
changes were circulated to local authorities, joint fire
authorities, chief fire officers and chief officers of police by
Home Office circular 7/1986 which included advice on
certification and the 1975 Act as it then was (see Appendix H).


Modification/cancellation/transfer of certificates


28. The local authority has power to amend or replace a safety
certificate; and, by the same token, the holder can apply to the
authority for amendment or replacement.

29. The only circumstances in which an authority can cancel a
safety certificate is if the holder dies or (if the holder is a
body corporate) is dissolved. But the holder of a safety
certificate can surrender the certificate to the local authority,
and then it ceases to have effect.

30. Similar procedures to those for applications for a safety
certificate apply to the transfer of a safety certificate. An
application may be made by the existing holder or the prospective
new holder. The issuing authority has to determine if the new
holder is a qualified person and, if so, there is discretion
given to the authority to transfer the certificate. The
authority has to copy the transfer application to the appropriate
Chief Officer of Police and either the building authority or the
fire authority (see paragraph 27 above).


Alterations to certificated stadia


31. The holder of a safety certificate must give notice to the
local authority of any proposals for alterations or extensions to
the stadium if such works are likely to affect the safety of
spectators. This requirement is particularly aimed at
alterations to exits or entrances including means of escape in
the event of an emergency.

Procedures and fees


32. The procedures and time limits for applications for general
and special safety certificates are set out in the Safety of
Sports Grounds Regulations 1987 (SI No 1987/1941); these include
provision for the local authority to have discretion to charge
fees for the issue of safety certificates at a level that covers
the administrative costs.

Appeals


33. There are four decisions by the local certificating
authority against which an appeal may lie:-

     (a)   Determination by the local authority that an applicant
           for a safety certificate is not a "qualified person" -
           (s.5 (l)).
      (b)   Refusal by the local authority to issue a special
            safety certificate (s.5 (2)).

      (c)   Inclusion or omission of anything in or from a safety
            certificate (s.5 (3)(i))•
      (d)   Refusal by the local authority to amend or replace a
            safety certificate (s.5 (3)(ii)) .

The procedures and time limits for appeals are laid down in the
Regulations (SI 1987/1941).


34.   The applicant for a safety certificate may appeal against a
local authority decision under (a) to (d) above. Appeals under
(c) and (d) above can also be made by the Chief Officer of Police
and either the building authority or the fire authority (see
paragraph 27).   Anyone else who is or may be concerned in
ensuring compliance with the terms and conditions of the safety
certificate may also appeal under (c) and (d) above.


35. If a local authority serves notice that an applicant is not
a qualified person, he is deemed to have withdrawn the
application for the safety certificate. An appeal against that
decision suspends the withdrawal at least until the appeal is
determined. Similarly, while the outcome of an appeal is
pending, the condition appealed against does not apply (s.7 (3)).

Offences

36. There are a number of offences in connection with safety
certification which can be committed by the management of a
sports ground and/or the holder of a safety certificate. Once a
designation order comes into force, it is an offence:


(i)   if spectators are admitted

      (a)   at a time when no safety certificate has been applied
            for (s.12 (1)(a)); or

      (b)   if an application for a certificate has been made but
           withdrawn or deemed to have been withdrawn (s.12
           (1)(a); or

     (c)   to an activity at the ground not covered by a safety
           certificate (s.12 (1)(b)? or

     (d)   on an occasion following surrender or cancellation of a
           certificate, when no certificate is in operation (s.12
           (1) (c) .

(ii) to contravene any term or condition of a safety certificate
     (s.12 (1)(d)) .

37. It is also an offence for spectators to be admitted to a
sports ground in contravention of a prohibition notice issued
under s.10 (s.12 (l)(e)) - see paragraphs 41-43 below.

38. A person found guilty of an offence under these provisions
may be fined up to the statutory maximum on summary conviction
and on conviction on indictment to imprisonment for not more than
2 years or a fine, or both.


39. There is a defence provision for a defendant to prove that a
breach took place without his consent and that he took all
reasonable precautions and exercised due diligence to avoid the
commission of such an offence by himself or any person under his
control.


40. The above are penalty provisions bearing upon the management
of a stadium/holder of a safety certificate. There is also
provision for (somewhat) lesser offences in relation generally to
the certification procedures. Thus an offence is committed by
any person who does not provide information to the Secretary of
State for the purposes of his estimating the crowd capacity of a
stadium or who provides to the Secretary of State or a local
authority false information? or who fails to notify a local
authority of proposed alterations to a stadium? or intentionally
obstructs a person authorised to enter and inspect the premises
or otherwise fails to answer the questions in the exercise of
these powers (s.l2(6)). Offences in this category attract on
summary conviction a fine of up to the statutory maximum
(s. 12(6)) .

Provision also exists for any regulations introduced to provide
that a breach of those regulations constitutes an offence
(s.12(5)).

Serious risk to spectators


41. The certification procedures described above provide the
main framework for securing the reasonable safety of spectators
under the 1975 Act. There is also a general, reserve power under
section 10 of the Act for local authorities to issue a notice
prohibiting or restricting the admission of spectators to a
ground, or any part of it, if the risk to their safety is judged
to be serious enough to justify doing so.

42. There is a right of appeal to a magistrates court against
such a notice (which must be copied to the police and building
authority or fire authority) by an aggrieved person - a defined
term intended to cover those who would be expected to have
responsibility for safety at a sports ground. A further right of
appeal to the Crown Court may be expressed against any order of
the magistrates court by the aggrieved person, the local
authority, the police and either the building authority or the
fire authority. Time limits in which to appeal are laid down in
the Safety of Sports Grounds Regulations 1987.


43.   Paragraphs 13-20 of the Annex to HO Circular 71/1987 (see
Annex B) contain advice to local authorities on how the section
10 power might be exercised.


Duty of enforcement


44. New section 10B of the 1975 Act provides for local
certificating authorities to enforce the Act's provisions and,
for that purpose, to arrange inspections of designated sports
grounds at least once every year in accordance with guidance from
the Secretary of State. Guidance was issued under cover of HOC
72/1987 (see paragraphs 48 and 53 and also Annex D).

The 1975 Act contains power for local authorities, police and
either fire or building authorities (see paragraph 27 above) to
authorise entry for inspection of a sports ground, and to examine
and copy records relating to attendances. This power is also
extended to the Secretary of State (see paragraph 48 below)•

Exercise by local authorities of their powers and duties


45.   The Home Office has only limited information on how local
authorities have exercised their powers under the Act. The local
authority is informed when an Order is made designating a ground
in respect of which that authority will be responsible for the
issue of a general safety certificate; and explanatory background
information is provided on how the Act works and their
responsibilities under it. Most local authorities have in the
past made a practice of furnishing the Home Office with copies of
safety certificates (and sometimes of special certificates) that
they have issued (although there is no obligation on them to do
so). It is not normally the practice for local authorities to
seek the advice of the Home Office about specific conditions
attached to safety certificates. Technical opinion may be sought
by both authorities and ground operators (or their professional
advisers) from time to time on the interpretation of the Guide to
Safety at Sports Grounds and how the Guide's principles may be
applied to the problems at a particular ground. Home Office
involvement here has, by necessity, to be limited even where it
can be given because of the lack of knowledge of individual
grounds and the problems posed by their design and configuration
when in use.

46.   In general, the approach to certification and inspection
most favoured by local authorities is understood to be the team
approach.   This was acknowledged by the Popplewell Inquiry
(Final Report 3 - 6 9 ) as an effective method notwithstanding the
inherent difficulty of balancing the views/input of different
disciplines.   This approach also ensures the consultation
requirements of the 1975 Act (see paragraph 27) are fulfilled as
well as bringing different skills to bear on safety problems.

47.   The organisation of the teams is a matter left to local
authorities who are best placed to determine the arrangements
which most suit them.    The lead may vary: for example, in some
authorities the building control may be the lead department, in
others the engineering department may assume the lead role.
The legal or chief executive's office may co-ordinate the
required action.   Typically, a safety team is likely to consist
of personnel from building control, engineering, fire, police and
may also include environmental health and electrical engineering.


Other powers of the Secretary of State

48.   As well as the authorities referred to in paragraph 44
above, the 1975 Act empowers the Secretary of State to authorise
entry for inspection of a sports ground and to examine and copy
records relating to attendances. The reason for this power was
to ensure the Secretary of State could discharge the functions as
an appellate authority (now discharged by the courts, see
paragraph 20d above) and also for designation purposes.

Regulations


49.   In addition to the powers connected with designation of
grounds, the Secretary of State has powers under Section 6(1) of
the 1975 Act to make regulations to:-


      (a)   prescribe the procedures for the issue, transfer and
      amendment of safety certificates; and



      (b) give authorities discretion to charge fees in respect of
      applications for issue etc pf safety certificates; and

      (c) prescribe the time limits for appeals to the courts.

50.   Under section 6(2) the Secretary of State may by regulation
make provision for securing safety at sports grounds, and under
section 18 (1A) (inserted by section 19 of the 1987 Act) for
different provision to be made for different classes of sports
ground.

51.   Regulations have been made covering (a) to (c) in paragraph
49 above (SI 1987/1941).   The powers under Section 6(2) and
18(1A) have not been used.

Power to modify the 1975 Act

52.   Under section 15A of the 1975 Act (inserted by section 19 of
the 1987 Act) the Secretary of State may modify the provisions
of the 1975 Act as applied to different classes of sports ground.
This power has not been used.   Along with the regulation making
powers of section 18(1A), it was intended to allow maximum
flexibility in the way the Act, and certification measures under
it, was operated.   In this way, if particular safety
requirements were applicable only to a particular class of
designated sports ground, it would be possible to include
suitable terms and conditions in any safety certificate issued
for a sports ground of that class without affecting the contents
of safety certificates for other sorts of sports ground.


Statutory Guidance by the Secretary of State


53.   Statutory guidance on annual inspection of designated
sports grounds by local authorities has been issued under cover
of Home Office Circular 72/1987 (See Annex D). The aims and
objectives are set out in the supplementary notes to the
statutory guidance.   The inspections might best be described as
monitoring inspections which are in addition to, but do not
replace, the more detailed inspection regimes envisaged by the
safety certificate requirements, or those already carried out by
local authorities when amending safety certificates. The
statutory inspections ensure at least a minimum inspection of
grounds by local authorities, providing an opportunity to observe
and require to have remedied any obvious safety deficiencies at
the ground.
PART III

FIRE SAFETY AND SAFETY OF PLACES OF SPORT ACT 1987

General

54 As mentioned in paragraph 9 above, Part III of the 1987 Act is
free standing of the 1975 Act.   It applies to grounds which are
not designated under the 1975 Act but which have covered stands
for spectators and as such complements the provisions of the 1975
Act.


Regulated Stands

55 The 1987 Act provides for stands (as defined) at non­
designated sports grounds which can accommodate at least 500
spectators under cover (either seated or standing) to require a
safety certificate for the stand.    Such stands are termed
regulated stands.    A summary of the system is described in a
Home Office publication giving advice to ground managers on the
effects of Part III of the 1987 Act (see Annex E). Local
authorities determine - subject to a right of appeal, but in
accordance with statutory guidance from the Secretary of State
 (see paragraph 57) - which stands are regulated stands.   Notice
to this effect is served on the person who appears to qualify for
the issue of a general safety certificate.    Thereafter, the
system operates very much as that under the 1975 Act.
Application for a safety certificate has to be made if a
regulated stand is to be used to view activities at the ground.
The local authority, once they have determined who is qualified
to hold the safety certificate, must issue a certificate
containing terms and conditions which the authority considers
necessary or expedient to secure reasonable safety when the stand
is in use for viewing specified activities at the ground.   (Notes
the safety certificate does not have effect if the stand is used
for some other purpose, eg an exhibition held within it).
Provision is made for consultation as in the 1975 Act, appeals to
the courts, offences, powers of entry and inspection and a duty
of enforcement.
A detailed account of Part III of the 1987 Act together with
general advice on certification was sent to local authorities
under cover of Home Office Circular 96/1988 (see Annex F).

Statutory Guidance under Part III

57.   There have been two sets of statutory guidance issued by
the Secretary of State


     (a) under section 26(8) of the 1987 Act, on the
     determination of a regulated stand and


     (b) under section 34 (2) of the 1987 Act, on inspections.

The first of these is intended to set a yardstick for calculating
the notional occupancy of the stand accommodation to determine
whether a stand requires a safety certificate.   The second lays
down guidance on inspections of regulated stands which is similar
to that in respect of inspections carried out annually of
designated sports grounds (see paragraph 53).   The frequency of
inspection is however variable depending upon the size of the
stand accommodation.   Home Office Circular 97/1988 covers both
sets of guidance (see Annex G).


Regulations under Part III

58 Regulations on the procedures for applications for and the
issue of safety certificates, appeals, and authorising local
authorities to charge to cover costs of work resulting from
applications were made in October 1988 (The Safety of Places of
Sport Regulations 1988, SI 1988/1807).   These regulations,
together with the Part III of the 1987 Act came into force on 1
January 1989.
PART IV

THE GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS (THE GREEN GUIDE)

Origins

59. In 1973 in the follow-up to the Wheatley Report and while
the 1975 Act was still in preparation, the first Guide to Safety
at Sports Grounds was issued by the Home Office and Scottish
Office. The Guide covered much of the ground originally outlined
in Appendix A to the Wheatley Report, but also took into account
further technical work and tests carried out on, for instance,
the strength of crush barriers (see paragraphs 69-70 below).

60. The booklet was published explicitly as a general guide to
measures for improving safety at any sports grounds, though the
point was made in the introduction that the recommendations had
been framed mainly with football in mind.

61. In December 1976 a revised version was introduced in which
some of the technical material had been updated in the light of
experience; and an additional section was added at the end
(section 14 in the present Guide) incorporating the
recommendations of the Working Party on Crowd Behaviour, under
the chairmanship of the then Minister for Sport. Reflecting this
development the Guide was re-titled The Guide to Safety at Sports
Grounds (Football).


Application of the Guide


62. The Guide was drawn up for (and continues to be aimed at)
safety in existing sports grounds. The design, configuration,
location, age, condition and use of these can vary substantially.
The Guide therefore provides principles, together with some
technical advice on physical requirements, to achieve reasonable
safety.
This acknowledges that absolute safety in circumstances where
thousands of people are assembled in a (relatively) confined area
is not attainable - and not in fact required by the 1975 Act. In
this respect both the Guide and the 1975 Act reflect the
principles of the Wheatley Inquiry (paragraphs 8-11, 20 and 68 of
Cmnd 4952) of flexibility in the application of guidelines to
individual grounds.


63. For the above reasons the Guide is not a statutory code but
safety certificates issued under the 1975 Act (or Part III of the
1987 Act in respect of regulated stands) may call upon the
recommendations in the Guide in their terms and conditions.


Popplewell Inquiry

64. The Guide was further reviewed by a Technical Working Group
set up in September 1985 by the Popplewell Inquiry. The overall
conclusion of the group was that the Guide, whilst in need of
some revision and expansion, had stood up well to close
examination and justified the high regard in which it was
generally held (Popplewell Final Report, Appendix E).

Revised Guide

65. A revised edition of the Guide, in line with the Inquiry's
recommendations, was issued in October 1986. Distribution
included the main representative sporting bodies, all then
designated grounds, local certificating authorities. Chief
Officers of Police and Chief Fire Officers.

66. Changes were made to the format and structure of the Guide
but it still relied (and continues to rely) heavily on the
technical material of the earlier Guide. New sections on
management responsibility and stewarding were added and the
section on fire safety was substantially expanded. Amendment was
also made to the crowd control section (now section 14).
Other developments

67. Shortly before the fire at Valley Parade Football Ground,
Bradford following a serious outbreak of violence in the
spectators enclosure and pitch invasion at the match between
Luton and Millwall on 13 March 1985, the recommendations in the
Guide on crowd control were subject to review to see if they
needed to be strengthened and amplified to take account of crowd
violence hazards. This decision was conveyed to the Football
Association in correspondence from the Prime Minister in April
1985 as part of an initial range of anti-hooligan initiatives,
including effective pitch perimeter fencing, that had been agreed
between the football authorities and the government in the light
of the Luton v. Millwall incident. Specific reference was
subsequently made in the Guide to the need for a special police
presence (as determined by the Chief Officer) inside major
football grounds in order for management to discharge properly
their safety responsibilities (paragraph 204 of the Guide).


Pitch Perimeter Fencing


68. The Luton v. Millwall match drew into focus the question of
pitch perimeter fencing - that is fencing designed specifically
to prevent access to the pitch - and the disorder witnessed at
that game. Pitch perimeter fencing is also addressed in the
Popplewell Report (Interim Report recommendation 24 and Final
Report Chapter 4. 136). The Bradford fire demonstrated the need
for sudden access to the pitch in an emergency, whereas the
absence or inadequacy of the fencing at Luton (and later at
Birmingham on 11 May 1985) contributed to the disorder which
could so easily have led to a more serious loss of life - as
evidenced by the tragedy at Heysel and indeed, albeit to a lesser
extent, at Birmingham. The present version of the Guide still
recognises these considerations and in seeking to reflect the
desire of the Popplewell Inquiry to be more explicit refers to
the possible need for pitch fencing. At the same time the Guide
(paragraphs 214-215) also draws attention to the need to allow
full access to the playing area in an emergency.
Crush barriers

69. Crush barriers are intended to combat known, inherent
dangers which arise from crowd pressure and surging. Such
barriers are essential to help control any build-up of pressure
in the crowd.

70. The principles of their strength, spacing and location are
intended to limit this build-up. Although uniformity of crowd
dispersal is unlikely ever to be achieved crush barrier
construction should be such that at the maximum overall level of
crowd density recommended in the Guide (54 persons per 10 square
metres) barriers will not collapse, suffer damage or fail in any
way such that those pressed against them in any crowd surge will
suffer serious injury - although they may experience some
discomfort.
PART V

CROWD CONTROL AND POLICING

Introduction

71. This part of the Home Office evidence considers the control
     of crowds at football matches, and the involvement of the
     police in that. Main sections below deal with the incidence
     of hooliganism (paragraph 75), the criminal law as it
     relates to football matches (paragraph 78), the courts
     (paragraph 93), the police (paragraph 95), the allocation of
     responsibility for crowd control at football matches
     (paragraph 105), control on admission (paragraph 110), and
     matches overseas (paragraph 121).          ^

72.   The Government's objectives in relation to crowd control at
      football matches and other sporting events are to ensure
      that necessary legislation and practical arrangements exist
      so that:

      - spectators can watch the event safely and enjoyably

      - violence, disorder and other unacceptable behaviour is as
      far as possible prevented and is dealt with if it arises.

73.   Practical arrangements rest principally with the organisers
      of the events (in relation to football, clubs and the
      football authorities) and the police. Ultimately, no
      arrangements can be entirely satisfactory without a large
      measure of responsibility and self-discipline amongst       i
      spectators.

74.   Unless otherwise stated the information in Part V relates
      specifically to England and Wales.
      The incidence of football hooliganism


75.   The annual criminal statistics published by the Home Office
      show numbers of offences recorded by type of offence not by
      circumstance, so offences inside football matches or
      otherwise related to football are not recorded as a separate
      category. However, as a guide to the level of trouble at
      matches, the Association of Chief Police Officers (ACPO)
      collate for each football season the total number of people
      arrested at or ejected from Football League matches (arrests
      'at' meaning arrests inside grounds, or those made outside
      but directly connected with the policing of matches). In
      recent seasons these have totalled:

           Season         Arrests           Ejections


           1985/6          4,143              4,356
           1986/7          5,531              6,466
           1987/8          6,106              6,542

76.   The figures for 1987/88 equate to an average of 3 arrests
      and 3 ejections at every Football League match - thus on
      average there were some 12 0 arrests and 13 0 ejections at
      League matches on Saturdays during that football season,
      assuming 40 such games took place. This average level can
      very significantly be exceeded: on the last full day of the
      1988/89 season (13 May 1989) there were over 300 football
      related arrests comprising 180 at football grounds and over
      120 elsewhere, including several violent incidents in which
      two people received serious head injuries.

77.   This level of disorder occurs despite the many efforts
      already being taken to reduce hooliganism, referred to in
      following paragraphs. Police resources deployed on football
      duties are described below, in paragraph 102.
      The Criminal Law

78.   There are several criminal offences for example of theft,
      assault and criminal damage that may relate to misbehaviour
      at football matches. In addition the following paragraphs
      describe certain offences and powers relating to disorder,
      alcohol and exclusion from football grounds.

      Disorder

79.   The offences which football hooligans may commit during
      bouts of disorderly activity vary greatly in type and
      seriousness. At one end of the scale, section 5 of the
      Public Order Act 1986 makes it an offence for a person to
      use threatening, abusive or insulting words or behaviour, or
      disorderly behaviour, or to display any writing, sign or
      other visible representation which is threatening, abusive
      or insulting, within the hearing or sight of a person likely
      to be caused harassment, alarm or distress. The offence may
      be committed in public places and, with a few exceptions,
      private places. A constable may arrest without warrant a
      person who does not stop such behaviour when warned to do
      so. On conviction the maximum penalty for the offence is a
      fine not exceeding level 3 (currently £400).

80.   At the other end of the scale is the offence of riot in
      section 1 of the Act. This makes it an offence where 12 or
      more persons who are present together use or threaten
      unlawful violence for a common purpose and their conduct
      (taken together) is such as would cause a person of
      reasonable firmness present at the scene to fear for his
      personal safety. The offence attracts a maximum of 10
      years' imprisonment.


81.   In between these two ends of the scale there are the
      offences of violent disorder (section 2), affray (section 3)
      and fear or provocation of violence (section 4) which
      attract maximum penalties ranging from 5 years' imprisonment
      and a fine to 6 months' imprisonment and a fine not
      exceeding £2000. There is a specific offence in the Act to
      deal with threatening, abusive or insulting words or
      behaviour which is intended to stir up racial hatred or is
      likely to stir it up. A person reasonably suspected of
      committing the offence can be arrested without a warrant and
      on conviction can be imprisoned for up to 2 years and fined.

82.   There are many other offences, outside the scope of the
      Public Order Act 1986, which hooligans may commit during
      disorderly activity. For example, the offences of common
      assault and malicious wounding. These attract maximum
      penalties of 1 year and life imprisonment respectively. The
      gravest incidents of hooliganism may involve murder or
      attempted murder for which the maximum penalty is also life
      imprisonment. Criminal damage and possession of an
      offensive weapon in a public place are other offences which
      hooligans sometimes commit which can attract terms of
      imprisonment.


83.   Statute law is not the only means at the police's disposal
      for coping with hooligans. Breaches of the peace may be
      dealt with using common law powers. If a breach of the
      peace occurs or if the police reasonably apprehend an
      imminent breach of the peace they may take any reasonable
      steps which are necessary to control or prevent it,
      including arresting those responsible. They may bring the
      offenders before the courts where they may be bound over to
      be of good behaviour for a period.

      Alcohol

84.   Various specific powers in relation to alcohol at football
      matches are contained in the Sporting Events (Control of
      Alcohol etc) Act 1985, as amended. In addition there are a
      wide variety of general powers in relation to alcohol
      licensing which have a bearing on alcohol in the context of
      football.
    85.    The Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc^ Act 1985
           prohibits the possession of alcohol on the way to matches on
           football special coaches and trains and makes it an offence
           to be drunk on them. It also makes it an offence to try to
           enter a ground when drunk or in possession of alcohol and to
           possess or consume alcohol within view of the pitch during
           the period of the match (from 2 hours before until l hour
           afterward), or to be drunk during the period of the match.
           Although there is provision for magistrates to grant
           exemption orders for premises with no view of the pitch, the
           police are empowered to close any bar in the ground should
           they believe that sale of alcohol there is detrimental to
           orderly conduct or the safety of spectators.   The Act also
           prohibits the possession of any bottle, can or other
           container capable of causing injury to a person struck by
\
           it. All Football League grounds, Wembley Stadium and non-
           League grounds when used for matches involving League clubs
           are designated under this Act. The Act also gives the
           police the power to search someone reasonably suspected of
           committing an offence under the Act, and to arrest such a
           person. Given the nature of offences under the Act this may
           include searching coaches or trains carrying passengers to
           or from matches or on arrival as well as searching fans
           waiting to enter a ground or inside a ground.

    86 .   Schedule I of the Public Order Act 198 6 extends the Sporting
           Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985 to prohibit alcohol
           on minibuses on journeys to or from a designated sporting
           event, and prohibits the possession of a firework or similar
           item at, or while entering, a designated sporting event.

                                                                          V
    87.    Home Office Circular 68/1988 (Alcohol and disorder^ (see
           Annex H) issued on 5 August 1988 gave wide ranging advice
           reminding courts and the police of relevant criminal
           offences and powers to regulate licensing, including the
           power to close all licensed premises in an area when riot or
           serious disorder is expected.  (Section 188, Licensing Act
           1964).
88.   In addition to the powers already available to the police,
      the Home Secretary agreed last year to try out, on an
      experimental basis, a bvelaw which prohibits the public
      consumption of alcohol in specified areas. The seven local
      authorities involved have designated areas, in consultation
      with the police, in which the practice of drinking in public
      by groups of mainly young people had reached the state where
      other citizens found it both threatening and intimidating.
      One of the Councils involved, Scarborough, has included in
      its designated areas the roads leading to and surrounding
      both the (separate) local cricket and football grounds. The
      byelaw will be tested for two years, during which time it
      will be closely monitored to see whether it can provide an
      effective remedy, without becoming oppressive, which can be
      made available as a model to other Councils. Although it is
      early days, preliminary results in Coventry where the byelaw
      has been in force for seven months show that public drinking
      on the streets has effectively stopped.

      Exclusion of troublemakers

89.   Part IV of the Public Order Act 1986 gave new powers to the
      courts to impose exclusion orders, prohibiting attendance
      for a minimum period of 3 months at all prescribed matches
      of any person convicted of a football-related offence. This
      includes offences committed not only inside or outside
      grounds, but also on journeys to or from matches.


90.   From 1 August 1987, when this power was introduced, to
       2 6 May 1989, 1,785 exclusion orders were recorded by the
       Football Association.


91.   This power to impose exclusion orders is without prejudice
      to a club's own entitlement to choose whom to admit, or
       refuse to admit, to their property. Conditions Under which
      this will take place are set out in each club's Ground
      Regulations, which normally follow a model drafted by the
      Football League. Ground regulations typically assert the
      club's right to exclude someone who refuses to be searched
      on entry

92.   The national football membership scheme proposed in Part I
      of the Football Spectators Bill is intended to replace
      exclusion orders with a positive check on entitlement to
      admission and mandatory disqualification for fixed terms.
      See separate evidence from the Department of the Environment
      (DOE).

      The Courts

93.   The Government's role in relation to penalties is to ensure
      that the courts have available to them adequate powers. For
      most offences applicable to disorderly behaviour at football
      matches custodial penalties are available. Sentencing in
      individual cases is for the courts themselves.

      Responding to maior outbreaks of hooliganism - "Swift
      Justice"


94.   Home Office Circular 62/1988 issued on 4 August 1988 invited
      the courts, the police and others to formulate contingency
      plans to bring very rapidly before a court those involved in
      large scale disorder. Swift action was intended to deter
      further outbreaks and to demonstrate the determination of
      the agencies involved to deal with hooliganism. The
      initiative envisaged disorder in general, but included that
      arising in the context of football.


      The Police


95.   Policing arrangements in England and Wales operate under the
      tripartite relationship governed by the Police Act 1964, the
      three parties comprising the Home Secretary, and local chief
      constables and police authorities. Chief constables have
      operational control of the officers in their force and
      police authorities are responsible for maintaining an
      adequate and efficient police force.  (Arrangements in the
      Metropolitan Police are different as the Home Secretary is
      the police authority for that force.)

96.   The Home Secretary's role is in approving certain actions by
      the police authority, such as the appointment of chief
      constables and setting the establishment for a force? making
      arrangements for common police services? and ensuring that
      adequate co-operation exists between forces. He also has
      powers to intervene if matters are not proceeding properly.
      The Home Secretary is assisted in this task by Her Majesty's
      Inspectorate of Constabulary who conduct annual inspections
      of every police force.

      General police powers and duties

97.   The common law duties of a constable can be summarised as
      being to prevent the commission of crime, to prevent action
      he reasonably apprehends may result in a breach of the
      peace, and to protect life and property (see paragraph 320
      of Volume 36 of Halsbury's Laws of England (4th Edition)).

98.   The Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (PACE) sets out
      police powers to investigate offences, for example to stop
      and search or arrest persons or to detain and question
      suspects. Other statutes also confer specific powers on the
      police. In addition the police have common law powers to do
      that which enables them to discharge their common law duties
      (above). Any action by the police not in the exercise of
      their powers is dependent upon the consent of the public,
      but any such action cannot be enforced by the police.

      Police action in relation to football


99.   The police regularly provide substantial numbers of officers
      at football matches, to maintain public order, apprehend
      offenders and (outside grounds) to direct crowds. The
      relationship between the police and clubs, and their
      respective duties, are considered in more detail in the next
      main section (paragraph 105). Inside grounds the police
      often make use of video and closed circuit television
     systems to detect trouble and gather evidence for use in
     court. British Transport Police often escort groups of
     supporters travelling to matches by train, and police
     reinforcements may be necessary eg in town centres where
     football supporters are expected to congregate, especially
     if they are likely to encounter opposing fans.

100. Besides operational involvement with football matches, most
     police forces have a liaison officer for football who
     exchanges information with other forces and with clubs in
     preparation for forthcoming fixtures. Some forces maintain
     intelligence records on known football hooligans in their
     area, and various criminal investigations have been mounted
     against 'hard core* teams of hooligans. These are matters
     on which ACPO may comment further in evidence to the
     Inquiry.

101. There is shortly to be established a National Football
     Intelligence Unit as a central police team (under Common
     Police Service arrangements) to promote the further
     development and co-ordination of local efforts and to take a
     central view on emerging national trends and issues of
     concern.

    Police resources

102. The cost of the police presence regularly provided at
     football matches - especially on Saturdays during the
     football season - is substantial. Central records of police
     expenditure do not identify specific activities such as
     policing of football, but a sample by ACPO on two Saturdays
     last November revealed an average of 5,000 officers deployed
     on football duties, slightly more outside grounds than
     inside. The police consider this sample to be broadly
     representative of the season as a whole. The total cost of
     police resources devoted to this activity would depend on
     precise rates of pay and periods of duty of each officer
     involved, but an indicative cost might be in the range of
     £200,000 to £300,000 per 'football Saturday'.
103. As a 'special service* within the meaning of Section 15 of
     the Police Act 1964 the cost of police presence inside the
     ground, if the chief officer agrees to provide it, is
     normally charged to the club. Since it is for the chief
     officer to determine what is a satisfactory level of
     policing for a match, the chief officer in effect also sets
     the cost charged to clubs for policing inside the ground.

104. Expenditure on policing football matches not recovered from
     clubs has to be born from public expenditure. Moreover,
     football duties often represent a substantial diversion of
     police effort from other police work.


     Responsibility for Crowd Control at Football Matches

105. Chapters 2, 13 and 14 of the Guide to Safety at Sports
     Grounds ('the Guide') give guidance on the respective roles
     of the management and the police at football grounds and
     other sporting stadia. As with other areas of safety, the
     management of the ground is responsible for the crowd
     control arrangements (paragraph 204 of the Guide).

106. For management of a major football ground to discharge its
     responsibilities properly paragraph 204 of the Guide points
     out that a special police presence inside the ground may be
     necessary to deal with any problem of disorder which may
     arise, as well as to provide support and leadership in an
     emergency. The number and disposition of the police must be
    determined by the chief officer of police who has sole
    responsibility for the direction of police operations (see
    also paragraph 67 above). So, to interpret the Guide, the
    police deployed inside stadia are not present to manage
    crowds unless the chief officer of police judges that
    disorder, crime or other emergencies might arise, in which
    case they may be able to provide assistance beyond the
    capability of the club's management and stewards.

107. Outside the ground, on public property, direction of crowds
    going to or from a football match is a matter for the chief
    officer of police. Very often it is considered necessary to
    ensure strict segregation of opposing supporters, eg by
    close escort of visiting fans from railway stations to and
     from the football ground.

108. Paragraph 205 of the Guide emphasises the need for effective
     co-ordination between the club and the police (with specific
     reference to potential crowd disorder). This extends not
     just to arrangements inside the ground but also those
     outside which are relevant to the match; and to advance
     planning, and to debriefing to evaluate existing
     arrangements and provide the flexibility to deal with
     different circumstances.

109. The detail of such   arrangements is however for individual
     chief officers and   clubs. ACPO issues general guidance to
     its members on the   policing of football matches and may
     comment further in   their evidence to the Inquiry.


     Control on Admission

110. Under the 1975 Act the certificating authority has power to
     set an overall limit on ground capacity and limits on
     individual parts of the ground. An important element in the
     safe conduct of football matches is adequate control on the
     numbers of spectators admitted within the authorised limit
     and, frequently, the segregation of opposing supporters in
     different parts of the ground to prevent conflict.  'All
     ticketr matches (ie an announcement that spectators will be
     admitted only with tickets bought in advance, none being on v
     sale on the day of the match) complement the physical
     segregation measures at the ground by ensuring as far as
     possible that tickets are allocated to different supporters
     for admission to certain parts of the ground only. Part
     IV, above, refers to the use of perimeter fences to assist
     in segregation (paragraph 68).

111. Before tickets are offered for sale organisers may allocate
     a certain proportion between home and away supporters, and
     possibly others. This allocation will have regard to
     expected demand and to arrangements for spectators' arrival
     and separate entry to the ground.

112. While an allocation of tickets that is acceptable to all
     groups is desirable, that may not be achievable, for example
     if total demand for tickets significantly exceeds the
     overall capacity of the ground. In those circumstances it
     is therefore important that supporters unable to obtain
     tickets accept that they will be unable to enter the ground.
     Suitable precautions may be necessary to deal with those
     who nevertheless try to enter.

     Unauthorised entry

113. Methods that may be employed to gain entry to football
     grounds without authorisation include rushing or forcing
     turnstiles or other points on the perimeter of the ground;
    bribing turnstile operators; and snatching tickets from
    others. The club and police at a ground may need to be
    ready to deal with such action appropriately. Depending on
    circumstances the police may have the power under the common
    law, for the preservation of public order and safety, to
    control access eg in the vicinity of the ground, turning
    away those without tickets to prevent them approaching the
    turnstiles.


114. Unauthorised entry to a ground is of particular concern
     because that could lead to the ground being filled beyond
     its safe capacity.

    Unauthorised ticket sales


115. It is desirable for clubs to control the distribution of
     tickets so that as far as is practical they do not fall into
     the hands of known troublemakers or those known to have
     abused arrangements for the distribution of tickets in the
     past. For some games tickets are only released for sale at
     the latest practical moment, to minimise the opportunities
     for circulation to ticket touts and forgers.


116. Tickets being re-sold at increased prices is commercial
     activity and is a response to market forces: and would-be
     purchasers will be clear if they are paying a premium over
     the face value of the ticket and are free not to buy if they
     consider the price too high. A specific offence of ticket-
     touting may be desirable in order to curb the activity of
     touts offering tickets for sale in the near vicinity of
     grounds. Problems can occur when fans are encouraged to
     travel to matches in the hope of buying tickets there. If
     successful in obtaining a valid ticket they may breach
     segregation arrangements and be admitted to an area reserved
     for opposing spectators, and tickets may also be acquired by
     those the organisers would wish to exclude T^if unsuccessful
     they may try to enter the ground anyway or cause
     difficulties outside. On the other hand, although the
     existence of a touting offence might deter some ticketless
     fans from travelling to grounds specifically in search of a
     tout, it might have very little effect against those who
     travel expecting the clubs to sell tickets or intending to
     gain unauthorised entry, perhaps in concert with others.

117. There are a variety of powers which may already be used
     against ticket touts. A club may eject a tout from their
     premises if they wish. The police may ask someone who is
     unlawfully obstructing the highway to move and, if
     necessary, may arrest him. They may also act to prevent a
     breach of the peace. If they have reasonable grounds to
     suspect that someone is carrying a stolen article they may \
     stop him and search him and they also have power to arrest
     him if they reasonably suspect him of having committed theft
     or fraud or any other offence for which the maximum period
     of imprisonment is 5 years or more.

118. It may well be that any further measures should come from
     tighter controls by the organisers of sporting events over
     the distribution of tickets, and the imposition of sanctions
     the distribution of tickets, and the imposition of sanctions
     against those found abusing the controls? or by a more rigid
     policy on refusing to sell tickets at the gate once a match
     has been declared all ticket.

     Forged Tickets

119. Forged tickets are a serious matter not only because of the
     criminal offences that may be involved but also because they
     could lead to serious overcrowding. However practical
     difficulties arise both in detecting forgeries and in
     identifying the persons who print and distribute forged
     tickets. It is important that clubs try to counter forgery
     eg by safeguards in the printing of tickets: watermarks and
     even holograms have been used. All seating areas also
     assist in detecting forged tickets since it is obvious when
     two people have tickets with the same seat number.


120. Where a person makes or sells a forged ticket he may be
     guilty of offences under Section 15 of the Theft Act 1968
     and Sections 1 to 4 of the Forgery and Counterfeiting Act
     1981 which carry maximum penalties of up to ten years'
     imprisonment.

    Matches Overseas

121. There have been a number of incidents of hooliganism in
     recent years involving English fans at football matches
     abroad: notably the serious disorder by Liverpool fans at
     Heysel, Belgium in 1985 which led to 39 deaths? and in the
     Summer of 1988 over 300 English supporters were detained by
     West German police following disturbances at the European
     Championships. 14 Liverpool supporters were recently
     convicted of manslaughter in respect of the Heysel
     disturbances, although some of these convictions are subject
     to appeal.

122. The Government has been keen to establish good liaison
     between the UK and other countries regarding the movement of
     football spectators and known hooligans, for example under
     the European Community 'TREVI' group of law enforcement
     Ministers and officials. In addition the Government has
     proposed new powers (below) to restrict convicted football
     hooligans from travelling to certain matches abroad.

     Restriction Orders


123. Part II of the Football Spectators Bill now before
     Parliament would provide the courts with a new power, on
     convicting someone in England or Wales for a football
     related offence, to impose a restriction order on him if the
     court is satisfied that would help to prevent violence at or
     in connection with a designated football match in other
     countries. Provision is also made for a restriction order
     to be made in respect of a conviction outsrde England or
     Wales for an offence corresponding to a football related
     offence. Under the terms of the Bill a restriction order if
     imposed would be for two years or, if the accused was
     sentenced to immediate imprisonment, five years.

124. The effect of a restriction order would be that the person
     must report to an agency (the reporting agency) on the
     occasion of a designated match (outside England and Wales),
     thus preventing him from attending. Failure to report as
     directed would be a criminal offence punishable by up to one
     month's imprisonment or a level 3 fine (currently £400) or
     both.

125. The reporting agency is unspecified in the Bill and might
     for example be the police, probation service or a private
    security firm - or some combination of these. The Bill
    provides for a degree of selectivity so that, for example,
    full internationals would probably lead to all persons
    subject to a restriction order being required to report
    whereas when individual clubs were playing abroad only some
    individuals might be required to do so. The Bill also
    provides for application for exemption from a requirement to
    report, where special circumstances exist, and for
    termination of the restriction order.


126. The Government believes restriction orders will be effective
     in significantly reducing hooliganism at football matches
     outside England and Wales by persons from those two
     countries, and will demonstrate to other countries
     (especially in Europe) our resolve to tackle this problem.
     The proposed powers have received general support. The
     conceptual alternative of withdrawing someone's passport was
     considered both ineffective (since it is relatively easy to
     obtain a temporary British Visitors Passport) and too
     sweeping a restriction (since it would prohibit all foreign
    travel, whether a foreign match was taking place or not).
