                                                                                                                       fiV




                                             w
                                                                                                                                     .




                                                    ? T b a \>
                                                       undev^


                       T H E F O O T B A L L LEA G U E L IM IT E D
                                          Chief Executive: A. Sandford

    City House, Maid Marian Way, Nottingham, NGI 6BH. Telephone 0602 508720. Facsimile 0602 508621


21st November 1990

                                                                (WiS&Ak*
Sir
  il Terence
     x cic u u c Burns
                 u uj -i i u O                                                                                                  .        ^


Chief Economic Adviser                             -            .n           .         / ryi\                         flu
H.M. Treasury                                               0                                                            ^
Parliament Street                                                                                                     rU. «)*/»» \\hfc. )
London                                                                                                                   ,         tv»-g_
SW1P 3AG                                                              ^                                           ^

                                                   UV»>

                                                                                                                               J.
Dear Sir Terence,
                                                                                                                               7*-
I refer to my letter of 6th August 1990 and our meeting on
1st November, I reported on our conversation to members of
the League Management Committee at their meeting on Thursday
15th November.

You will recall that when we met I mentioned the issue of
police charges and I subsequently arranged for you to have a
copy of the letter dated 7th November which our President
sent to the Home Secretary.    If police charges are to
escalate in the way which-we now fear, then it will be very
difficult for clubs to increase the earmarked funds for
ground improvements above the levels which I put before you
at our meeting.   Indeed, it was pointed out that even
proceeding with that sort of scheme could have an adverse
effect on clubs since not only would they be losing part of
their normal income which would become earmarked for ground
improvements in the future, but they would be paying tax on
the monies so earmarked.    I was asked therefore to write to
you to ask if there was any way in which monies earmarked for
ground improvements could be treated as capital so that clubs
were not required to pay tax on money which was not available
to them.

Consideration was given to a proposal which would raise
additional monies for ground improvements which I understand
Mr. Bates, Chairman of Chelsea and a member of the Management
Committee, had mentioned to the Chancellor.   This proposal
entailed a levy being made on the admission price of say , £1
for each First Division Club and 50p for clubs in other




                     Registered Office: Lytham St. Annes, Lancs.. FY8 I |G       Registered in England 8 0 6 12
                                                                                                                                 ca/
Divisions.    It would be made clear to spectators that this
levy was specifically for ground improvements and clubs would
not be free to use this income in any other way.    We would
hope however, that such a levy could be made free of VAT so
that the whole amount could be applied to ground
improvements.    Such a levy could produce some £10M per annum
which, when added to the £5M from broadcasting income and
transfer fees which we discussed previously, would come much
closer to matching the monies raised from the 2|% reduction
in the Pool Betting Levy.    Since these monies would be
earmarked specifically for ground improvements, I would hope
that they would demonstrate the earnest of League Clubs in
implementing the Taylor recommendations.

I am sorry to have to trouble you yet again but would welcome
the opportunity of meeting with you to discuss further these
proposals.

Yours a sincere Y y ,




ARTHUR SXNDFORD
Chief Executive
    / \



          W (/■■:/
            e>.




t
