hs.8.7/flseml.peb



FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED CLUB SEMINAR ON TAYLOR IMPLEMENTATION
THURSDAY 2 AUGUST 1990

I attended this seminar on 2 August to give a presentation on the
work of the Football Licensing Authority. I took the opportunity
to attend for the whole day.     A copy of the programme is at
Annex A.

Arthur Sandford's presentation in the morning was about funding.
He indicated that calculations by the League now estimated that
there would be a £200m-£250m shortfall to meet the minimum needs
of clubs as identified in the Taylor Report: that is to say the
provision of covered seating accommodation.    To meet the total
bill of improvements in facilities would mean expenditure in the
region of £600m. This would be the cost of doing away with the
hostile environment. He said that he wanted the League to make
a case for extending the reduction in pools betting levy for a
further 5 years. He recognised in this connection that it would
be necessary to say what the League could do itself.

He said that many clubs were awaiting for the setting up of the
Football Licensing Authority and for the revised Green Guide
before making plans. They were also awaiting guidelines from the
Football Trust and revised policy planning guidance from the
Department of the Environment.     Other clubs had plans well
advanced. He thought that clubs should look at other Government
programmes for grant aid both at local level, Central Government
level and at the European level.

Mr  Sandford announced that the Advisory Design Council
recommendation 5 of the Taylor Report had now been appointed.
Its Chairman would be Mr Gwylym Roberts.   The objective of the
Advisory Design Council would be to look for good stadium design
at minimum cost.     (Mr Simon Inglis who spoke to me on the
telephone on 3 August told me that he had been invited to join
the Advisory and Design Council and was very keen to do so.
I told him that I did not think that it would conflict with his
membership of the Football Licensing Authority.)

Mr Sandford invited clubs to consider self-help moves such as
bulk purchasing of seats which could result in substantial
discounts from manufacturers and leasing arrangements under which
clubs would not be required to find the capital costs of new
seating.   He was pleased that the Football Trust had been
persuaded to give 75% grant of up to £70 cost per individual
installed seat.

He said the discussions were continuing with the Inland Revenue
about taxation and capital allowances. He advised clubs with tax
losses to maximise trust income because they could clearly not
benefit from tax allowances.
He also indicated that the League and clubs should maximise
sponsorship income. He made reference to the recent sponsorship
by Rumbelows and to the potential for maximising income from
video and tv sources.

Finally he pointed to the need for clubs to apply their own
sources of income where this was practicable not excluding
increasing  prices of accommodation where facilities were
improved.

(It should be noted that proposals for raising funds by
introducing a levy on transfer fees etc was considered by the
League at its privatesession at the conference on Wednesday
1 August but the decision was deferred.)

Mr Tom Wharton spoke about the work of the Football Trust 1990.
He indicated that before the establishment of the Football Trust
1990 some £9m per year was available from the pools betting
industry of which £5m from the Spot-the-Ball competition went to
the football grounds improvement trust.       There had been a
disagreement in earlier years about the use of trust funds, some
trustees believing that only the interest on accumulated capital
should be dispersed, while others thought that the totality of
the money     should be made available for football ground
improvements.    This had now been resolved though only after
resignation of one of the trustees.        Treasury rules about
dispersement of the new income made available from the reduction
in the pools betting levy established without doubt that the
trust was expected to disperse the whole of the money which it
received.   The trust had now put up the "ceiling" on grants to
75% of approved expenditure and up to £300,000 per club in total
for safety.      For toilets,   family enclosures and similar
improvements in amenity, grants of up to 70% were available.

The new Football Trust 1990 had income of £10m per year from the
old sources and about £20m per year from the reduction in the
pools betting levy.   It had been agreed that the old Football
Grounds Improvement Trust should remain in existence during 1990
to provide a means of continuing to make money available during
the closed season before the Football Trust 1990 became
operational.

Mr Wharton said that he had become Chairman of the Licensing
Authority Liaison Committee of the Trust (known as the Lilac
Committee) and they had appointed Peter Lee, formerly Acting Head
of the Sports and Recreation Division of DoE, as the new
Secretary of the Football Trust (with effect from the beginning
of August).

Mr Wharton said that national stadia were being treated in the
same way as League clubs - that was a Treasury requirement. The
Trust's contribution to Northern Ireland would be £150,000 for
all football clubs in the province.

He referred to the booklet recently produced by the Police
Scientific Development Branch of the Home Office in co-operation
with ACPO on the installation of CCTV.   £2m had been allocated
for the updating of   CCTV systems and 100% aid would be provided.
The Trust regarded     CCTV as the single most effective means of
combating football    hooliganism.   6 copies of the CCTV booklet
were being sent to    clubs by the Trust.

A new brochure had been produced on the work of the Football
Trust 1990 (to replace the old "Blue Book") which specified
procedures on grant applications. The priority would be towards
the provision of seated accommodation though this would not be
an exclusive priority.   In the first instance, grants would be
directed towards Divisions 1 and 2, where the timetable was more
demanding. Major projects would be assessed on the basis of need
and resources.   The Trust was not in the business of providing
money to fund empty seats.

He made reference to police cost and charges.      The Trust had
decided to phase out aid on police charges for which there was
a 41% increase in costs during 1989/90.    Funds had temporarily
been allocated for 3 seasons and the matter would be looked at
again in the light of current discussions.

In answer to questions, Mr Wharton said that although the police
had in the past been willing to accept ownership and maintenance
responsibilities arising from the provision of CCTV equipment,
they now expected clubs to accept these responsibilities. This
had expenditure implications. He was asked whether the Trust's
grants were available on a ground basis or a club basis; if the
former, there was no financial advantage to be had from ground
sharing. Mr Wharton replied that the Trust would be prepared to
consider double allocations of grant money where clubs shared
facilities.

He was asked whether the priority being given to 1st and 2nd
Division clubs would mean that small clubs would at present be
excluded.    He said that the Trust would still consider
applications from small clubs but repeated that it was not in the
business for funding unused capacity.

Government speakers

There were 3 Government speakers: Mr Mike Ash of the Department
of the Environment Inner Cities Police Unit gave a fairly
standard presentation on inner cities grants and indicated how
football clubs might be able to take advantage of various grants
programmes by making proposals which envisaged community use of
club resources.     Mr Des Coles of the Department of the
Environment, Planning and Development Control Directorate, gave
a presentation based on DoE's forthcoming policy planning
document, the main message of which was if you were thinking of
trying to develop in the Green Belt, forget it. (A copy of that
speech is at Annex A.)

A copy of my own presentation on the Football Licensing Authority
is at Annex B.
Advisory Design Council

At the seminar it was announced that Mr Gwylym Roberts had been
appointed as Chairman of the Advisory and Design Council.      Mr
Roberts, who is an engineer, was introduced to the audience. He
said that it was expected that the ADC would have about 6 members
who were predominantly architects and/or engineers that they
would co-opt other members with particular skills when it was
thought necessary. The intention of the Advisory Design Council
would be to produce a code of good practice for the development
of the football stadia and for new stadia. They wanted to start
by examining existing research and ideas on stadium design. They
would also hope, if it was necessary, to be able to commission
new research.

Mr Roberts told the conference that       he envisaged a hectic
12 months following the first meeting     of the Advisory Design
Council this month, the aim would be to   disseminate views which
would help clubs to develop in the most   effective way possible.

Mr Roberts subsequently indicated to me that he would like to
come to the Home Office to discuss these issues. I said that he
would be very welcome (and gave him my telephone number as a
contact point, but suggested that it might be better to wait
until after the holiday season or at least until after Mr Mould
returns from leave at the beginning of September.




                                          P E BOLTON
                                          G2 Division


7 August 1990
