                                                                                          &
                                                              o.c.     Ms Harrison   2 6 M S IBM
E.R.                                                                   «= ““is
                                                                       Ms Snow
                                                                                          '
                                                                       Ms   Spencer
                                                                       Mr   Yates
                                                                       Mr   Moriarty
                                                                       Mr   Hammond
                                                                       Mr   Chilcot
                                                                       Mr   Boys Smith
                                                                       Mr   Mower
                                                                       Mr   Bolton
                                                                       Mr   Goddard
                                                                       Mr   Gilbert
                                                                       Mr   Godfrey




   Mr Turnev


                    TAYLOR REPORT:   HOME SECRETARY'S STATEMENT


       I understand that the Prime Minister will not look at the draft before the
   weekend. However, 10 Downing Street believe that she may have the following
   comments, among others:

         (i) at the end of the first paragraph on page 3, a reference
              to TV revenue;

        (ii) at the bottom of page 4, mention of the number of
              policemen deployed on football duties each Saturday and
              at what cost, this indicating the continuing scale of the
              problem;

       (iii)   included in the first    paragraph on page 5, reference to
                things done by or        with the encouragement of the
               Government already:      exclusion orders; separation of
                spectators; CCTV; the   alcohol ban; all-seater stadia;

        (iv)   in the final paragraph on page 5, instead of the last
                sentence it is suggested we should say that the three
               proposed offences are to some extent covered by the
               existing public order legislation; the Government will
               nevertheless consider carefully the case for the creation
               of specific offences;

         (v)   the suggestion is that we should spell out on the final
               page the reasons for Lord Justice Taylor's rejection of
               the national membership scheme: the danger to safety
               outside grounds; doubts as to whether it would catch
               hooligans; and police resources which would be consumed.
               The omission of "grave" in line 3 and "serious" in line
               6 is also suggested;


                                                               /(vi)
                                        2.
E.R.

        (vi)   10 Downing Street suggest the inclusion of a fairly brief
               reference   to   continuing   study  of   the   technical
               feasibility of the membership scheme;

       (vii)   finally, the suggestion is made that the peroration needs
               to be strengthened in order to give more of an impression
               that the Government is in command of this issue.

   2. The Home Secretary is considering these points.      I shall circulate other
   comments on the draft as they come in.




   Private Office                                     C J WALTER!
   26 January 1990                            Principal Private Secretary
