From:      F J Archer                                      cc    Ms Adams
           G1 Division.                                          Ms Craig
           Extension 3925 QAG                                    Mr Yates
                                                                 Mr Moriarty
            \ip May 1989                                         Mr Chilcot
                                                                 Mr Turney
                                                                 Mr Mower
                                                                 HMCIFS
                                                                 HMCIC
                                                                 Mr Watts
                                                                 Mr Whalley
                                                                 Mr Goddard
                                                                'Mr Mould
                                                                 Mr Lidington

                                                                VWVjES.

HILLSBOROUGH - REPORTS FROM AMBULANCE SERVICES AND HEALTH AUTHORITY

We have received, from       Department of Health, copies of reports on the Hillsborough
tragedy from the Ambulance Service and from the Health Authority.          A copy of the
reports are attached.       A copy has been forwarded to Lord Justice Taylor's
inquiry team.


2.      The main points from the reports are as follows:


Ambulance Service


     a)    Two officers were stationed inside the ground, at pitch level, well
     before kick off.      Additionally, an   ambulance with two crew members was
     within the ground area and another ambulance and crew was specifically
     assigned as back up at a station about one mile from the ground.           (We are
     aware also that St John's Ambulance Service was present at the ground but
     the strength of cover provided is not yet confirmed.)


     b)    The first call for additional assistance was received at 15.08 hours -
     the request being for a fleet of ambulances at the Leppings Lane end

     of the ground.


     c)    within 15 minutes, 11 ambulances attended.     Others attended later.


     d)     172 casualties were taken to hospital by ambulance.      The last casualty
     was removed from the grand at 16.20 hrs,94 fatalities were taken to the
     Medico Legal Centre in Sheffield (later a further fatality occurred in a
     Sheffield hospital).
Health Authorities


   a)    at approximately 15.20 hours the Northern General and Royal Hallamshire
   Hospitals received a telephone message from the police to stand by as there
   was an incident with casualties at Hillsborough.


   b)    the first casualties were received at 15.27 hours (Northern General)
   and 15.40 (Royal Hallamshire).    The Northern General appear from the report
   to have learned about the scale of the incident at Hillsborough from the
   ambulance staff.    At 15.35 a call was made for all available medical staff to
   attend the accident department and at 15.43 the major disaster staff call
   out was implemented.


   c)    at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Staff appear to have learned about
   the scale of the incident from police officers who arrived at 15.30 hours.
   The major disaster staff call out followed.


   d)    the ambulance service requested a medical team from the Northern General
   Hospital at 15.45 hours.    The team departed at 15.55 hours - earlier
   departure not being possible because of the volume of casualties in the
   accident department.    The team was sent back to the hospital on arrival at

   the ground.


    e)   81 casualties were admitted to hospital - 26 of these in intensive

    care units.
6489A/2194x/AK/2/3-4
                       DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND SOCIAL SECURITY
                          Richmond House, 7 9 Whitehall, London SW1A 2N S
                                       Telephone 01-210 3000




F J Archer
Fire and Emergency Planning Department
Home Office
Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON
SW1H 9AT                                                          H   May 1989




HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER


In your letter to me of 20 April you asked that factual reports about the
Hillsborough Stadium disaster be provided to the Home Secretary from the
hospital and ambulance services involved.

I now enclose copies of the reports requested which have been produced by the
Sheffield Health Authority and the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance
Service respectively.

You may also like to have the enclosed brief report from the Trent Regional
Blood Transfusion Centre which was also involved in responding to the Disaster.




                                                                  BARRY SLATER
                                TRENT REGIONAL HEALTH AUTHORITY


                             HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - J5. APRIL 1989


                      Report From Trent Regional Blood Transfusion Centre


15.30            Call from Glasgow BTS with offer of help - they had seen it on TV.

15.35        Call from Dr M Greaves, Consultant Haematologist,
             Royal Hallamshire Hospital to:

                 1)   notify of disaster

             2)       request blood          20   O   Positive
                                             20   A   Positive
                                              9   O   Negative        sent at 16.00
                                              9   A   Negative
                                             10   O   FFP

15.40        Transport Officer arrives.

15.50        Switchboard Operator, Deputy Donor Organiser, extra driver arrive.

16.00        Medical Officer on-call (Dr Forman), Donor Organiser, backup
             Despatch Orderly arrives.

16.00        Call from the Northern General Hospital requesting 20 units of 0
             Negative blood - sent at 16.20.

17.00        Call from Barnsley District General Hospital requesting:

                 20 0 Positive, 10 A Positive - sent at 17.15.

The Director, Chief Administrator, further Consultant Haematologist, relief
Telephonist and Donor Attendant Supervisor also attended.

4 further Donor Panel Department staff were called in to help deal with the
constant stream of ’phone calls from potential donors which continued until
~   2 2 .0 0 .

Further offers of help from Liverpool BTS, North-East Thames BTS,
Birmingham BTS, Edinburgh BTS, Lancaster BTS and the Army Blood Supply
Depot were received.
Trent Regional Health Authority


HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER - 15TH APRIL 1989


Report of the South Yorkshire Metropolitan Ambulance Service


1.        Two Liaison Officers of Station Officer rank were based inside
          Hillsborough with radio communications well before the kick off.       It
          is our normal policy to have one or both Liaison Officers at every match,
          and both attend every major game.     The Liaison Officers were stationed
          at pitch level as for major matches the Club does not supply the tickets
          for the south stand which we normally receive.     In addition there was
          a fully equipped emergency ambulance with two crew members at the
          ground and another as back up at Middlewood Ambulance Station, a little
          under one mile away.     Both ambulances were specifically assigned to
          this match;   that is our usual procedure for major football matches

          at Hillsborough.


 2.       The first notification received by SYMAS of any need for our
           involvement came at 1508 hours from Police Headquarters when a fleet
           of ambulances was requested to attend at the Leppings Lane entrance
           to the ground;    no notification of the nature of the incident was

           received.


 3.        Within 15 minutes eleven SYMAS ambulances had reached Hillsborough.
           In total forty two ambulances attended, of which thirty one were
           SYMAS vehicles and eleven came from outside areas.     Most of these
           vehicles made several trips between the ground and the Sheffield
           hospitals.   In addition further vehicles were brought in from
           outside SYMAS and were put on stand by.


     4.    A Divisional Superintendent arrived on the scene before 1515 hours,
            the Deputy Chief Metropolitan Ambulance Officer and the Senior Duty
            Officer arrived at Hillsborough at 1523 hours and the Assistant Chief
            Metropolitan Ambulance Officer (Operations) before 1600 hours.
5.    At 1519 hours SYMAS was informed by the Police that they had told the
      Royal Hallamshire and the Northern General Hospital of the incident
      at Hillsborough.   At 1520 hours, SYMAS informed Barnsley and Rotherham
      District General Hospitals that the incident had escalated and at
      1523 hours a Charge Nurse at the Northern General Hospital was verbally
      informed by a Leading Ambulanceman that a major incident had been
      declared.


6.    At 1536 hours the Royal Hallamshire were asked to supply a medical team.
      At 1538 hours the same request was made of the Northern General and at
      1540 hours of the Barnsley District General Hospital.   The. medical
      teams from each of the Northern General and the Barnsley District
      General were taken to the ground by ambulance.


7.    The major incident vehicle arrived at the ground at 1540 hours.


8.    One hundred and seventy two casualties were taken to hospital by
      ambulance, initially to the Northern General and then to the   Royal
      Hallamshire.   Two patients were taken to Barnsley District General
      Hospital.


9.    All casualties had been removed from Hillsborough by 1620 hours.


.0.   Ninety four fatalities were taken to the Medico Legal Centre   in
      Sheffield, some after having been returned from the Northern General
      and Royal Hallamshire Hospitals.   The last of the fatalities left
      Hillsborough at 0528 hours on Sunday 16th April 1989.


The incident was closed at 0530 hours on Sunday 16th April 1989.
MANAGEMENT IN CONFIDENCE

                           SHEFFIELD HEALTH AUTHORITY

                 H I L L S B O R O U G H    E M E R G E N C Y

        BRIEF FACTUAL REPORT RELATING TO THE HOSPITALS RESPONSE TO THE
         HILLSBOROUGH EMERGENCY OF SATURDAY AFTERNOON. 15 APRIL 1989

 1   Activation of Mai or Disaster Plan

     1-1 From approximately 15.15 hours on Saturday, 15 April, information
         regarding some form of incident began to reach the Hospitals in
         Sheffield through staff making enquiries following media reports.

     1.2 Northern General Hospital

         At approximately 15.20 hours, a telephone message was received at the
         Northern General Hospital switchboard from police asking the hospital
         to ‘stand b y ’ as there was an incident with casualties at
         Hillsborough.     A further message was received at approximately 15.25
         hours that a paediatric cardiac arrest was on route to the
         Northern General Hospital.     At approximately 15.27 hours the
         paediatric cardiac arrest arrived and proved to be the first casualty
         from Hillsborough.     The ambulance driver stated that there had been
         a major accident at the Football Ground.

     1.3 Charge Nurse Batty at the Northern General Accident and Emergency
         Department arranged for the Accident and Emergency Department to be
         prepared for receipt of a large number of casualties, having
         instructed his staff nurse to commence the Accident and Emergency
         call-out cascade for a major disaster.

     1*4 The Accident and Emergency Department contacted the switchboard at
         approximately 15.35 hours and asked for all available medical staff
         to be called to attend the Department.   This was done.

     1.5 Meanwhile, Mrs B Williams, Assistant Matron, went to the switchboard
         and, at approximately 15.43 hours, she and the telephonist
         implemented the call out of staff for a major disaster.    The
         Royal Hallamshire Hospital confirmed that it, too, had been asked to
         ‘stand b y ’ by the police.

     1.6 At approximately 16.00 hours, the Consultant in Accident and
         Emergency arranged with SYMAS for further cases to be taken to the
         Royal Hallamshire Hospital (which was, in fact, already receiving
         casualties.

     1•7 The Roval Hallamshire Hospital

         At approximately 15.20 hours, a telephone call was received from a
         Police Inspector by the nurse in charge of the Accident and Emergency
         Department asking the Hospital to stand by and to expect casualties
         from an incident at Hillsborough.   The switchboard, which had been
         monitoring the call, immediately advised key members of staff of the
         receipt of this message.   The key members of staff included the duty
         Administrator, Accident and Emergency staff and duty Assistant
         Matron.   Preparation of the Accident and Emergency Department, in
         anticipation of a possible major accident alert, commenced.    At


                                      1
    approximately 15.30 hours, police arrived to set up a control room
    and, in response to a hospital staff enquiry, confirmed that a major
    alert was in being and the hospital duty pursing officer notified
    switchboard which commenced cascade call out for staff in accordance
    with major disaster procedure.

Accident and Emergency Department

2.1 The first casualties arrived in the Northern General Hospital
    Accident and Emergency Department at approximately 15.27 hours and
    the last at approximately 16.45 hours.   The Department was cleared
    by approximately 17.30 hours.

2.2 The first casualty arrived in the Royal Hallamshire Hospital Accident
    and Emergency Department at approximately 15.40 hours and the last at
    approximately 17.01 hours.   The Department was cleared by
    approximately 18.15 hours.

Site Medical Teams

3.1 SYMAS called the Northern General Hospital for an emergency medical
    team to attend the site at approximately 15.45 hours.    The team,
    comprising two doctors, was collected by ambulance from the
    Northern General Hospital at approximately 15.55 hours (earlier
    response was not possible because of the volume of casualties in the
    Accident and Emergency Department).   The team was sent back on
    arrival at the Ground but the equipment (resuscitation box etc) was
    retained for use at the Ground.

3.2 There is no record of the Royal Hallamshire Hospital having received
    a request although it had put a team on stand by, ready to respond to
    any request to attend the site of the incident.   No ambulance
    reported to collect the team.

Patients Statistics

4.1 Brief statistics, concerning casualties received at the Sheffield
    Hospitals from the incident are as follows:-

                                      NGH           RHH             TOTAL

Casualties brought
to Accident & Emergency               88            71                  159

Dead on arrival or died in
the Accident & Emergency              11             1                   12

Treated and discharged                21            45                   66

Admitted                              56            25                   81

Admitted to ITUs (included
in total admissions above)            19             7                   26

Subsequent transfers from ITU
(for scans and neurological care)      7 to RHH      7 from NGH           7

Subsequent deaths                      2                                  2
        4.2 The total number of casualties remaining in hospital at 09.00 hours
            on Wednesday, 26 April was 1 (in Intensive Care) at the
            Northern General Hospital and 4 (all in Intensive Care) at the
*           Royal
            Hallamshire Hospital.

        4.3 It is understood that 3 minor casualties were also taken to Barnsley
            District General Hospital.

    5   Hospital Responses

        5.1 Debriefing of personnel involved in the hospital response is
            proceeding, primarily aimed at identifying whether improvements in
            the procedures, either in the individual hospitals, across the
            District or in the inter— face with the other emergency services can
            be made for future planning.              -

        5.2 IT IS, HOWEVER, CLEAR THAT THE NORTHERN GENERAL AND ROYAL HALLAMSHIRE
            HOSPITALS RESPONSES WERE TIMELY, EFFICIENT AND EFFECTIVE, AND STAFF
            HAVE EVERY REASON TO BE SATISFIED AT THEIR RESPONSE AND OF THE
            QUALITY OF SERVICES PROVIDED AT THE HOSPITALS.

        5.3 Psychological support services have been provided to the hospital
            staff at the hospitals involved in the emergency, as well as to many
            others involved in the disaster.

        5.4 Other hospitals involved in support roles were:—

            5.4.1 King Edward VII Hospital to which transfers were made (19
                  orthopaedic) early in the emergency to clear beds at
                  Royal Hallamshire Hospital.

            5.4.2 Lodge Moor Hospital, which prepared (1 ward) ready to receive
                  transfers to clear beds at the district general hospitals; no
                  transfers were, made, but see also note (5.4.6) below.

            5.4.3 Beds were cleared at the Jessop Hospital for Women, again ready
                  for transfers to clear beds at the two district general
                  hospitals and to release staff for the district general
                  hospitals.   No transfers of patients were subsequently made.

            5.4.4 Children’s Hospital brought its state up to full alert ready to
                  receive casualties if required.

            5.4.5 Staff from several hospitals and from District and Regional
                  Headquarters departments went to and undertook duties at the
                  two district general hospitals.

            5.4.6 The Bed Bureau, on hearing of the major emergency, arranged
                  with Chesterfield and Rotherham Hospitals to take general
                  practitioner emergency admissions if required and Lodge Moor
                  Hospital to take medical emergencies.

            5.4.7 Barnsley District General Hospital received 3 casualties.
                  Subsequently, at the request of the Sheffield Hospitals
                  Control, Rotherham District General Hospital took on the
                  ‘initial receiving centre’ for casualties for any further major
                  emergency which might occur, and for which the Sheffield
                  hospitals would normally have been selected for response, until


                                         3
                                                                                  <


                 9.00 am on Sunday, 16 April.   The Sheffield Hospitals Control
                 confirmed with Barnsley that the Barnsley District General
                 Hospital could stand down at 18.45 hours.

6   Communi cation s

    6.1 Communications within and between the two district general hospitals
        were very effective.   The rapport between the emergency service
        representatives on the hospital sites was good. Many calls from the
        public came to the hospitals because of apparent difficulties in
        contacting the police emergency number.

7   Volunteers and Other Agpnn'ps

    7.1 Volunteers from organisations and individuals reported to hospitals
        to give assistance and made effective contributions, as did the
        social work staff of the Sheffield City Council.   Numerous offers of
        help, particularly to provide accommodation and transport, were
        received from Sheffield residents.

8   Conclusion

    8.1 Finally, the hospitals would wish to formally recognise the many
        °ffers    help, condolence and support which were received during and
        after the initial emergency, and the many visits (official and
        unofficial) which contributed significantly to the morale of
        patients, relatives and staff.

    8.2 Pre-arranged visits were made to the Northern General and
        Royal Hallamshire Hospitals by the following:-

        Sunday. 16 April :

        Mr D Blunkett MP (to Northern General Hospital)

        Archbishop of Liverpool, the
        Bishop of Warrington (representing the Bishop of Liverpool)
        and the Free Church Moderator of Liverpool

        Mrs M Thatcher, Prime Minister and Mr D Hurd, Home Secretary
        (accompanied by Mr I Patnick MP at the Royal Hallamshire Hospital)

        Chair of Liverpool Council          )
        Lord Mayor of Sheffield accompanied) Sunday RoyalHallamshire  Hospital
        by Councillor Clive Betts           )Monday Northern GeneralHospital
        Lord Mayor of Nottingham            )


        Monday. 17 April:

        Liverpool Football Team

        TRHs Prince and Princess of Wales




                                      4
          Tuesday. 18 April:

          HRH Duke of Kent (Northern General Hospital)

          The Archbishop of York (Royal Hallamshire Hospital)

          Mr N Kinnock, Leader of the Labour Party
          accompanied by Councillor Clive Betts


          Wednesday. 19 April:

          The Bishop of Hallam

          Nottingham Forrest Football Team             ~


          Thursday. 20 April:

          Lord Justice Taylor

          Chief Constable Dear, West Midlands Police


          Tuesday. 25 April

          Mr T Clay, General Secretary, RCN



KT/LS
27 4 89




                                       5
