           FOOTBALL MEMBERSHIP AUTHORITY SUB-CCH4ITTEE - LEGAL SUB-GROUP

MINUTES OF A MEETING HELP ON MONDAY 11TH SEPTEMBER, 1989 AT THE OFFICES OF TilE
FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION, LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2.


Present:     W.G. McKeag, B.A. (Cantab) (Management Conmittee) - in the Chair

             J.A. Crawford (Football League)
             N. Kinghan (Department of the Environment)
             C. Metcalfe (Ernst & Young)
             R. Adams, M.A. (Association of Chief Police Officers)
             P. Rowlandson (Chief Inspector, Merseyside Police)
             C.J. Whalley and Mrs. P. Rossiter (Football League)



The meeting corrmenced at 11.36 am.

OPENING REMARKS

The Chairman welcomed everyone to the inaugural meeting of this sub-group. He
outlined the terms of reference as being to examine and define the procedures
for specific legal aspects of the national membership scheme and to report
back to the FMA Sub conrmittee.

The Chairman thought that it would be helpful to have a general discuss ion
under various headings.

FOOTBALL MEMBERSHIP AUTHORITY

The Chairman reflected on the fact that the FMA would have to deal with two
Government departments, and felt that this wculd make the task more difficult.
Mr. Kinghan confirmed that the Department of the Environment was the main
department responsible, but the Hare Office would need to have a continuing
interest because of the Law and Order aspect. He emphasised that he would
speak on behalf of Government but on occasion he may have to consult with
other colleagues.

It was’agreed that this sub-group should look at the drafting of the FMA
rules.

Mr. Kinghan re-iterated his offer to provide a retired departmental lawyer to
assist .with the drafting of the scheme rules. It was agreed that this would
be helpful and the Chairman undertook to put this to the FMA sub-ccnmittee
meeting to be held that afternoon. It was felt that the government lawyer,
when found, should be invited to attend a meeting of the FMA sub-ccnmittee.

 FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY

The Chairman felt that this sub-group ought to monitor the progress of the
FLA. Mr. Kinghan reported that his department was currently working on the
practical arrangements, such as staff, inspectors, pay, when it might start
operating and where it might be based. He added that the size of the
operation vrould depend on whether the FLA takes on the safety role and this
aspect would be considered by Parliament after the final Taylor report. He
felt that if Parliament agreed the safety role there might be a need to set
things up for the next close season.



                                        -   1   -
•A


     Mr. Kinghan confirmed that, in any event, the FLA would carry cut the
     licensing function under the national membership scheme. He envisaged that it
     would employ a small inspectorate to visit, all grounds. Mr. Crawford v*Dndered
     if the FMA would also need sane form of inspectorate. The Chairman was
     unhappy that the FMA would be responsible to the Secretary of State and yet
     would have an independent watchdog over which it would have no control. Mr.
     Kinghan envisaged clcse co-operation between the FLA and FMA. He added that
     his department had a lot of work to do on the FLA and he hoped to be able to
     talk with this sub-group as the work progressed over the next few months.

     SELECTION OF SUPPLIERS

     Mr. Metcalfe reported that a legal contract would need to be drawn up between
     the FMA and the chosen supplier and Ernst and Young were in the process of
     appointing specialist legal experts to deal with this. The Chairman felt that
     the costs involved would be not insignificant and wondered if the Government
     would make a contribution, adding that these costs were additional to those
     already specified, but an integral part of the requirements. Mr. Kinghan felt
     it unlikely that the Government would contribute any extra, but suggested that
     an application be made for further financial aid. Mr. Metcalfe felt that
     there would be considerable additional costs'to those already specified. , The
     Chairman warned that the whole scheme might founder without the appropriate
     level of Government help as funds were not available thraagh The Football
     League.

     APPLICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP

     It was agreed that the FMA would need to make sure that no false applications
     get through. It was generally felt that a written enquiry should be sent to
     suspicious applications and this would probably lead to the majority of them
     falling by the wayside. If the applicant persisted and there was still a
     suspicion then either a further written enquiry could be made or the person
     could be asked to come in somewhere totry and resolve the problen.

     It was agreed that the FMA should only    involve the police if it wasrelatively
     sure that a criminal offence had been conmitted. Mr. Adams felt that the FMA
     should have discretion to decide how far to pursue any offence. It was felt
     that the whole process of investigation ofsuspicious applications needed to
     be defined and perhaps included in theFMA rules.

     Mr. Metcalfe reported that.he had recently had a meeting with the Post Office,
     who had raised the problem of intimidation at the counter. It had been
     suggested that, in order to avoid confrontation at the counter, the counter
     clerk could tick a box on the application form to indicate to the FMA a
     suspicious application. Mr. Metcalfe confirmed that he would be discussing
     this further with the Post Office.

      MANDATORY AND DISCRETIONARY WITHDRAWAL OF MEMBERSHIP

      Mr. Kinghan reported that the Government intended to amend the Bill to provide
      for mandatory bans to ccmmence from the date of conviction.

      There was a discussion on whether a person should be allowed to attend
      football matches between the date of arrest and the date of
      conviction/acquittal. It was suggested that it should be written into the
      scheme rules that the membership card remains the property of the FMA and must
      be surrendered on request. Upon arrest, therefore the card would be seized
      and forwarded to the FMA.



                                           -   2   -
Mr. Adams suggested that persons ejected fran grounds should also have to
surrender their card and apply for its restoration.

It was generally felt that club should have the facility to ban individuals
fran their ground, but it would be up to the FMA to consider whether that
person should be banned fran all grounds. Mr. Metcalfe confirmed that the
facility to ban individuals fran one particular ground could be added to the
Statement of Requirements. The Chairman felt that a member's own club should
have a facility to consider the evidence against a ban imposed by an away
club.

APPEALS PROCEDURES

The Chairman reported his grave concern at this area. He wondered if it vculd
be unreasonable to suggest that the FLA should be the body to consider
appeals. Mr. Kinghan's view was that this was not a possibility.

Mr. Kinghan reported that the Bill now allowed for written representations
against decisions and for a review of these decisions. The Chairman thought
this a helpful step forward and vas grateful for the Government's assistance
in this matter.

EXCHANGE OF INFORMATION

It vas felt that the exchange of information between ■clubs and the FMA vrould
present no realistic problem, but this would have to be spelled out and might
require an addition to Football League Regulations.

The exchange of information between the police and the FMA was a different
n\atter and it was suggested that perhaps the Heme Office should prepare
guidelines to police forces. Mr. Adams felt that it would not be a problem
for the police to notify ejections to the BMA. He added that details of each
ejection were recorded in a book and it vrould simply be a matter of copying
these details to the FMA. He felt that details of arrests away fran grounds
could be notified to the FMA with the offender's membership card. He
stressed, however, that it was important for the scheme rules to be properly
written, so that the member is aware of the possible eventualities up-fra\t.

PECUNIARY PENALTIES

It was noted that this sub-group would have to look at the pecuniary penalties
to be imposed on persons having functions under the scheme for failure to
discharge those functions.

e m tr y   Pr o ce d u r e s a t t u r n s t i l e s

It was suggested that this item be discussed at the next meeting. The
Chairman felt it would be helpful if information could be found on how clubs
deal with invalid cards under the current partial membership schemes.

NEXT MEETING

It was agreed to decide this at the full meeting of the FMA sub-cormittee
later that afternoon. (It was subsequently agreed to hold the next meeting on
Wednesay, 27th September, 1989, at Newcastle United Football Club, cortnencing
at 11.30 am). The Chairman proposed to concentrate on specific items at the
next meeting.




                                                       - 3 -
There being no further business, the Chairman closed the meeting at 1.55 pm




                                       Chairman

                                       Date ...
