                            CONFIDENTIAL


25-9.JS                             . ,



FOOTBALL:    PUBLIC POLICY ISSUES



A.    Introduction


1.    Football continues to raise a knot of public policy issues
which arouse a high level of public concern and media attention.
Hooliganism in connection with matches abroad continues to damage
our standing internationally.       Hooliganism at home regularly
occupies substantial police resources throughout the football
season.     It also makes more difficult the resolution of the
problems of crowd co,''*rol and public safety at football matches
highlighted by the       Isborough tragedy and Lord Justice Taylor's
Inquiry.


2.    This paper reviews the Government's response s^ far to these
issues, previews developments in Government policy already in
train or envisaged and raises for consideration some outstanding
 issues.


 B.   Background: recent and expected hooliganism


 3.   At Annex A is a digest of events in recent years.      As for
 this season there was serious hooliganism in connection with the
 Sweden v England match in Stockholm on 6 September.      At the
 match itself there was no trouble and early press reports of the
 behaviour of English supporters in Stockholm were exaggerated.
 But English supporters were involved in drunkenness,      fighting and
 damage to property, abroad the Tor Britannia Ferry from Harwich
 to Gothenberg on 3 September (43 arrested; 8 charged; one man
 jumped overboard and drowned).        In Stockholm before and after
 the match 104 English, and 104 Swedish were temporarily detained;
                            CONFIDENTIAL




1 Englishman was charged.   No trouble was reported at the
matches on 6 September between Yugoslavia and Scotland, Finland
and Wales or Northern Ireland and Hungary.


4.       The domestic picture has been more peaceful.  The opening
w e e k s of the League season have been relatively free of violence
although the British Transport Police report a number of minor
incidents involving travelling supporters.


Risks of hooliganism for the rest of the football season


5.    A list of the matches arranged by the four home countries
for the rest of the season is at Annex B.     The match that offered
the highest risk of violence - the Holland vs England friendly
arranged for 13 December in Rotterdam - has been cancelled at the
request of the Minister for Sport.


6.   Arrangements are in hand,   including liaison with other
national police forces, to prepare for the World Cup matches
involving all four home countries On 11 October and the England
v Italy friendly at Wembley on 15 November.     All of these involve
some risk of trouble but probably less than that threatened by
the Holland match now cancelled. The football authorities are
repqrted to be.considering whether to proceed with the most
obviously risky match on the list: the England vs Scotland match
at Wembley on Tuesday 22 May.


7.   The best estimate that we can offer is that the domestic
season will probably follow the pattern of the last two seasons:
about 6,000 arrests; 6-7,000 ejections; and some more serious
trouble,   such as occurred at the end of last season.    (Annex C
gives details.)    Existing measures are likely to contain the
problem but more serious violence on occasions cannot be ruled
out.
                                  CONFIDENTIAL


C.   Government action at home


The Football Spectators Bill


8.   The Bill will complete its remaining stages in the spillover.
(A detailed timetable for the Bill and its implementation is at
Annex D.)    It provides for:          ^


      (1)    a national membership scheme to which all those
      attending designated football matches in England and Wales
      must belong (subject to limited specified exemptions).
      Following receipt of the final Taylor report Parliament will
      debate the scheme twice further before it can be
      implemented.


      (2)    Part II of the Bill is intended to prevent a convicted
      football hooligan from attending kev matches outside England
      and Wal es .        It will enable the courts to impose a
      restriction order on someone convicted of a football related
      offence.       This will require the person to report to a
      police station when a relevant football match is taking
       place outside England and Wales.          The Bill also makes
       provision to impose a restriction order in England and Wales
       on someone convicted elsewhere of an offence corresponding
                 *    ■
       to a football related offence here.          We are in touch with
       Scotland and will be negotiating with Italy and other
       countries to put this into effect.


       (3)   The Football Licensing Authority (FLA) established by
       the Bill to have the power to "review the discharge bv local
       authorities of their functions under the Safety of Sports
       Grounds Act 1975” . in relation to football grounds.            A
       commencement order, subject to the negative resolution
       procedure,     is required to give the FLA this power - to be
       debated post-Taylor.         The FLA will also have the task of
       advising the Secretary of State on which grounds should be__
                             CONFIDENTIAL


       required to replace terracing bv seating accommodation and
       how quickly.


National Football Intelligence Unit (NFIU)


9.     We have recently appointed the Superintendent to head this
new central police team to co-ordinate police intelligence on
more serious and persistent football hooligans.     The NFIU will
work closely with the existing British Transport Police *TREVI'
office (paragraph 12), strengthening the exchange of information
and intelligence with other countries.      The Superintendent will
take up post on 1 October.


Other measures


10.    other relevant recent le*gislation and guidance is set out in
Annex E.


D.     Government action to improve international co-operation


 11.    Football hooliganism in the context of international matches
can only be dealt with effectively with the full support of the
countries concerned.      The UK has been instrumental in setting up
through the TREVI group of EC law enforcement ministers and
 officials,   a network of permanent correspondents to exchange
 infbrmation relevant to policing football.     The UK correspondent
 is a senior British Transport Police officer.     A discreet but
 increasing role is being played by police liaison officers
 travelling to their country's away matches to advise the local
 police on the identity and tactics of hooligans: we both send and
 receive such officers.


 12.   The UK is also a founding signatory of the Council of Europe
 Convention on Spectator Violence at Sporting Events, whose
 official standing committee is chaired by DoE.      The Convention
 encourages parties to adopt policies and practical measures to
                             CONFIDENTIAL


counter hooliganism and promote the safety of spectators.
Article 5. for example, urges parties to identify and prosecute
spectators who commit criminal offences.


E.      Government action on safety; the Tavlor Inguiry


Taylor's Interim Report

13.     On 4 August the Home Office circulated the Interim Report to
the police,    the local authorities concerned, other emergency
services, clubs and major sporting bodies urging them all to
take action to implement the Report's recommendations without
delay.     Feedback received so far, primarily from the police and
Fire Service, has indicated no lack of willingness to implement
in full the Report's recommendations.


14.     There have been some practical difficulties and some
difficulties of interpretation.       This was to be expected given
 the variation between grounds.     The Home Office is keeping the
 situation under review.     The option to enforce relevant
 recommendations of the Report by requiring safety certificates to
                  0
 contain mandatory terms and conditions remains open and has not
 been ruled out.


 Taylor's Final Report
    *
 15.     It is expected that the Final Report will be available at
 about the turn of the year.     The Inquiry has already indicated
 that it will address the wider safety issues of football
 membership schemes, supervision of local authorities in the
 exercise of their safety responsibilities and new and all seated
 stadia.     More specific issues such as the content of the ''Green
 Guide" to safety at sports grounds, pre-match drinking and ticket
 touts are also likely to be addressed.      Acceptance and
     implementation of recommendations on any or all of these matters
 may involve further legislation.      It may also have resource
                              CONFIDENTIAL


implications both for the public sector and for sport.         A
measured response from Government to the Final Report will be
required.


F.     Preview of Government action in the coming months


16.  The programme of work over the next 12 months will focus on
four main areas:-


       (i) completing the passage of the Football Spectators Bill
       and bringing Parts I and II (the national football
       membership scheme and restriction orders) into operation;


       (ii)    bringing the National Football Intelligence Unit fully
       into operation;


       (iii)     strengthening international co-operation in
       preparation for the World C u p in Italy next year.


       (iv) considering and acting on Lord Justice Tavlor*s final
       report.


Of these the first is far advanced with little scope for major
policy revision.       The second is   well in hand and should be
producing results by the end of        the year.   The third is more
operi to new initiatives because       much remains to be arranged.    An
interdepartmental working group of officials, chaired by DOE, on
which the police and the football authorities are represented is
 already co-ordinating UK measures to reduce the risk of violence
 in Italy.     Action on the fourth must await publication of
 Taylor's Final Report at the turn of the year.


 17.   in order to strengthen co-operation abroad we shalli-


        (i)    urge, through TREVI, the adoption of new guidelines
       prepared by the UK on policing international matches;
                              CONFIDENTIAL



      (ii)     press the signatories' of the Council of Europe
      Convention on Spectator Violence at Sporting Events to
      identify and prosecute spectators who commit criminal
      offences;     and


      (iii)     strengthen international liaison on intelligence on
      football hooligans through the newly established NFIU.


18.   We shall publicise the programme set out in paragraphs 16
and 17 above emphasising that we are tackling the issues of
criminality, crowd safety and international co-operation on a
broad front.


G.    Outstanding issues for consideration


19.   We believe that the measures already taken and in hand
provide opportunities for effective action to reduce hooliganism
at home and abroad.       We wish to give further consideration to
whether we should:-


       (i)     urge the withdrawal of England from the World Cup;


       (ii)     seek the abandonment of the England v Scotland match
       at Wembley next Spring;


       (iii)     withdraw passports from notorious hooligans.


 2 0.’ Considerations affecting these three issues are:-


       (i)     there is a strong likelihood of some violence.    Many
       England supporters will travel to Italy with or without
       tickets.     But withdrav^l would not prevent those hooligans
       determined to cause trouble from travelling to Italy and
       focussing on Scotland or other teams.      Withdrawal is for the
       FA.     We cannot force them to act.   Opinion might be against
                              CONFIDENTIAL

      withdrawal.    On our present assessment we are inclined not
      to press the FA to withdraw;


      (ii)    holding the match on a weekday evening should reduce
      the risk of trouble. The football authorities may decide to
      call the match off voluntarily.      If they do not, we are
      minded nearer to the event to consult Scottish Office and
      the police, and review the case for asking for the match to
      be cancelled;


      (iii)    Although we wish to stop football hooligans
      attending key matches abroad, withdrawing or endorsing
      passports has hitherto been held to be a disproportionate
      response because,    if effective,   it would stop all travel
      abroad by the people concerned.        The Government's preferred
      solution is the more targeted approach in Part II of the
       Football Spectators Bill.    In any case, the ready
       availability of British Visitor's Passports (BVPs) and 'no-
       passport'    excursions would make general passport
       restrictions ineffective.     At least until the
       computerisation of passport offices has been completed the
       retention of BVPs as an alternative travel document will be
       essential.     We are not inclined to pursue this option.


Conclusion
         «


21.    We invite colleagues to note the programme of work set out
in paragraphs 16 and 17 above.


22.    We also invite their views on the outstanding issues set out
in paragraphs 19 and 20 above.
                         CCNFirCNITAL

                                                                  Annex A


              RECENT KEY EVENTS AND GOVERNMENr ACTION




1985     Bradford fire
         I leysel, Belgium - death of 39 supporters (Liverpool v Juventus)
         Luton v Millwall - serious pitch invasion

         Pcpplewell inquiry (follcwing Bradford fire)
         Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985


1986     Public Order Act 1986 - exclusion orders and new jxiblic order offences


1987     Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987


1988     European Championships FRG (June/July) - hooliganism by English
         supporters

          Hone Office Circulars on swift justice and
          alcohol/disorder (August)
          Minister for Sport's Working Party report (Novenfcer)


1989      Hillsborough disaster (15 April)
          Widespread disorder on last day of football season (13 May) - over
           300 arrests.
          Sweden v England (6 September) - trouble on ferry and in Stockholm.

          Football Spectators Bill introduced (January)
          lord Justice Taylor's inquiry (follcwing ILULlsborcxigh disaster)




 (Government action shown in bold).
                                 c cwfudrnttal



                                                                   Annex B

 INTERNATIONAL FOOTBALL MATCHES 1989/90



 ENGLAND

 11   October       v    Poland
 15   November                                   Chorzow   World Cup
                    v    Italy                   Wembley
 13   December      v                                      Friendly
                         To be arranged          Wembley   Friendly
 28   March         v    Eire
 25   April                                      IXiblin   Friendly
                    v    Czechoslovakia
 15   May                                        Wembley   Friendly
                    v    To be arranged          Wembley
 22   May           v                                      Rous Cup
                         Scotland                Wembley   Rous Cup


 SCOTLAND

 11   October       v    France
 15   November                                   Paris     World Cup
                    v    Norway
 19   May           v                            Glasgow   World Cup
 22   May                To be arranged          Glasgow   Rous Cup
                    v    England                 Wembley   Rous Cup


WALES

11 October          v    Holland
15 November         v                            Wrexham   World Cup
                         W Germany               Cologne   World Cup


       — ,-
N. IRELAND

111 October              Eire                    Dublin    World Cup


WORTH CUP     FTNAT.c:

June/July                Italy




                                             10
  i                            CCNFIEENnA

LNCIL^IS OF HOOLIGANISM: 13 M M 1989                                            Annex C

Crystal Palace v Biminaham Citv: 6 police and 10 members of the public were injured
(including a stabbing) and 26 arrested. Scare Birmingham fans invaded the pitch and
fought with Crystal Palace fans and police. Play interrupted for 30 minutes.
Toddington Services Ml.

Disturbances by returning Birmingham City supporters from Crystal Palace in early hours
of Sunday morning at motorway services. Crockery was thrown and customers intimidated.
44 arrested.

A train carrying some 90 Birmingham fans returning from the match was stopped at Milton
Keynes after a buffet car was bro into and a carriage damaged.

Shrewsbury Town v Leeds United: Fighting broke out at a' public house in Alsager,
Cheshire between Leeds United fans returning by coach from their game at Shrewsbury and
local youths, l Leeds United supporter suffered severe head injuries. 41 arrests on
suspicion of violent disorder and assault.

Brisuol Citv v Sheffield United: Sporadic outbreaks of trouble between rival factions
before and after the game outside the stadium - one Sheffield fan was slashed along the
length of his back with a craft knife. Just before the end of the game rival fans
clashed on an enpty terrace below the main stand which they had just left. Fighting
spilled onto the pitch holding play up for six minutes. There were 14 arrests before,
during and after the match, with 5 ejections.

Wes ton-Super-Mare

 Numerous incidents of fighting involving Sheffield United supporters who were staying
!for the weekend and local youths. 27 persons were arrested mostly for public order
 offences.

 Burv v Bristol:

Tewkesbury

 A group of 25-30 drunken Bristol Rover fans returning from Bury "gate crashed" a
 private wedding reception. 3 person including a police officer were assaulted.
 Sub1 quently 3 arrests involving assault and criminal damage were made.

 Portsmouth v Chelsea: 56 arrests, 31 for alcohol offences with 15 ejections. On the
 evening before the match 20 Chelsea fans fought with local youths at Hayling Island. 3
 arrests for violent disorder.

 AFC Bournemouth v Plymouth Arctvle: 11 Plymouth Argyle supporters were arrested at
 Southampton railway station for alleged offences involving disorderly behaviour and
 obscene language.

i Millwall v Southampton: Southampton supporters, travelling from New Cross Gate to
  London Bridge after the match caused over £2,000 worth of damage to a train and
  ransacked a buffet trolley stealing goods and about £300 in cash. BTP are conducting
  enquiries.

                                              11
                          OCNFIDENnAL


                                                                           Annex D

FOOTBALL SPDCGVTORS BILL: TIMETABLE FOR IMPUMENEATION



Part I: National membership scheme


1.   Royal Assent Cor football Spectators Bill          early November 1989


2.   Receipt of final Taylor report                     December/January


3.   Parliamentary debate on 2 commencement             late-January/early-
     orders: (1) to enable the Secretary of             February
     State to appoint the Football Membership
     Authority (who will prepare the scheme);
      (2) to establish the Football Licensing
     Authority.


4.   Football Membership Authority submits              early March
      draft scheme

5.   Parliamentary debate on order confirming           end-March
      Secretary of State's approval of scheme.

On a separate timetable, the football authorities sire proceeding towards a
selection of the company that will run the scheme on their behalf. They intend
to reduce their present short-list of six to one within the next three months but
a binding contract will not be made until the Football Membership Authority is
appointed - probably early February 1990.

 The Government's declared target for implementation of the scheme (subject to the
 availability of appropriate technology) is "the early months of the 1990/91
 season". tThe football authorities say that the beginning of the 1991/92 season
 is the earliest achievable date. Our realistic objective should be to achieve
 implementation before the end of the 1990/91 season.

 Part.II: Restriction Orders and reporting arrangements

 Following Royal Assent we will need to establish the central enforcing authority
 (who will issue requirements to report to those subject to restriction orders)
 and give guidance to the police (who will register the attendance of reportees)
 and the courts (who will impose restriction orders). We hope to complete these
 arrangements early in the New Year.

 We intend to follow that quickly with Orders in Council allowing convictions in
 Scotland, Italy and other countries to result in restriction orders in England or
 Wales. The key target is to establish arrangements with Italy well before the
 World Cup in June 1990.
                                        CONFIDENTIAL
(■

     #                                                               Annex E



             RECENT LEGISLATION AND GUIDANCE




             The Spbrtinq Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985 introduced
             prohibitions on alcohol and drunkenness at and on journeys to and
             from designated football matches in England Wales.    In addition
             there is a wide range of general powers in relation to alcohol
             that are relevant to football.    These were referred to in a wide
         ^   ranging Home Office Circular to the courts and police in August
             1988.


             The Public Order Act 1986 introduced revised public order
             offences such as the use of threatening, abusive or disorderly
             behaviour within the hearing or sight of someone likely to be
             caused harassment,   alarm or distress; the Act also introduced
             exclusion orders to prohibit someone convicted of a football
             related offence from attending a designated football match.
              (Exclusion orders will be replaced by the national football
             membership scheme once Part I of the Bill comes into force.)


              In August
                    «   1988 the Home Office issued a Circular encouraging
         ^    contingency arrangements to enable swift prosecution of cases
              after large-scale disorder.




                                               13
