                    VOLUNTARY MEMBERSHIP SCHEME




Following the Taylor Report the focus should now shift to new
key issues.


KEY ISSUES

1.    How will football pay for the implementation, of the
      Taylor recommendations?
2.    Can development of membership schemes help to minimise
      future 'hooliganism problems’?


THE WAY AHEAD

The following steps should be taken*

1.    Design of voluntary national membership scheme
      This should include:

             its objectives
             the benefits to members
             how it will interface with club schemes, FA travel
             club
             how it might interrelate to other future developments
             - all seater stadia, ticketing and ground entry
             developments
             its management
             any technical standards that clubs would need to
             meet (these are not likely to be very demanding,
             although some national standards on card design and
             information to be collected, are probably desirable)
             ownership and profit/cost sharing arrangements
             its legal status - this could affect taxation as
             there are likely to be ways of reducing corporation
             taxation liability
             its operating rules
                              -   2   -




2.    Develop a launch plan
           to be successful the scheme must be backed by the
           Football League, Football Association and the Clubs.
           It will also be useful to have the support of
           football associations and perhaps Taylor

           present an attractive package to clubs which
           demonstrates how the game will attract more money
           without damaging club schemes,

           consider holding a seminar which would involve club
           management and secure their backing for the concept

3.    Develop a financing plan

           to fund the start up and operation
           consider setting up a new company to manage the
           scheme and possibly other appropriate Football
           League Commercial activities

4..   Develop a full implementation plan covering

           scheme marketing and promotion.
           application process and card issue,
           central management and organisation
           development of any central standards
           scheme operation
           timetable

5,    Other Activities - Post Taylor
          review rationalisation of grounds in England and
          Wales to minimise conversion costs to modern all
          seater stadia
          consider how Football League could provide more
          guidance and assistance to clubs on:

           *   fund raising activities
           *   ground design
           *   membership schemes
          review possibility of financial assistance from
          local authorities, Government or European sources to
          fund improvements
          consider extension of all the above activities to
          other leagues eg Scotland
                             _   3   _




CONCLUSION

I was attracted by the Stadium Consortium's Commercial Approach;
which was based on market research and a high profile campaign
aimed at maximising the number of members that, would join a
scheme.    In our view a voluntary scheme that builds on the
current opportunities and pitched in the right way would be
very attractive to fans provided they saw the majority of the
profit going back into the game to improve its image and,
standards.
However, real benefits to fans would have to be provided:

o    Improvement of facilities for club members

o    Priority ticket allocation at cup finals, major games

o    High risk games may become members only in due course,

o    Cheaper ticket prices than for noa-members
o    National and club newsletters
o    Other opportunities to meet club staff, players or
     national personalities associated with the game-

significant revenues could be raised, for example:


o     At £5 per season membership charge, 2 million members
      = £lOM/season
o     At £10 per season membership charge, 1.5 million members
      = £15M/season.

To achieve these volumes it may be necessary to integrate club
and national scheme benefits but overall higher revenue could
be attracted into the game.
                             -   4   -




In addition considerable sponsorship and advertising revenues
could be raised.

The running costs of the scheme would be far less than, that
envisaged for the mandatory scheme as sophisticated technology
would not be a necessity, indeed computer technology would only
be used if the additional benefits more than outweighed the
cost.




T R PHILLIPS
COMMERCIAL DIRECTOR


12 February 1990
