                                      ^u)   i v       w

                                     ^ Wi ) 0- \ «
/   \   \                                         1



                                     wm))                 Department of the Environment
                                                          q                   P3/165
                                                          Room
                                                          2 Marsham Street Londgg^WIP 3EB
                                .s                        Telex 22221    Direct Line 01-276
                               _o                                       Switchboard 01-276 3 000
                                                                                  GTN 276
                          <c
        13 March 1990   n

        Football Supporters Association




        Thank you for your letter of 19 February to Mr Algacs about the
        Football Supporters Association's welcome    plans to set up an
        advice centre in Sardinia during the World Cup Finals.
        It would be helpful particularly to the FA, who, as you know,
        will have an advice centre in Cagliari, and Consular staff to
        have contact names and phone numbers of FSA officials in Sardinia
        in order to circulate and receive information as and when
        necessary.   X think that you are also aware that the FA are
        preparing an advisory leaflet for supporters intending to travel
        to Italy.    I understand that they will be giving the FSA an
        opportunity to comment on the contents of the leaflet.
        In the run up to the Finals there are two particularly important
        points which you may wish to draw to the attention of your
        members and anyone else who seeks your advice.        First, all
        England supporters wishing to obtain tickets should join the
        England Travel Club. Application forms for the Travel Club can
        be obtained through the FA, telephone 01-724 1182. Second, those
        supporters not flying direct need to make advance bookings for
        ferries from the Italian mainland to Sardinia.
        The details of the summer timetable to Sardinia operative from 1
        June this year we understand are as follows:
            - 1 ferry a day plus 3 extra during the week from Genoa to
              Porto Torres, 2,000 passengers, undesignated number of
              vehicles, including coaches;
             - 7 ferries a week from Genoa to Olbia, 1,200 passengers,
               undesignated number of vehicles including coaches;
     - 3 ferries a week from Genoa to Cagliari, 2,000 passengers,
       undesignated number of vehicles including coaches?
     - 1 ferry a day (plus 1 extra a week from 18 June) from
       Civitavecchia, 1,200 passengers, 370 car size vehicles or
       unspecified number of coaches.
     - 4 ferries a day from Civitavecchia to Golfo Aranci (run by
       the state railways),600 passengers, 150 vehicles including
       coaches, on each ferry.
Bookings for    all the above ferries apart from Civitavecchia to
Golfo Aranci    are now open.   Bookings for the Civitavecchia to
Golfo Aranci    ferry link open in about 2 weeks time and can be
made through   the Italian State Railways Office in London.
I would be grateful if you could keep me informed of developments
in the setting up of your Advice Centre.
I am copying this letter to Pat Smith at the FA.
Yours sincerely




A R BADEN
Sport and Recreation Division
                   THE FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS ASSOCIATION
                               London Branch
                  m
                    m
         \                                Please reply to:



                                                             19 February 1990.
P. ALGACS Esq
Sport and Recreation Division
Department of the Environment
Romney House
43 Marsham Street
LONDON SW1P

     D       J2 ^L T - —S 'rL * / "


          During the- World Cup in Italy this summer the' Football
Supporters' Association intends to organise a Supporters’ Advice Centre
in Sardinia in order to provide advice and information to travelling
England supporters on such matters as accommodation, health and transport.
We envisage that this would be organised with the co-operation of the-
Football Association, tour operators, the British Embassy in Italy, police
and the relevant Government Departments*

          We propose to staff the Advice Centre with volunteers from our
membership, and, besides issuing information sheets, organise social
events for supporters based on the island and act as media contacts on
issues involving supporters during the tournament. We see these as essen­
tially 'pro-supporter 1 rather than 'anti-hooligan' measures, but we are
sure that a service such as this will reduce the likelihood of English
supporters becoming involved in disturbances,

          I should be grateful for an assurance of your Department's
support for this project, as well as any information you are able to give
us concerning preparations for the tournament.  In addition, .1 should like
to see any material which your Department has prepared for distribution to
supporters travelling to this or previous World Cups*  I understand that
an ad-hoc advice centre was set up by supporters in Mexico in 19 8 6 : do you
have any information on this?

          I look forward to your reply, and hope that all involved can
work together towards the common goal of a peaceful and successful World
Cup this summer*
                                      !


                 BRIAN S O R R E L L
                .Football Supporters' Association
                World Cup Sub-Committee
