hs.11.27/hillsb23.dm


HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY:    FOLLOW UP TO THE INTERIM REPORT

Introduction

This note summarises the information gained from our enquiries
of local authorities in late September early October about the
progress on implementation of the most urgent recommendations of
the Hillsborough Inquiry except for recommendation 4 (Police/Club
agreements) which has been the subject of separate action by F8
Division.

General

Despite some difficulties, mainly practical, and some expressed
resentment at the arbitrary reduction of 15% in crowd capacities,
the response received from over 70 local authorities contacted
by telephone was co-operative, positive and encouraging. They
reported that all or nearly all of the urgent recommendations had
been or were being implemented.        In some cases the other
recommendations had either been implemented or were well in hand.
Further, informal contact with some local authorities has
supported this general impression of their willingness and desire
to effect compliance with the Interim Report by the adoption of
practicable, sensible solutions which achieve the objectives
behind the Inquiry's recommendations.

Some indication has been received that local authorities have not
confined implementation of the Inquiry's report to football
league clubs; and that both rugby league and non-league football
grounds have been the subject of review.

The Recommendationt     Points Arising

Recommendation 2 (deduction of 15%) . With one exception the 15%
reduction had been generally applied to all football league
grounds where the crowd density levels amounted to at least 27
persons per 10 square metres. The authorised capacity of some
parts of some grounds, usually of those clubs in the lower
divisions, were assessed at well below the 27/10 sq metre figure
mentioned above. An additional 15% cut had not generally been
imposed in such circumstances especially when on occasions the
authorised capacity was so low that such a reduction was not only
unnecessary but would be regarded as ridiculous. In one or two
instances authorised capacities had been calculated on the basis
of exit routes rather than "holding capacity" of the terrace.
Here again local authorities had not tended to reduce the
capacity still further. In all these instances the assessments
met with the intention of the Inquiry to ensure that sufficient
margins existed to avoid overcrowding on the terraces.

The exception was Twerton Park, Bath, which is used by Bristol
Rovers Football Club.    In this instance the local authority
members felt, given recent ground improvements, a further 15%
reduction on the terrace capacity was not justified.

Recommendation 3 (limiting spectators into pens) led to the
removal of some fencing at the Norwich City ground; at
Scarborough there is an unusual, intermittent radial fencing
arrangement which allows lateral movement of spectators and which
is therefore almost impossible tp accurately monitor.       (This
arrangement in itself should ensure that the kind of situation
which arose at Hillsborough could not happen even were
Scarborough to attract large crowds - which they did recently
when they played Chelsea.)

Recommendation 8 (open pitch gates) . One or two club grounds are
known to keep the perimeter gate closed but unlocked.          At
Millwall, for example, the gates are up to 3 metres wide.
Crystal Palace are still sensitive following the Birmingham
incident last May: here the perimeter fence is said to be fairly
low acting more as a hinderance than a barrier to pitch invasion.
More generally, the impression gained is that there is some
unease about retaining open pitch gates and that frequently,
where there may be no more than a suspicion of potential trouble,
the gates are closed but left unlocked.

Recommendation 10 (cutting equipment) has proved quite difficult
in some cases (and some general scepticism has been expressed
about the value of this recommendation). The problem remains
unsolved at the Manchester United ground but the fire brigade are
satisfied with the emergency exit arrangements onto the pitch.
At another ground, Bury, compensatatory features including
substantial reduction in the crowd capacity have been introduced.

Recommendation 18 (turnstile flow rate).      Early indications
revealed that several grounds had not monitored the turnstile
flow rate and at others the club measurements had not been
checked by local authorities. In such cases arrangements were
in hand to do so and follow up enquiries indicate that they have
been carried out. None of the grounds were reported as having
experienced any build up of spectators outside.     In all cases
local authorities were keeping under review the ingress
arrangements.


Recommendation 39 (first aiders). One or two reports indicated
problems in obtaining sufficient, trained first aiders. Follow
up enquiries suggested that, irrespective of any difficulties,
the recommendation was nonetheless being complied with.

Co-ordination of Emergency Services (Recommendations 35-38)

Separate enquiries of the Fire Service and the Police (via ACPO)
made in late August/early September revealed that the
recommendations in question had been or were being complied with.

First Aid Provision

A number of reports received from local authorities revealed an
increase in activity to provide improved first aid facilities:
in some cases new rooms are to be provided and/or new first aid
equipment.   Health authorities and St John's Ambulance have
provided advice. Provision of HHS ambulances and crews has led
to one or two queries as to whether an equivalent alternative
would be acceptable if the relevant health authority could not
oblige.    Some difficulty appears to have arisen over the
provision of NHS ambulances where crowds exceed 10,000.

Wemblev stadium


The local authority reported that long standing, continuous
liaison and negotiation with the Wembley Stadium management on
all safety issues was continuing.       All the Interim Report
recommendations were, in the local authority opinion, implemented
- most of which were already in place before the Inquiry. The
only exception is the monitoring of turnstile flow rates. The
local authority is satisfied as to the adequacy and the
arrangements to ensure no undue build up.        Compliance with
recommendation 17 (setting up an advisory group) was posing a
particular problem because the local authority already had a well
established safety team of various disciplines.      They did not
wish to interfere with this arrangement.

Summary


Total compliance with 28 urgent recommendations at 91 football
grounds was probably more than could reasonably be expected.
However wide compliance appears to have been achieved and
progress made in complying with the remaining 15 recommendations.
Monitoring of turnstile flow rates becomes something of an
irrelevant exercise at grounds which are substantially
under-used; retaining pitch gates in the open position has
obviously been unwelcome and also posing difficulties.      There
seems to be some concern about the 15% capacity reduction,
provision of NHS ambulances and cutting equipment. One or two
local authorities did comment, incidentally, on the provision of
an   advisory   group    (recommendation   17)   which   included
representation of football supporters. Whilst authorities were
not in any way objecting to inclusion of supporters in the
general discussions they felt that the internal policies of the
safety team needed to be settled before discussions with the club
and/or supporters.


The overall picture is one of a general, widespread willingness
to restore public confidence in the safety arrangements at
football grounds and at sports grounds generally.




                                         D J MOULD
                                         G2 Division

27 November 1989


FEP/89 35/48/122
