                                          IMMEDIATE BY FACSIMILIE




              DATE


              TIME
                                  11.15
              NUMBER DF PAGES                               ^   --- -y
              (Excluding “his shesc!                             *»-•<:




              TO:
                                               Tdoo        £ l \ i n 6 R><slO                       i
              N AM E


              D IV/ROOM

              B UILDING
                                  ~ i rnBte-Sttftrn                 <vv <CC C ’i’

              FROM:

              N AM E '            (Y )r         0        m o u L O
              DIV /R O OM           H 61T v T )      & iZ s               a>                .....
              BUILDING
  .W.„ ,m ---■—     . ■■■■,.— •     Vtems-
                             -*------- -— .. o f f t c n .
              TEL NO:
                                    C-----------
                             _L-----E  R - I - ---------------
                                                 7 ^ 3 - —? -----------
                                                               d 9 c/

PS6£ szaTze                       I '*
                                     > I "90
                                                                 n ^a itia o io a d S N i   saomaas     aau   woaj
PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES


Proper provision to accommodate safely people with
disabilities should be made at all grounds.


The safety measure set in the Guide should not be
construed in such a way as to place undue
restrictions on people with disabilities.


People with impaired mobility


Although it is unlikely that anyone whose mobility
is severely impaired will occupy standing
accommodatior^ they will often wish to occupy seated
accommodation, perhaps with friends or relatives,     in
stands.   Arrangements should therefore exist to meet
such wishes wherever it is possible to do so, for
example by the provision of wheelchair spaces within
the seated area, preferably in different parts so
that there is a choice of seating position.   Such
provision should take account of the sightliness
available from the allocated areas to ensure that
occupants have an unrestricted view.


Wherever possible there should be more than one
ingress/egress to those with impaired mobility.
Although aofiLess/sgress to and from accommodation at
ground level is easier for users of wheelchairs,
consideration should be given to the means by which
they can be accommodated on other levels without
prejudicing their safety or the safety of others.


Where <   jrson leaves their wheelchair in order to
occupy a seat, provision should be made for the
wheelchair to be readily accessible without it
causing an obstruction in a gangway or exit rout e.
         Those who remain in the&r^wlteelGba&r •.should not
         obstruct the movement of others.


         Support services and facilities for disabled people
         should also be available within the stand.               Toilet
         facilities should be provided.         Consideration should
         be given to how refreshments might be made available
         to those unable to leave their seats unaided.


         New design work for stands should incorporate
         guidance in BS 5588 Part 8 Code of Practice for
         mg an s> of escape for disabled people.      Where, because*^
         po^aiy        existing buildings,    it is not possible or
         practicable to apply the Code fully, alternative
         ways of meeting its objectives should be sought.


         Ramps which are to be used by wheelchair users
         should conform to BS 5810.


         Use of lifts in an emergency


         A lift should be used as a means of escape from a
         stand only [in the case of fire] if it is an
         evacuation lift or firefighting lift operated under
         the direction and control of an appointed steward
         designated with specific responsibility for its use
         in an evacuation using an agreed evacuation
         procedure.        BS 5588 Part 8 recommendations should be
         followed.


         The arrangements described above should be in
          addition to any special provision made for the
          admission (often at pitch level) of vehicles used by
          people with impaired mobility.         The location of such
         vehicles should be agreed with the relevant safety
          authority in order to ensure that access to the




                                         91




£   'd   , 1796E E Z2TZ0       [   '90                n a j / 3it i a 0i 03dsni   saoma.as   aau   wo a d
                  ground by emergency vehicles and means of escape are
                  not compromised.


                  People with impaired vision


                  Signposting (see paragraphs                      ) especially fire
                  or other safety signs, should be sited so that as
                  far as         -ssible they can be easily seen and readily
                  distinguishable by those with impaired vision or
                  colour perception.              Advice is available from the
                  Royal National institute for the Blind or the
                  National Federation of the Blind of the UK.


                  People with impaired hearing


                  Although people with impaired hearing may experience
                  difficulty in hearing messages broadcast on a system
                  designed for those with normal hearing (see Chapter
                    ) a hearing impairment does not mean that in all
                  cases a person is insensitive to sound and that they
                  do not have a sufficiently clear perception of. all
                  convent tonal alarm signals.                Where this is not the
                  case it is reasonable to expect spectators who have
                  been alerted, to prepare for evacuation to warn those
                  with impairac! hearing.




                                                         92




- ■ '   d _   £   t^FiR   FJP.ZJF1      E ’ t? I ’ 9 0                n3d^31.dy 0 1 3 3 d 5 N I   S 3 3 I fty 3 S   3y Id
