                                       f±                        2 0 SEP 1989 101 Ok
    E.R.
                                                     cc.   Ms Craig
                                                           Ms Rex
                                                           Ms Nicholson
                                                           Mr Yates
                                                           Mr Chilcot
                                                           Mr Moriarty
                                                           Mr Turney
                                                           Mr Boys Smith
                                                           HMCIC
                                                           HMCIFS
                                                           Mr Mower
                                                           Mr Clayton
                                                           Mr Goddard
                                                           Mr Bolton, o/r
                                                           Mr Whalley
                                                           Mr Lidington
                                                           Mr Yeo




       Mr Mould


                    HILLSBOROUGH:   PROGRESS ON IMPLEMENTATION


               The Home Secretary saw your submissions of 15 September
           and 14 September on the proposed letter to John Carlisle and
           the reply to Mr Edey.        He agreed to the issue of the letter
           to Mr Edey, subject to the deletion of the fifth and eigth
           paragraphs of the draft.        He decided that to mention that
           consideration was being given to any necessary enforcement of
           the r e p o r t 's recommendations by means of a statutory
           instrument would beg the question of why, if we knew that the
           recommendations were not being implemented in some places, we
           were not using this power.        I have circulated my letter to
           Mr Edey separately.

           2.  In regard to the letter to Mr Carlisle, the Home Secretary
           needs to know before it is sent which, if any, local
           authorities       v --            have not implemented the
           asterisked recommendations, and why.      If there are a number of
           local authorities          . w h o have not implemented the
           recommendations he would like advice on why it is not possible
           to use the statutory power.      The draft letter to Mr Carlisle
           will need to be amended in the light of advice on this.      I
           should be grateful J.Nf advJ,^™aaad»»afresh draft could be with
           us by 29 Septembers ooo     C\

           3.  The Home Secretary discussed publication of the letter to
           Mr Carlisle with Mr Mower and Mr Lidington on 18 September.
           Mr Mower advised that it would not be sensible to publish the


                                                            /letter as this




©
E.R.
                               2.




   letter as this might simply stir up journalists to write
   stories on local authorities and clubs not implementing the
   recommendations. He advised that the reply should simply be
   used when necessary to explain what we were doing.  It was
   noted that Mr Carlisle would need to be told that the letter
   would no longer be published, but that he would be able to
   use it as he saw fit.




   Private Office                          MISS C J BANNISTER
   19 September 1989                       Private Secretary
