                                                                                          . . . . .    /       ' 0
                                                                                                                 H r*\
                                                     to)      -2 CCT 1989 Il3>l2, ^
                                                                            bl30'©<*
                                                                                                      65-10.JS
          / if,             s                 Ic
          i                . ft                                               cc:       Mr Bolton
                                                                                        Mr Whalley
      .y
              1/ *         „j i # - / ' A**
|5*   I           J*I> *    /

  %.K *. b

                                                      vkk                           i



                                                            1&/<rwv              ca ^
  Mr Clavton



                                                                                V ^ u 4>
                                                                                    X / )0
  HILLSBOROUGH: TAYLOR: RECOMMENDATION 4




  I attach a draft letter to Mr Anderton for my signature which I
  should like to fax to him in the course of this afternoon.                                               I
  should be grateful for any comments you may have on the draft by
  4.00pm today.                               of course, a telephone message will suffice.




                                                            J. L. GODDARD


                                                            J L GODDARD
                                                            F8 Division
D R A F T                                                     64-10.JS



                                                       3314




                                            2 October 1989
C J Anderton Esq CBE CStJ QPM CBIM
Chief Constable
Greater Manchester Police
Chester House
PO Box 22 (S West PDO)                         hcc:   Mr Boys Smith
Boyer Street                                          Mr Turney
MANCHESTER M16 ORE                                    Mr Clayton




HILLSBOROUGH: TAYLOR: RECOMMENDATION 4


We have spoken more than once about the difficulty experienced by
the police service in responding to Recommendation 4 in
Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report.    Having consulted our
lawyers, I am now able to let you have our advice on the response
which the police service will wish to give to this
Recommendation.


Our understanding is that this Recommendation is intended to
provide clarity and certainty to the club and the local police
force about who does what in operational terms at a match.       In
this way there would, for example, be no possibility that the
monitoring or counting of spectators was left undone because each
side thought that the other was doing it.    It is not our view
that in responding to Recommendation 4 it is necessary to resort
to legally binding written agreements.    On the contrary, we take
the view that the Chief Constable's discretion in fulfilling his
common law duties to keep the peace and maintain law and order
should not be inhibited or constrained by any contractual
obligation.   We think it is important that the service to be
provided to the club by the police force should not be in
response to a contractual obligation but should be a special
police service in the sense of Section 15 of the Police Act 1964.


We advise, therefore, that in establishing an understanding with
clubs of the scope and level of special police services to be
provided, forces should avoid any possibility of contractual
constraints on the Chief Constable's independence in operational
matters.   Chief Officers, therefore, should adhere to the
principle of a statement of intent in writing of the functions
that their officers would discharge on club land or premises
which preserves the freedom of the Chief Officer to revise these
arrangements as circumstances require.   Such revision might be
made where other operational demands arise which, in the Chief
Officer's judgement, prevent him from providing in full to the
club the expected special police services on a particular day.
Where such a revision is to be made the club should be given
advance notice of it in writing where practicable.   The terms of
such a statement of intent should not be included in a safety
certificate.


I am copying this letter to Peter Bolton, G2, and Bob Whalley,
Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry, here.




                                   J L GODDARD
                                   F8 Division
