                                    W* ifVv-5vv\^ -   fo iL^-r      G>
h s .3.2/hillsb4.peb                     X
From:   P E Bolton                        cc   Ms Dent
        G2 Division                            Ms Craig
        X3322                                  Mr Moriarty
                                               Mr Chilcot
        2 March 1990                           Mr Turney
                                               Mr Boys Smith
                                               Mr Mower
                                               Mr Goddard
                                               Mrs Reisz
                                               Mr Godfrey


Miss Nicholson



HILLSBOROUGH FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP

Ms  Dent asked    for advice on the attached letter from
Robert Hughes MP to Mr Brandon-Bravo covering a letter from
Trevor Hicks, the Chairman of the Hillsborough Family Support
Group.   The Home Secretary has had a similar letter from
Mr David Alton MP.

2.   My submission of 22 February to Ms Dent proposed a reply by
Mr Brandon-Bravo, but he does not wish to respond himself. I now
propose that Lord Ferrers should reply to both letters.

3.   The letter from Mr Hicks is concerned primarily with remarks
made by Mr Peter Wright the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire
quoted in the "Sheffield Star" (a copy of which is annexed to
Mr Alton's letter) about drunkenness among football fans on the
day of the Hillsborough tragedy.      Mr Wright's views in the
article are more measured than those attributed to members of the
South Yorkshire Police in an article in "Police" magazine which
appeared in November 1989. Mr Eric Heffer MP drew this to the
attention of the Home Secretary and the draft reply which I have
provided draws on the reply to Mr Heffer which was sent by
Lord Ferrers on 19 February.

4.   Mr Hicks takes particular exception to Mr Wright's statement
that he found it a little difficult to come to terms with
Lord Justice Taylor's finding that though there was drinking
among a percentage of fans at Hillsborough, it had no effect on
events.   The article says that the Chief Constable accepted
Lord Justice Taylor's findings, but believed that the inquest,
which would have evidence presented to it which was not presented
at the Inquiry, would "reveal a different picture" and "put a
different complexion on the end product".
5.   I have spoken with the Chief Constable who says he was
correctly quoted in the article.      He tells me that he was
reflecting the views and opinions of his officers who were
present at the match and considers that it was his duty to do so.
He emphasised that he does not disagree with the principal
conclusions of the Taylor report.

6.   I do not think that Lord Ferrers will wish to be drawn into
the argument and I have tried to steer a neutral course in the
draft reply which has been prepared in consultation with
Mrs Reisz and Mr Goddard in the Police Department.

7.   The other issues raised by Mr Hughes is the possibility of
a meeting for Mr Hicks with one of the Home Office Ministers,
preferably the Home Secretary.

8.    I cannot see that there would be any practical advantage for
the Home Office from such a meeting.          The Minister would
doubtless have to explain to Mr Hicks why we are unable to
prevent Mr Wright or members of the South Yorkshire Police
holding or expressing the views which have been attributed to
them.

9.   Nevertheless Mr Hicks is a responsible individual who lost
2 daughters in the tragedy.    The Hillsborough Family Support
Group has already had one meeting with a "cross party" group of
MPs and a second was arranged for 27 February.    Mr Patten was
invited but said he was unable to attend.     Mr Hicks is often
interviewed by the media and there may therefore be a strong
presentational case for granting him an interview - which should
perhaps be with Lord Ferrers.  (Lord Ferrers will recall that he
has agreed to meet, at their request, representatives of the
Football Supporters Association and the Federation of Football
Supporters Clubs.)

10. However as the draft letter suggests, the Home Office is
already committed to meeting the 3 specific objectives of the
support group which are in the Home Office area of responsibility
and if a meeting with Lord Ferrers is difficult to arrange and
Mr Hicks would be content with a meeting with an official,
I shall be very happy to see him myself.

11. If Lord Ferrers agrees, I think a hidden copy of his letter
should be sent to Mr Wright.




                                          P E BOLTON



Encs
