                          ^\\>2
                                  CD
     >
                          LC   I Xojo'-i-




1.       Mr McDonald
2.       PS/Mr Moynihan


cc:      Mr   Owen
         Mr   Lee
         Mr   Baden
         Mr   Newsom


REQUEST FOR MEETING WITH THE FOOTBALL AUTHORITIES



After a period of silence ("stunned" might be an appropriate
epithet), following publication of the Taylor report, the FA and
the League have made separate, apparently unco-ordinated requests
for Ministerial meetings. The FA have written to the Home
Secretary asking for a meeting on Taylor, with "our colleagues
from the Football League", (letter attached). At the same time,
the League has contacted us at official level to take up the
Secretary of State's offer of a further meeting, particularly to
talk about planning permission for new stadiums.

There is no case for involving both Secretaries of State in
meetings. We have agreed with Home Office officials that we
should recommend that the Home Secretary and Mr Moynihan should
see the two bodies. I understand that the Home Secretary has
provisionally agreed this approach. If Mr Moynihan also agrees,
he may wish to send the attached draft minute to the Secretary
of State.




N E I L KINGHAN
SARD


27 February 1990
DRAFT MINUTE FROM MR MOYNIHAN TO THE SECRETARY OF STATE


1.     You will recall that we met the football authorities on 14
November 1989 to discuss the national membership scheme and other
football issues.    It was agreed that we would meet them again
before long and you have subsequently said that you would see
them if they wanted a meeting.


2.     It has taken them some time to recover from Lord Justice
Taylor's   final report    but   there have now     been    two   separate
requests for Ministerial meetings. Bert Millichip, Chairman of
the Football Association,        has written to the Home          Secretary
asking for a meeting to discuss the next steps in taking forward
the    Taylor   recommendations    and   the    Football    League       have
approached us at official level to ask for a meeting with you.
The League say that they would particularly like to talk about
the planning implications of a move to all-seater stadia (ie new
sites on the edge of towns). Not for the first time, the FA and
the League seem not to have told each other that they were asking
for meetings, though each has asked to include the other in its
meeting.


3.     I understand that Home Office officials have advised the
Home Secretary to agree to see both bodies and to invite me to
attend the meeting, and that he is content. If you also agree,
I am    inclined   to go   along with    this   approach.   It would be
excessive for both you and the Home Secretary to see them; he has
yet to meet them for the first time; and I can deal with the
planning issues which they wish to raise. We could perhaps offer
the prospect of a further meeting with you at a later date, if
one is needed.


4.   If you are happy with this approach,             I will      make    the
necessary arrangements with the Home Office.
      £RVICES           I NSPECTORATE/ FEU                                         02.23.1990       U«13            HO.      1     P.   2

                                2 2 F t o VDOO 2 1 T t B 1990
                                THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION                                                            frw           M ***-
                                                             LIMITED                                           CC          aV ^v J
                                                              ('otiiiili'ii 1863
                                                                                                                      l/U/.TlA/K^f
                                             Patron: H h k M a j e s t y T h e Q u i ..i.:n
                                                                                                                       K I a /.
                                           President; H.R.H. Tilt- D u k e O F K fcN T
                                                 Chairman; F. A. Mil.M CI IIP                                          f W Ctsriffvty
      Chief Executive:                                                                               Phone: 01 -402 7151 /2fi2 4542
R.   II. G.     K   k i .l y h c i s
                                                                                                            Telex: 261110
                                                                                                       Facsimile: 01-402 0486
                                                                                                                     t W , tfU jU -e / .
                                       16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W23LW
     Our Ref:                FAM/RHGK/RB/90                Your lief:                         19 th February 1990                           2^|-




       The Rt lion David Waddington, MP
       Home Office
       50 Queen Anne's Gate
       London SW1H 9AT



       Dear Home Secretary,


                                           TAYLOR INQUIRY:                         FINAL REPORT

             Now that we have had some time to scrutinise the-Taylor
       Report fully, I thought I should write formally to set out The
       Football Association's response to its recommendations.

             At the outset, whilst we welcome the Report's   '
       recommendations, we must make it clear to you that we consider
       some of Lord Justice Taylor's strictures most unfounded.

             The Football Association has limited powers it can
       exercise.in relation to crowd control and safety which were
       set out in our submission to Sir Peter. The respective
       responsibilities of police, club, and local authority under
      •the supervision of your Department were fully set out in the
       Popplewell Reports, and have been accepted by Lord Justice
       Taylor.

             We support Sir Peter Taylor's suggested strategy against
       hooliganism: stronger detection measures, new criminal
       offences, greater use of attendance orders and the
       introduction of electronic tagging, together with the crowd
       control and facility improvements he recommends. We believe
       that if this strategy is to be effective it must be treated as
       an integral whole.  We are therefore anxious that the proposed
       criminal offences within football grounds are indeed created
       and enforced.

             We accept Lord Justice Taylor's view that "in.the end
       the buik of the finances for ground improvement must be raised
       by the clubs themselves".  We have always recognised this.




                                            ftsgisietaj Offict: J6          Gate. Lomii'ti W 23LW
                                             Incorporated in London     Registration Number 77797
;ER<J I C E S   INSPECTORATE/FEU                02.23.1999   11:14   HO.   1   P.




The Rt Hon David Waddington                          2                 16.2.90



But in view of the considerable capital sums which will be
involved in meeting the targets Taylor sets, we are pleased
that he did not rule out consideration of a reduction in pools
betting tax or the extension of capital allowances to ground
improvements. We would be grateful if the Government would
indeed give urgent consideration to these proposals. I am
writing to the Chancellor of the Exchequer about them.

       Increasingly over the past few years, we have been
 working in a partnership with the Government and police in
 tackling hooliganism.  The successful introduction of CCTV,
 ground improvements and closer crowd control are all the
 fruits of this co-operation.  Clearly there is much more to be
 done, and the Taylor Report gives us the opportunity to renew
 our commitment to fight hooliganism and improve crowd safety
 and conditions.   We are considering areas in which The
 Football Association can provide new ideas, resources and
 assistance to promote safety with the game. We are ready to
 work with the Government to implement Taylor's strategies.

       As many of the Report's recommendations bear on Home
 Office responsibilities, I would be very grateful if it would
 be possible for us to meet you with our collegues from The
 Football League to discuss the Report and its implications.
 My earnest hope is that we will be able to agree a common
 approach to promote, in Lord Justice Taylor's words, "better
 and safer conditions at sport.s grounds in the future".



                                   Yours sincerely

                                          v
                                       0 « ir

                                    F.A. Millichip
                                       Chairman
