'
j
            Date
   iur reference
  Our reference
                   4th December 1989

                   BWB/JC
                                       &                  8 DEC



Enquiries to M r   Beckett
       Extension   276/6078




 Mr. David Mould,
                                                  County Trading   County of Avon
                                                  Standards Officer Bryan Beckett, DMA
 Room -937 - F.E.P.D.                                              Kenham House
 G2 Division,                                                      Wilder Street,
                                                                   Bristol BS2 8PD
 The Home Office,                                                  "telephone Bristol (0272) 290777
 50, Queen Anne's Gate
 London,
 SW1H 9AT.




 Dear Mr. Mould

 SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS - PERIMETER FENCING.

 The Public Protection Committee in the County of Avon, who are the Licensing
 Authority under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, resolved at their meeting
 on the 4th October not to require the perimeter fence gates at Bath to be kept
 open. This view was reiterated at their meeting on the 30th November with a request
 that their views and the reason behind these views again be made known to you.

 The earlier decision was reinforced because at the Bristol Rovers v Swansea
 football match held at Twerton Park, Bath on the 25th November there was an
 attempt by the Swansea fans to invade the pitch; Swansea were losing 2 - 0
 at the time and the fans, presumably decided to take advantage of the absence of
 a gate in the perimeter fence in order to disrupt the match. Prompt action by
 the stewards and police frustrated their intentions, although several charges
 were made at the open gate.

 It is this Authority's view that the opening of perimeter gates is an invitation
 to those so minded to take advantage of the situation and gain access to the
 pitch.

 The incident was recorded byulocal television and Avon and Somerset Police and
 clearly demonstrated that the insistence of opening perimeter fence gates
 provides a safety risk, not only to the fans involved, but also to the stewards,
 policemen and police horses who have to move in to prevent such an invasion of
 the pitch.

 This Authority's policy of rigorously enforcing the requirements of the safety
 certificates that all gates be closed but attended at all times by a steward with
 a key would have prevented the Swansea fans from taking the action they did, as
 the open gate was seen as an invitation to cause trouble.




                                                                           .contd
It should be pointed out that at Twerton Park the only high perimeter fencing
encloses the 'visitors' terracing as it is felt that the purpose of perimeter
fencing should be to prevent opposing fans from getting at one another.
Enclosing that area occupied by one group of fans is sufficient to prevent
confrontation and largely mitigates the effect of football grounds looking like
prisons.

I hope the views of this Authority will be of use to you in further consideration
of the Hillsborough Report.



Yours sincerely,




B. W. BECKETT
COUNTY TRADING STANDARDS OFFICER.
