                              1 7 OCT 1989 lc>nS
  INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH
         STADIUM DISASTER


   'YVwaL
                 With the Compliments of
                the Secretary to the Inquiry


(jU^Jtr                               CW       n||0

 ^ . O u J L L




                           Z|j//IGJUWY           -




  50 Queen Anne’sGate
  London SW1H 9AT
  01-273 3602
                     JM

                                                                                " T ^
                                                                                         ©
                                     d e p a r t m e n t of the environment
                                     2 M A R SH A M S T R E E T L O N D O N SW 1P 3E B
                                                       01-1HXX3&8XX
                   tfCRETAKl^        Myref:              276 3000
                                                           M/PSO/3223 8/89
                                     Your ref:




                                                                T'fl OCT 1989




                  aboutWr° t L t0 Mr ^°Ynihan on 21 September
                  ,    ,     . . 9round  management operation
                  to the visitors sections of the Highfie™
                  Road ground.                       J-yiiJ-ieia

                  However, as the matter seems to be primarily
                  leJteJ          ? ffinCe’ 1 ai" P a- i n g               your
                  S      i ?           Department asking                   them
                  to reply to you direct.
                 Yours sincerely




                ALASTAIR MCINTYRE
                Private Secretary




               Councillor H Chase

This is 1 0 0 % recycled paper




                                                        60
                                                        Cl

                                                         o
                                                  -V     o
                                                         o
                                                               uo
                                 AcW- pi' (wr ' u ^ o A ^
                                     r**     —11 " i '')      ■ (* .....
                                                           Hillsborough Working Party,
                                                           Chief Executives Office,
                                                  ■— i     Room 5,
LIVERPOOL                                         i        Municipal Buildings,
                                                           Dale Street,
                                                           LIVERPOOL L69 2DH
                                                           Telephone: 051- 225 2334/3
                                                           Fax: 236 2047
                                                           DX 14206 LIVERPOOL

                                                           Your ref

                                                           Our ref    HWP/HC/CTH
Colin;Moynihan, Esq.,
Minister for Sport,                                        Date       21st September, 1989
Department of the Environment,
2 Marsham Street,
LONDON.
SW1P 3EB
                                               mmmmm
                                             M 27SEPI989


   Dear M r . Moynihan,

   On the opening day of the new football league season on Saturday,
   19th August, 1989 Everton F.C. played Coventry City F.C. at Highfield
   Road, Coventry.

   Over 100 telephone calls were received by the Hillsborough Working
   Party office from Everton supporters raising serious allegations
   about the crowd management operation to the visitors sections of the
   Highfield Road ground.

   The Working Party began an immediate investigation into the complaints
   and 2 0 statements were taken by officers of the Working Party from
   Everton supporters.

  A dossier of these statements have been handed to West Midlands Police
  and the Football League. Copies are enclosed together with other
  relevant documentation.

   The main complaints raised by the Everton supporters are:-

   -    inadequate turnstile facilities to the visitors1 section of the
        Sky-Blue Stand where, in the absence of a queueing regime, arrival
        at the back exceeded the rate of flow causing severe localised
        crushing and unrelieved pressure;

   -    severe crushing and unrelieved pressure occurred at the egress
        gate adjoining the stand and home terrace area which visiting
        stand occupants had to exit after the game;

   -    overpacking in the visitors1 pen on the East Terrace was not
        relieved until half-time, when police officers allocated an
        adjoining pen to a number of Everton fans;




When calling or telephoning please ask for
                                                            Cont'd.
V
                                     -   2-



    -   inadequate and misleading police communications with the
        Everton supporters;

    -   poor and hazardous existing facilities from the Sky-Blue Stand
        and from the East Terrace visitors' section.

    The Working Party are concerned that all the good intentions raised
    m the recommendations contained in Lord Justice Taylor's Interim
    Report and the non-statutory recommendations contained in the Guide
    to Safety at Sports Grounds are already being ignored.

    We believe it is essential that these recommendations are made
    statutory at the earliest opportunity. We have written to the
    Football League asking that they conduct a full inquiry into what
    happended at Highfield Road.

    Yours sincerely,




    Chair,
    Hillsborough Working Party.
                                          Hillsborough Working Party,
                                          Chief Executives Office,
                                          Room 5,

LIVERPOOL                                 Municipal Buildings ,
                                          Dale S treet,*'
                                          LIVERPOOL- L69 2DH
                                                             "'

                                          Telephone: 0 5 1 - 225
                                          Fax: 236 2047
                                          DX 14206 LIVERPOOL

                                          Y our ref

                                          O ur ref

                                          Date        23rd August, 1989
Mr . J D . Dent,
Secretary,
The Football League,
Lytham St. Annes,
LANCASHIRE.
FY8 1JG




Dear M r . Dent,

With reference to the crowd management problems involving supporters      %
of Everton Football Club at Coventry City F.C. on Saturday,               1
19th August last.                                           /^ .

Following a telephone conversation between my research officer and
Chris Whalley at your office on Monday, 21st August.  I write to
confirm the nature and seriousness of the incidents discussed.

A deluge of complaints continue to pour into this office regarding
serious allegations about the conduct of the crowd management
operation at the visitors sections of Highfield Road. The
allegations basically identify four problems:-

    severe crushing and unrelieved pressure of the 4 turnstiles
    allocated to visitors in the Sky Blue Stand. Arrivals at
    the back exceeded the rate of flow through the turnstiles and
    noj?queuing regime was imposed throughout;

    severe crushing and unrelieved pressure occurred at the egress
    gate, adjoining the stand the terracing areas, which stand
    occupants had to exit after the game;

-   overpacking occurred on the visitors pen behind the goal causing
    police officers at half-time, to open up the pen allocated to
    Coventry supporters to relieve the pressure;

-   police officers misinformed fans about a delayed kick-off and
    many fans were blamed   for the absence of a queuing system.
Currently we are formulating a dossier based on fans statements. The
consistency and.clarity of the allegations thus far clearly suggest
that an investigation by  the Football League into these incidents is
clearly warranted. •                                   •.
                                                                          I
                                                                          $
                                                 IT NUCLEAR FREE
                                                      LOCAL AUTHORITY
                                                                          I
                                                                     4




                               -   2-


A copy of the dossier will be forwarded to your office, Lord Chief
Justice Taylor and the Football Association on completion.
Yours sincerely,




 ft

Councillor H. Chase,
Chair,
Hillsborough Working Party.
                                               Hillsborough Working Party,
                                               Chief Executives Office,
                                               Room 5,

    LIVERPOOL                                  Municipal Buildings ,
                                               Dale Street,
                                               LIVERPOOL L69 2DH
    Ci%y,Q4>(*4+C\L                            Telephone: 0 5 1 - 225 2 3 3 4 /3
                                               Fax: 236 2047
                                               DX 14206 LIVERPOOL

                                               Your ref

                                               Our ref

      Mr. Geoffrey Dear,                       Date       23rd August, 1989
      Chief Constable,
      West Midlands Police H.Q.,
      Colmore Circus Queensway,
      BIRMINGHAM.
      B4 6NQ
w




      Dear Sir,
      With reference to the crowd management problems involving Everton
      supporters at Coventry City's Football Ground on Saturday,
      19th August last.

      Following a torrent of protests from Everton fans, to this office, we
      wish to solicit a response from you regarding the police operation
      at the visitors sections of Highfield Road on the day in question.
      The basic corroborated allegations are as follows:-

         That the officers on duty to the visitors turnstiles area of
         the Sky Blue Stand did not operate a queueing regime. No
         attempt was made to filter and channel people in this area.
         Given only four turnstiles were available at this point to not
         operate a crowd flow system would compromise recommendation 2 8
         of Lord Chief Justice Taylor's Interim Report.

         That repeated requests by fans for a delayed kick-off were met
         with firm refusals. Given the consistency of fans statements
         to the failure of crowd supervision at the Sky Blue Stand it
         would appear this decision was somewhat misplaced as many
         fans did not access the turnstiles until after 3.15 p.m.

         Police communications were confusing and on occasion failed.
         Officers are reported to have held heated arguments amongst
         themselves on the terracing behind the goal concerning the
         overfilling of the Everton section. Instances of police radio
         failures have also been identified.  In the wake of Lord
         Justice Taylor's comments on police communications this matter
         is of some concern.

         Reasoned complaints to police officers from individual fans,
         were often met by abusive language and misleading claims.
                                2




As officers of the West Midlands force acted as agents for Lord
Chief Justice Taylor it concerns this authority that recommendations
3,9,19,27,28 and 29 of his Interim Report appear to have been
compromised on the basis of these allegations.

Quite clearly Coventry City Football Club and the local authority
have: much to answer for and a dossier of fans statements will
be forwarded to Lord Chief Justice Taylor, the Football Association,
Football League, Football Supporters' Association and Coventry
City Council. With regard to the police operation at the visitors
sections of Highfield Road I suggest the enclosed allegations
require investigation.

Yours faithfully,




Councillor H. Chase,
Chair,
Hillsborough Working Party.
                                                       Hillsborough Working Party
                                                       Chief Executives Office,
                                                       Room 5,

LIVERPOOL                                              Municipal Buildings ,
                                                       Dale Street,
                                                       LIVERPOOL L69 2DH
Gvty                                                   Telephone: 0 5 1 - 225 2 3 3 4 /3
                                                       Fax: 236 2047
                                                       DX 14206 LIVERPOOL

                                                       Y our ref

                                                       Our ref     HWP/HC

                                                       Date 23rd August,      1989.

'Mr. Ean Roxburgh
 Chief Executive,
 Coventry City Council,
 Earl Street,
 COVENTRY
 CV1 5RR.


Dear M r . Roxburgh,

With reference to the crowd management problems involving Everton supporters at
Coventry City's ground on Saturday April 19th last.

Following a torrent of protests from Everton fans to this office I wish to
solicit a response from you regarding the existing General Safety Certificate
for the Highfield Road stadium.

The allegations, listed below, raise serious questions about the adequacy of
the Safety Certificate in the wake of Lord Chief Justice Taylor's Interim
Report particularly in relation to recommendations: 3; 9; 13; 18; 19; 27; and
28. .As the licensing authority we are concerned that Coventry City Council, as
a responsible authority, investigate these matters forthwith.

The basic allegations are as follows:-

     severe crushing and unrelieved pressure at the 4 turnstiles allocated to
     visitors in the Sky Blue Stand. Arrivals at the back exceeded the rate
     of turnstile flow and no queueing regime was imposed throughout:

-    severe crushing and unrelieved pressure occurred at the egress gate,
     adjoining the stand and terracing areas, which visiting stand occupants
     had to exit after the game:

-    overpacking in the visitors' pen behind the goal was not relieved until
     '_ialf'-'time when police officers allocated an adjoining pen to a number of
     Everton fans. This pen already contained Coventry City supporters:

     Police officers misled and misinformed fans about a delayed kick-off.
     Some officers blamed the overcrowding to the turnstiles on the fans
     themselves.
Currently we are formulating a dossier based on statements taken by my staff.
The consistency and clarity of the allegations suggests that an investigation
is warrented by yourselves, the football authorities and the Football
Association.

I am sure you will treat this matter with the utmost urgency.   I await your
reply;in anticipation.

Yours sincerely,




Cllr. Harry Chase,
Chair Hillsborough Working Party.
                                             Hillsborough Working Party,
                                             Chief Executives Office,
                                             Room 5,

LIVERPOOL                                    Municipal Buildings ,
                                             Dale Street,
                                             LIVERPOOL L69 2DH
                                             Telephone: 0 5 1 - 225 2334/3
                                             Fax: 236 2047
                                             DX 14206 LIVERPOOL

                                             Y our ref

                                             O ur ref

Mr. Glen Kirton,                             Date        23rd August, 1989
Football Association,
16 Lancaster Gate,
LONDON.
W2 3LW




Dear Mr. Kirton,

With reference to the crowd management problems involving
supporters of Everton Football Club at Coventry City F.C. on
Saturday, 19th August last.

Following a telephone conversation between my research officer and
yourself on Monday, 21st August I write to confirm the nature and
seriousness of the incidents discussed.

A deluge of complaints continue to pour into this office regarding
serious allegations about the conduct of the crowd management
operation at the visitors sections of Highfield Road.  The allegations
basically identify four problems

      severe crushing and unrelieved pressure at the 4 turnstiles
      allocated to visitors in the Sky Blue Stand. Arrivals at
      the back exceeded the rate of flow through the turnstiles and
      no queuing regime was imposed throughout;

 -    severe crushing and unrelieved pressure occurred at the egress
      gate, adjoining the stand and terracing areas, which stand
      occupants had to exit after the game;

      overpacking occurred on the visitors pen behind the goal causing
      police officers at half-time, to open up the pen allocated to
      Coventry supporters to relieve the pressure;

      police officers misinformed fans about a delayed kick-off and
      many fans were balmed for the absence of a queuing system.

 A copy of the dossier will be forwarded to your office, Lord Chief
 Justice Taylor and the Football Association on completion.
 Yours sincerely,-




 Councillor H. Chase,
 Chair,
 Hillsborough Working Party.
When calling or telephoning please ask for
                                                                        S? b a \>
                                                                         ^wded ^

                                      THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED
     Lytham St. Annes, Lancashire. FY8 1JG. T e le p h o n e 0253 729421. Telex 67675. Fax 0253 724786                                       Secretary J. D. D e n t



     2^6211                                                                                                 24th August, 1989


     Councillor H. Chase,
     Chair,
     Hillsborough Working Party,
     Chief Executive Office,
     Room 5,
     Municipal Buildings,
     Dale Street,
     Liverpool,
     L69 2DH.


     Dear Councillor,

           I acknowledge receipt of your letter of 23rd August, 1989, concerning the
     c-omplaints received from Everton F.C. supporters regarding the crowd control
     arrangements at the Coventry City F.C. ground on Saturday, 19th August, 1989.

          This matter is receiving urgent attention, contact has already been made
     with the Secretary of Coventry City F.C. and steps are being taken by the club
     to prevent any repeat of the incidents complained of.

          I       am calling for a full report from the Secretary of Coventry City F.C.
     and I will communicate with you again in due course.

                                                                   Yours sincerely,
")




                                                                        J.D. Dent,
                                                                       SECRETARY.




                      All c o rre sp on d en c e to b e a d d re s s e d to The Secretary, Registered Office as a b o v e. Registered in England 80612
         W est M id lan d s P o lice
                                                                                              P O L i C E HE A C O U A R T E . R S
                                                                                              P O BOX 52       L L O Y D HOUSE
                                                                                              COLMORE CiRCUS QUEENSWAY
                                                                                              BIR M INGH AM          B4 6 N Q
                                                                                              TELEPHONE            021 2 36 50 0 0
                                                                                              TELEX       3 3 7 321


                                                                                              A L L C O M M U N I C A T I O N S S H O U L D BE
                                                                                              A D D R E S S E D T O " THE C H IE F C O N S T A B L E '



                      ^                  ,          tt    /-,i                                YOUR REFERENCE
                     Councillor H Chase
                     Hillsborough Working Party
                     Chief Executives Office                                                  oun reference
                     Room 5                                                                     NJD/AMS
                     Municipal Buildings                                                      DATE
                     Dale Street                                                        J       24 August 1989
                     Liverpool
                     L69 2DH


                      Dear Councillor Chase

                      The Chief Constable has. asked me to write, and thank
                      you for your telex message of 23 August 1989-

                      The matter that you have raised will be dealt with
                      by the Divisional Commander of Coventry.  I have
                      therefore forwarded your correspondence to Chief •
                      Superintendent Swingewood, for his attention.

                       Yours sincerely



   )             p. ft* •S*C2*jpauiatew(c'i.

                          Staff Officer
                          to Chief Constable




                                                                             Chief Inspector Dicker^gp^^                        2012
T H E O F F IC E R D E A L I N G W IT H THE C O R R E S P O N D E N C E iS
Y'our Reference
Our Reference        DEDP/P(BC)5/DJG/CS/SSGA
                                                                      City of                   ■/ i
please ask for
Direct Dialling No
Date
                     H Noble, D Giles
                     831200
                     25 August 1989
                                                                            Coventry
                                                                       DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC
                                                                       DEVELOPMENT A N D PLANNING
                     Councillor Harry Chase (Chairman)                 Harry Noble DipTP. ARtBA. MRTPI.
                     Hillsborough Working Party                        Director of Economic Development
                                                                       and Planning,
                     Liverpool City Council                            Tower Block,
                     Chief Executive's Office                          Much Park Street,
                     Room 5                                            Coventry CV1 2PY
                     Municipal Building                                Telephone : 0203 83 33 33
                                                                       Telex     : 265451 (MONREF G)
                     Dale Street                                                   Attention LMX810
       ( ,           Liverpool L69 2DH                                 Telecom Gold Mailbox: 76 :LMX810
                                                                       Fax       : 0203 831257


                     Dear Councillor Chase

                     SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975
   G                 COVENTRY CITY V EVERTON
                     19 AUGUST 1989

                     Your letter dated 23 August 1989, received by facsimile transmission
                     addressed to Mr Iain Roxburgh, my Chief Executive, has been passed to me
                     for reply as it is this Department in conjunction with the City Secretary
                     that has responsibility for overseeing safety at sports grounds.

                     Your Working Party would seem to be making a number of serious allegations
                     concerning safety standards at Coventry City Football Club’s Highfield Road
                     Stadium, however, as a preamble to my reply you should be aware of the
                     following facts.

                     Immediately on publication of the Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor’s interim
                     report into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster a meeting was called by the
                     City Council of all those parties interested in safety at sports grounds,
                     namely:-

                     1   The Local Authority
   C.-
                     2   Coventry City Football Club
                     3   West Midlands Police
                     4   West Midlands Fire Service

                     This group which has always met on a regular basis was immediately
                     reconstituted into a Formal Advisory Group and it was agreed that future
                     meetings would also include representatives from the West Midlands
                     Ambulance Service and a Supporters Group.

                                                                                      Continued




                                                                       Head of Planning:
                                                                       Bernard Dowell
                                                                       Head of Economic Development:
                                                                       Christopher Hammer
                                                                       Head of Administration:
                                                                       Roy Davies
The immediate responsibility of this group was to make sure that the 28
points of the Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor’s interim report were implemented
as far as was practically possible before the commencement of the 1989/90
football season.  I am satisfied that this was achieved.

As you are no doubt aware, Coventry City Football Club had considerable
foresight in attempting to create an all seater stadium for viewing
football many years ago, but this was frustrated by fans who wished to
stand. Be that as it may the total spectator capacity of the stadium was
significantly reduced by the experiment and currently is a mere 26,218.

A new General Safety Certificate was issued to the Club on 24 August 1988
and this has been amended once since that date. Coventry City Football
Club have recently made application for a further amendment of their
General Safety Certificate concerning reduction in ground capacity in the
light of recommendations. Furthermore, the City Council will be carrying
out a review of the Safety Certificate in its entirety, also as
recommended.

There have never previously been allegations of crowd problems, either
inside or outside the ground, which were beyond the control of Police or
stewards and which could have prejudiced safety.

The problems which were encountered on Saturday 19 August were in the
opinion of the Advisory Group - many of whom were present - of a minor
nature and certainly not beyond the capabilities of the Police to control.

Taking your allegations point by point

1    The Coventry City Football Club have acknowledged that there was a
     problem concerning the rate of admission of   visiting spectators to the
     seated areas of "The Sky Blue Stand".  This   has been identified by the
     Advisory Group as being due to spectators possessing tickets and those
     wishing to pay by cash attempting to pass through the same turnstiles.
     The problem has been addressed, a solution put forward and adopted by
     the Advisory Group. It must be said that the situation was
     exacerbated by the late arrival of Everton supporters.

     At no time was there "severe crushing and unrelieved   pressure" and the
     Police did impose a queueing regime.

2    It has been the policy, as it is at many football grounds, for the
     Police to keep "away" supporters inside the stadium until such time as
     the home supporters have dispersed.

     Although it is acknowledged that there was crowding, there was nothing
     exceptional in the size and density of the crowd which would have
     warranted any Police or steward intervention.

     I believe it is the intention of the Match Commander (Police)
     to elaborate on the point in his reply to your letter to
     Mr Geoffrey Dear.
                                                                         13
                                     3

3   I must entirely refute this suggestion.   On analysis of the figures,
     at no time was a density of more than 44 person per 10 m 2 of terrace
     prevailing on the visitors terrace.  The, pen did not contain any
     Coventry City supporters.

4   The Match Commander (Police) in charge of policing matters on
     19 August entirely refutes the claim that his officers misled and
     misinformed fans about a delayed kick-off.  There was never any
     suggestion of delaying the kick-off.  Police officers are there to
     assist the fans, not to attribute blame.

I would be pleased to inspect your dossier of complaints when it is
complete, but I must say that on the unchallengeable information available
to me I feel that the matter does not warrant any further investigation.

Yours sincerely




Director of Economic Development and Planning
        FOR T H E     PEPSOSAL   ATTENTION    OF;


        Mil   HARRY    CHASE
        CHAIft   HILl.SBOflCUCH    WORKIN '   PARTY




■4<v"
o
vVest M id la n d s P o lic e
                                                                                                            ’VT D I V I S I O N H E A D Q U A R T E R S
                                                                                                            LITTLE PARK STR EET
                                                                                                            COVENTRY
                                                                                                            C V 1 2JX

                                                                                                            TELEPHONE:          0203 555333




 Cllr Harry Chase                                                                                           vQ'wq REFERENCE
 Hillsborough Working Party
 Chief Executives Office                                                                                    0v_p R£F=0£\CE                           KGJB/AJD
 Municipal Buildings
 Dale Street                                                                                                oaTE                              24 August 1989
 LIVERPOOL   L69 2DH




 Dear Sir

 I am directed by the Chief Constable to reply to your letter dated the 23
 August 1989 about the difficulties experienced on 19 August 1989 by some
 Everton supporters, and other related matters.

  I am aware of the content of the letter sent by you to the Chief Executive
  of Coventry City Council which arrived in time for its content to be
  discussed by our Advisory Group. The Director of Economic Development and
  Planning will reply to you on behalf of the Advisory Group, but as
  Match Commander on the day I will comment on the points in both letters
  which relate solely to the policing of the event.

  Since the Taylor Enquiry, recommendations 1, 2 and 3 have been addressed by
  the Advisory Group, and as a result the capacity of the Highfield Road
  Ground has been re-adjusted to 26218.  Of that number, 5849 is allocated to
  visiting supporters;  2789 for those seated and 3060 for those standing.
  On the date in question the attendance was 17981 which included 5540
  visitors, 2578 of whom were seated and 2962 standing.

   Closed season improvements carried out in the visitors seated area were
   designed to separate the covered from the uncovered area. Those
   improvements allowed the club to re-introduce reserved seating for the
   convenience of seated supporters and to make marshalling and stewarding
   more effective.

   For the match itself, our intelligence indicated that between 4-5000
   Everton supporters would attend the match and that the overall attendance
   would be in the region of 19,000.  It became apparent quite early on in the
   week that the seated and standing overspill areas for visiting supporters
   would be required.  That information was relayed to the club and
   re-inforced on Friday morning as a result of information received from^
   Liverpool. The policing operation was adjusted to accommodate a capacity
   crowd in the visitors areas. The tactics used by the Police have been well
   practiced in the recent past and reviewed in the light of the events at
   Hillsborough and the recommendations made by Taylor.




 T H E O F F I C E R D E A L I N G W I T H T H E C O R R E S P O N D E N C E IS   . ..   ^   .   ..   . .                          E X T E N S I O N ......
                                                                                                                                 .
We have experienced larger visiting support and never before had
allegations of crowd problems, either inside or outside the ground which
were beyond our control and which could have prejudiced safety.

At the pre-match briefing the potential for a capacity visiting contingent
and our response to it was dealt with in detail, and sufficient reserves
identified, again in line with the recommendations made by Taylor.

The club informed us that almost 2000 tickets had been sold before the
match and that a further 600 were to be made available for sale on the day;
again a normal practice.

The four turnstiles in question are described by the club as being slow.
Their potential rate of flow indicates an ability to admit one person every
4 seconds, that rate correlates very well with the capacity for that
viewing area (recommendation 19)-

Two of the four turnstiles into the Sky Blue Stand were initially allocated
to ticket holders and two for those wishing to pay.  Our deployment
comprised 8 officers and a Supervisor and 2 mounted officers. At
2.15pm we were aware of a build-up of supporters at those four turnstiles.
This was seen on the ground cameras and reported by the Officer Second in
Command of Operations, who was at the scene.  It was apparent that the
queuing was to the two pay gates but at that time, the queue was orderly
and good humoured. There was no queuing at the ticket turnstiles.   At that
time there was not need to increase Police presence at that location.

The situation was monitored and at 2.25pm there was evidence of an increase
in the size of the queue and an additional 10 officers and 2 mounted
officers were deployed to that area.  It was congested in the immediate
vicinity of the turnstiles but along its length, supporters were queuing in
twos and threes. At that time, it is true to say that more people were
arriving than were passing through the turnstiles.  Those joining the queue
again did so in twos and threes.  There was a separation of ticket and cash
queues and it is reported by the Sector Commander that those wishing to pay
cash formed orderly queues, whereas those with tickets were not so orderly.
There was an attempt made to form the ticket holders in to some sort of
order using horses and foot patrols, but because of complaints, the tactics
used by mounted officers were eased.  I was able to view the events on the
video and there was no request from the Sector Commander to deploy other
available officers to the scene.  I was satisfied with the tactics being
used and the number of officers deployed to what was a relatively small
crowd. By 2.40pm the cash sale gates were re-designated "ticket only" to
ease the congestion outside the tickets turnstiles.

There is no funnelling at those turnstiles and therefore, the verbal
advice and containment tactics from the mounted and the 18 officers was
ample to control the 400-500 supporters who were outside the ground.  I
think you will agree that the number of officers at that location was
appropriate to deal with the numbers waiting, but we could do nothing about
the rate of flow through the turnstiles. Our tactics and availability of
resources was fully in line with the letter and spirit of recommendation 28.
                                          -   3   -




       I am aware that by 3.12pm there were no queues at any of the four
       turnstiles mentioned.  There were the inevitable late arrivals who
       experienced no difficulty in gaining access to the seated area.   You will
       see from the details given in the third paragraph of my letter that the
       number of visiting supporters was under the reviewed capacity. The "Green
       Guide" density recommends 54 persons per 10 square metres.  A 15% reduction
       in that figure results in a recommended density of 46. On Saturday the
       actual density averaged out at 44 persons per 10sq.m.  I have had the
       opportunity to view the video of the crowd which shows there to be ample
       room in the visiting standing area.  The Director of Economic
       Development and Planning will respond to you in more detail about
       densities and video footage which completely refutes the allegations
     - contained in your letter to the Chief Executive.
\ 1
      At 3.00pm it was estimated that there were 400 spectators waiting at the
      four turnstiles, and at that time I still had 18 patrol and 4 mounted
      officers in attendance.   The presence of that crowd did not constitute
      either a public order or a public safety risk.   I was able to police the
      crowd inside and outside the ground, and the mere fact that there were
£*    people who could not get in in time to view the kick-off is not sufficient
      justification to warrant a delay in the kick-off.   That option was
      considered by me prior to the players taking to the pitch. That fact was
      relayed to those still waiting outside the ground. They were
      understandably unhappy and frustrated about their delayed entry, but in the
      circumstances were quite orderly.   It is interesting to note that one
      complaint related to a persistent refusal to delay the kick-off, yet in the
      letter to the Chief Executive one of the complaints was that we misled fans
      about a delayed kick-off!   There was little the Police could do to
      relieve that frustration as we had no control of the speed of entry of
      those fans into the ground.   I saw no justification to order the kick-off
       to be delayed and on reflection I still consider that to be the right
      decision.

       There is no doubt that a number of people were frustrated at not being able
       to get into the ground in time, even though most had arrived early enough
       to do so.  I would say that the 400 outside the ground probably arrived
       near to the kick-off time. Nevertheless, the fact that quite a few of
       them were frustrated can have implications for public order with
&      consequential safety ramifications.  The mood of a few visiting supporters,
       and only a few, made marshalling and stewarding thereafter more difficult
       than it should have been, but I can fully understand their feelings.   On
       Monday morning I expressed my views to the club on the delay caused by the
       turnstile configuration and other related matters.  That was discussed at
       the Advisory Meeting on 23 August. The outcome of that meeting will be
       outlined in the letter from the Council.

       In relation to your third point, I recollect that the communications on the
       day were good and that there were no systems failure.  The volume of radio
       traffic was reasonable and did not pose any operational problems to the
       experienced operator, nor did the volume of information being fed into the
       Command Post.  I am not aware of any heated arguments or disagreements
       between Police Officers in the overflow section behind the Everton goal, or
       in any other area. It is true that officers spoke strongly to one or two
       fans. I have viewed the video of that section of the crowd and it
       appeared well behaved, requiring little intervention by the Police.
                                   -   A   -




Nothing occurred which would have led to a 'discussion' on policing tactics
or action.  I certainly saw no arguments between officers. My enquiries
since receiving your letter confirms that fact.
 I
Referring now to the last allegation about the attitude of my officers.
Th|ey were briefed to act in a courteous, firm and positive manner and to
communicate a philosophy of professionalism in dealing with both home and
visiting supporters.

We tried to deal with a frustrated section of the crowd with firmness and
understanding but it was perhaps inevitable, where the tempers of some of the
fans were becoming frayed, that there was a breakdown in effective
communication.   At the end of the day, allegations of curtness from both
sides were inevitable and understandable.

If I may touch briefly on the letter you sent to Coventry Council, there is
no evidence whatsoever from the video to support the allegation that there
was severe crushing or over-packing of the visitors pen which we refer to
as the overspill area.  I can make the video of this available to you,
which will show quite clearly that conditions within the crowd generally were
comfortable and in the pen referred to specifically by you, you will see that
conditions were very comfortable indeed.

I listened with interest to some of the comments made on Radio Liverpool
and you may have heard that I responded to them all. Some of the comments
about the absence of police , the time taken to get into the ground and
that some fans were still queuing at 3.40pm were wholly inaccurate and
unhelpful.

Like many other grounds, including Goodison Park, the visiting supporters
are kept in until the streets are relatively clear of home supporters. You
will fully understand the reasons why we continue to employ that tactic.
There were 6 announcements made to the visiting fans that this would be
done and as far as I am aware, there was no severe overcrowding on the
approach to the exit gate. Bearing in mind we were under the reviewed
capacity for that area, there was nothing exceptional in the size or
density of the crowd which would have warranted police or steward
intervention. Our Police box is situated just 10 metres from that exit
gate. It is elevated some 5m above the crowd and the windows at the front
face out on to the main exit gate and have excellent views of the
crocodile which forms behind that gate. Police Officers manned those gates
and assisted with the stewarding of the exiting fans and I, as Match
Commander, had an un-restricted view of the exodus of fans, saw nothing
exceptional to justify the allegation that there was severe crushing at
that location.

I hope the above comments have eased your fears over the conditions
reported to you. I can assure you that everything possible was done on
the day to allow the match to take place in a safe environment. Having had
the opportunity to again review the events of the day I am satisfied that
the spirit and letter of the Taylor report were followed and that there
were no safety problems at the ground.

Yours faithfully




 P J SW    .WOOD
 Chief    ferintendent
                       THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                                    LIMITED
                                                    Founded 1863
                                     Patron: H e r M a j e s t y T h e Q u e e n
                                   President: H.R.H. T h e D u k e o f K e n t
                                         Chairman: F. A. M i l l i c h i p
                                                                                          Phone: 01-402 7151/262 4542
    Chief Executive:
                                                                                                 Telex: 261110
R. H. G. K e l l y   f c is
                                                                                            Facsimile: 01-402 0486



                              16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW
  Our Ref:   QK/JC/2094                          Your Ref:



  Councillor H. Chase                                                                     2 9th August,          198 9
  Hillsborough Working Party,
  Chief Executive Office,
  Room 5,
  Municipal Buildings,
  Dale Street,
  Liverpool,      L69 2DH.




   Dear Councillor Chase,


              Thank you for your letter of 23rd August.


         I have noted the contents and have asked our Club for its
   comments.


              I shall come back to your shortly.




                                                                                  Yours sincerely




                                                                                  Glen Kirton
                                                                                  Head of External Affairs




                                    Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Gate, London W2 3LW
                                    Incorporated in London Registration Number 77797
Of   -£v€ £ j   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ••*' VC'V'T; ,,'V"
                                                                                                                                                                           ■   — ■!— . HTM»I-------




                        \   *'   ^ ' ■ ' ' ' ‘ ' ‘' ^ ^ T ' T ' T ' * v»* ■   =   ■   *   ;   ;   •   -   *   . . : - ' , ^ . - . u , . ; ; . 1. v   ^ ; ; ^ ^ , ( iiiii

                            ■ •' • J oh n :jW cO h ie‘?^-?-:ythrough,X I- w ent to a police-"                 isitin g ;/a r is’-yw h o~turriv
                        A M nV w rT 5" ff -;u i'i '■'■ - P1311 and said > “-Haven’t you ' vithout tickeVs*                                                     i
                        A NO TH ER _| .football .trag- : learnt ^anything from H ills-
                                                                                                         ... ?■ i n ^ H j s j 1 ^ e r l m ' | ^ H s l j b r % •
                        e y y a s ”:^onlyY7'narrovvly^ b orough?” but all he W t 6 ■ ‘ pugh .r e p o r t ,L 'o r id y ju s tic e
                        averted on th efirst day of the ; m e .was, “Y o u ' bloody w ell
                                                                                                         - T a y l o r ^ . c r i t i c i s e d - j^outh'i-'
                        n e w ^ a s Q ^ i n ^ s t i g a t i o i Y ^ g o t in, d id n ’t you? G o and sit
                                                                                                            Y o r k s h i r e ." .p o n c ej 'rfor'y’' n o t :I
                        by The .-. O bserver ; has; ;re- ,' d o w n ” . - • I was- ab solutely
                        vealed..                                                               j   <; A '. p o stp o n in g '.J ;'^ th e ^ /k ic K p o ffi
                                                                                                                                                                           w h en i i tj ,-jb e e a iw e -Jag p aren't y
                        a^ H ^ ° ^ ?:S       C^ ' ^ ^ - ‘-T ^ ' % 3rWng party sa'ys it ; ' t h e r e w e r e . s 'e n o u s 'p V o b le m s ^
                        S t t^ f -%l0.t> a ,,. . ^ 8 u f--Vwants-the Football League to a t t h e L e p p i n g s L a n e e n d . S-'y
                                                                                did not -i.          P rev.ious -sea s o n s',-\p p ;:i
                                                                                                          . lic e d e la y e d m a t c h e s y d n l y if-:
                        g ? * * $ * « « » . * ¥ * S g & 5 'lS 3 & 8 ? ,S &                                   v i s i t o r s w e r e h e l d tipih''traf-!:'-: .
                        jn e n t,                                                                        ■ -fie or if t h e r e w a s 1 a. se'rious-'d
                        inns alleging 'overcrowding «*                               •        .     • • in c id e n t . B u t ; 1' a l r e a d y . : t h i s ’
                        cm*in<r
                        c i n g a n d .,^          i- • g ’       0t ensure proper seating  . . * . ar­ s e a s o n t h e y h a v e - p o s t p o n e d J
                                                                                                           . a t l e a s t ^.-11 -.f i r s t . d i v i s i o n '
                         1 he demand sh o w s the c o n - .. - -;,T                    -     ... :
                      ■ tinued precanous state of the T               -w ?? at H illsborough and •. m atch ers;-m p stly. to-'allow l a t e '
                        domestic game it---- '~~-i '•"•.-' : ■ 't“ ere seem ed to .be too many.'. arrivals|tim 'e t o ' g e t ’in l ''4 T-S -■'-X:
                        ' With^tHeivcurrent v s e a ^ o ' n H p ^ ^ S                    H ig h fie ld , •t-'-^On o n e o c c a s i o n a?rn'a't'ch^
                       just four \veeks;.61d, there i s . ^ o a d fo r c o m fo r t.-In s lucky ■I-\yas delayed for,’-1 S’-.rninu’tes ' I
                                                                                                               :because st’e w ards’’and'police''|
                       e v i d e n c ^ t h a t , . A y h i l e . t h e r e j s ® ^ ^ ;^ l . ^ 0^ I^ s ^ V
                       enormous : .will--' to'^ehsure:^ Jl                                *^l~.rry. 'phase, --:were stillTiolding" a pre-game ‘t
                       safety, the game is beset with :~-                                                     ' briefing to discU ss’how mariy •'
                       confusion aboufctftlfljest way.'’~-W• •?                          •*$?.:• 'working;, •jfans to.let in tp the'st'adiu’m.;: .-
                       forward, i         -        ' ..- ; '. . . - party. -                  ." . > . ' /. • ' : Police-:-face- another.", di^-
                           Liverppoi’ssH iH sborough’ •:'-c 9 ver>try.;admitted there- lemma in their haridling”of..;
                       working ■ party-, .-.set - up t o -cVv er. ^ . - P J 9 m s ’ ;• with,, the ticketless fans. A fter "Swed-';|
                       monitor safety at grounds i n ? - ^ ™ ? ^ 6-®1w hich it says it has - ..ish -, police.’-.allowed ;.,seVeral
                       the aftermath .of A pril’s trag- .. '«ww:sorted.outj'but'it denies .;. hundred - E n glan d .' fans ."into'
                       edy which left;9'5rfahs.dead, • --                       there was-'significant-', •last week’s ..World-....Cup
                       says that thejwor'st example- con g estion ’ outside ' the Jmatch, the F ootb all Associa- .
                       o f this muddled.-approach .;8round                            any ^vercrowding '.tion condem ned the m ove as |
                        was at the C bventry-Everton.                   the terraces.;,■ . ■            : - ". l ik e ly . to e n c o u r a g e , r o g u e
                       game.                       .            •••''' P r o b l e m s ’- the g a me - is' ..E n g la n d s u p p o r t e r s t o travel
                            More thany5,500 Jsv.erton g rapp lin g                      with       revolve. ' a b r o a d w i t h o u t t i c k e t s . .
                       fans arriving "at Coventry’s :'-around the issues o f delaying . -• But - the '■ d ilem m a - the
                                                                                                                  Swedes ■ faced;.is. o n e” which
                       Highfield ' "Road- sta d iu m y m atches and what to do w ith
                       were forced 'to'-go through '                     ’ '                                     police all oyer E n glan d have .
                                                                                                                 to ..confront ev ery week:-If::
                    ( only four 'tUrnstifes,' causing j?
                                                                                                             .- t h e y d o n ’t le t t h e ] f a n s ; m t h e y J
                    V^considerable'Jcrushing -out-^;
                                                                                                               - c o u l d c r e a te -problem s-" out-''
                       side th e ground."W hen’they;’;
                                                                                                                 s i d e . O p e r a t i o n a l d e c i s io n s
                       finally got.inslde,':the work-.
                                                                                                                 are-taken_by!the’s e n io r ..p p lic e .|
                      ■in g - party^'-.says;;.s u p p o rte r's -'.
                       w ere m et by- p o o r.sig ri p o str
                       ing and fu rth e r-c ru sh in g o n V
                                                                                                                 parity' betw een ,.locaiv?pblice-:
                      •the terraces,}\yh.rle those who:,
                                                                                                              - forces.
                       h ad b o u g h t s 'sta n d .-tic k e ts ',
                       fo u n d people in th e ir seats.’ . '.;                                                 "; A senior p olicem an with a '
                                                                                                                 long record o f p'olicing foot-.-'
                            A 45-year i ’old ’Evertori --
                                                                                                                ball told The .O b server that
                       supporter w ho has followed^ "
                       his team , to away'gam es for.                                                            top officers w e r e beginning
                                                                                                                to'despair at. th e .lack o f an y
                       30 years, told-The QbserverXt-
                                                                                                              . mechanisms.to"deal.with the
                       was the worst, experience he.'’:
                                                                                                             . problems' and w o u ld b'e call-
                      had ever had at a match? j’-'-'V;-:'
                                                                                                              -ing--bn the G oyernrhent to
                          -“ By ’2.45,-'?the-;crowd ’,-had-V                                                  "change the law.-\^;'.'.“v?'^-J "- .
                      swelled t p ^ b o u t . 500,1^11
                                                                                                             >v ‘Whatever w e do in these,
                      milling aroiind trying to-get\ :i
                      through these!fo’u r..tiny tu r n '•                                                    •situations .we are bound to .
                      stiles..-VVhenVwe'heard in-bar?';                                                      ;.]PSP- We can’t arrest people'
                                                                                                              •just' for .c o m in g , to-a ;match
                      from - insidg^as:. the ^ tfeams *
                      came out;- panic Began to set-i.                                                        '^without a.'ticlcet'.but'.neither/-
                                                                                                              ■can we allow'them^tb' ram-V.
                      in ;.' T herei-jw as^ p and errib V ^ 'gK M S K raB ^ ^ ^ ^ M S M gM
                      nium ,' with . nrnnlp                      .                       ~~          w     . .page outsidevgrouhds.-...W pJ
                                                                                                              ■•have to be g iven the powfirs.J
                      hysterical              the p o l i c e ; ^ f ; : ^ e » v m i l s b o r b u g « v
                                                                                                                to d e a l. with- it -before.-' thie.. - :...
                      doing nothing, to ;.sort..it .out:v<vground s a f e t y was •saki^<-
                                                                                                           v               • thing.'n;gets'..;'but’Xcpf;:
                                                                                                           ^■'harid,’ he saidV'r                                i?J
                                              HWP/HC



                                       12th September, 1989
Mr. Geoffrey Dear,
Chief Constable,
West Midlands Police H.Q.,
Colmore Circus Queensway,
BIRMINGHAM    B4 6NQ



Dear Mr. Dear,

     Following the recent complaints from Everton Supporters
regarding aspects of crowd safety at the Coventry City -v-
Everton match on Saturday, 19th August, 1989, members of the
Hillsborough Disaster Working Party were invited to visit
the West Midlands Police at 7M 7 Division Headquarters in
Coventry. This meeting took place on Wednesday, 6th
September, 1989.

     Unfortunately, the meeting did not resolve most of the
issues we raised.   The supporters complaints centred around
the lack of police control and poor turnstile facilities
outside the Sky-Blue Stand from 2.15 p.m. onwards and
localised overpacking on the terraces from 2.35 p.m. The
edited police video of the scenes outside the Sky-Blue Stand
did not commence until 2.57 p.m. and offered a very
restricted view; the video of the terraces was inconclusive
and the still photographs of the terraces were taken during
and after half-time. The video evidence neither proved or
disproved the supporters7 complaints.

     I had hoped that we could have either supported the
fans7 complaints and then taken the appropriate action to
ensure such problems do not happen again or that we could
have been reassured that the complaints were unfounded.   To
be left doing neither is a most unsatisfactory situation.




                                                  / —2-




KC1ACW
Contd. 2

Mx Geoffrey Dear,
Chief Constable,
West Midlands




     I have requested the Football League to hold an urgent
inquiry in order to progress this matter.   I do hope th
iSTwill also investigate the problems the supporters have
raised.   I have enclosed copies of statements which
supporters have submitted to me.
                              Yours sincerely,




                             Councillor H. Chase
                         Chair, Hillsborough Disaster


 ENC.




  KC1ACW
                                      Hillsborough Working Party,
                                      Chief Executives Office,
                                      Room 5,

LIVERPOOL                             Municipal Buildings ,
                                      Dale Street,
                                      LIVERPOOL L69 2DH
                                      Telephone: 0 5 1 - 225 2334/3
                                      Fax: 236 2047
                                      DX 14206 LIVERPOOL

                                      Your ref

                                      Our ref

                                      Date
                                          13th September, 1989
  Mr. J. D. Dent,
  Secretary,
  The Football League,
  Lytham St. Annes,
  LANCASHIRE      FY8 1JG


  Dear Mr. Dent,

       With further reference to the crowd management problems
  involving supporters of Everton Football Club, as detailed
  in our recent correspondence, at the request of
  Superintendent Birch, as commander of the police operation
  at the match, I, along with Councillor Steve Ledwich (Chair
  of the Liverpool City Council Licensing Sub-Committee and
  Chair of the General Safety Certificate Advisory Group) and
  two Council officers, attended a meeting on Wednesday, 6th
  September 1989 at Coventry Police Headquarters with Graham
  Hover (Secretary, Coventry City F.C.), D. Giles (Chief
  Building Surveyor with Coventry City Council) and other
  police officers.

       Relying on a heavily edited police video for the
  visitors7 terracing and turnstiles, together with
  black-and-white photographs - the latter taken from 3.57 p.m.
  onwards - of the terracing, all three officials dismissed
  the allegations on the .basis of the 7evidence7 provided at
  this meeting.

       Throughout the meeting we contended, and continue to
  contend, that the evidence available to our group was
  highly selective and irrelevant to the substance of the
  allegations already tabled and documented.  Concern at the
  quality, character and presentation of this evidence was
  compounded by a joint decision of Mr. Hover and Mr. Giles to
  deny our request - presented well in advance of the meeting
  and again during the meeting - for an accompanied visit to
  the ground.




  KC1ACT
Contd. 2:

Hr. J. D. Dent,
The Football League.




     Without access to the Highfield Road stadium the visit
to Coventry by our delegation proved futile.

     In consequence we consider the allegations remain open
and require a full Football League investigation.   Our
confidence in the response of the West Midlands Police,
Coventry City F.C. and Coventry City Council in the light of
our approaches has proved misplaced.

                              Yours sincerely,




                             Councillor H. Chase,
                       Chair, Hillsborough Working Party.




 KC1ACT
                                                                 ?Tb a Vk
                                                                  ^nded
                                THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED
Lytham St. A nnes, Lancashire, FY8 1JG. T e le p h o n e 0253 729421. T elex 67675. Fax 0253 724786                              S ecretary ). D. D e n t



2/7901                                                                                                     20th September, 1989



Councillor H. Chase,
Chair,
Hillsborough Working Party,
Chief Executives Office,
Room 5,
Municipal Buildings,
Dale Street,
LIVERPOOL,
L59    2DH.



Dear Councillor,
      I acknowledge receipt of your letter of the 13th September
1989, this matter is still receiving attention, I will let you
have my views on this matter in due course.

                                                        Yours sincerely,




                                                                J.D. Dent,
                                                                Secretary.




                  All correspo n d ence to b e a d d re s s e d to The Secretary. Registered Office a s above. Registered in England 80612
                                                               Hillsborough Working Party,
                                                               Chief Executives Office,
                                                               Room 5,

LIVERPOOL                                                      Municipal Buildings ,
                                                               Dale Street,
                                                               LIVERPOOL L69 2DH
                                                               Telephone: 0 5 1 - 225 2334/3
                                                               Fax: 236 2047
                                                               DX 14206 LIVERPOOL

                                                               Your ref

                                                               Our ref    HWP/HC/CTH
Lord Justice Taylor,
c/o Secretary to the Hillsborough                              Date       21st September,' 1989
  Inquiry,
Room 662,
5 0 Queen Annes Gate,
LONDON.
SW1 9 8T




Dear Lord Justice Taylor,
On the opening day of the new football league season on Saturday,
19th August, 19 8 9 Everton F.C. played Coventry City F.C. at Highfield
Road, Coventry.

Over 100 telephone calls were received by the Hillsborough Working
Party office from Everton supporters raising serious allegations
about the crowd management operation to the visitors sections of the
Highfield Road ground.

The Working Party began an immediate investigation into the complaints
and 20 statements were taken by officers of the Working Party from
Everton supporters.

A. dossier of these statements have been handed to West Midlands Police
and the Football League. Copies are enclosed together with other
relevant documentation.

The main complaints raised by the Everton supporters are:-

 -      inadequate turnstile facilities to the visitors' section of the
        Sky-Blue Stand where, in the absence of a queueing r e g i m e a r r i v a l
        at the back exceeded the rate of flow causing severe localised
        crushing and unrelieved pressure;

        severe crushing and unrelieved pressure occurred at the egress
        gate adjoining the stand and home terrace area which visiting
        stand occupants had to exit after the game;

 -      overpacking in the visitors' pen on the East Terrace was not
        relieved until half-time, when police officers, allocated an
        adjoining pen to a number of Everton fans;




W h o n o a llin n n r te le o h o n in c i olease ask f o r
                                -   2-


   inadequate and misleading police communications with the
   Everton supporters;

   poor and hazardous existing facilities from the Sky-Blue Stand
   and from the East Terrace visitors' section.

The Working Party are concerned that all the good intentions raised
in the recommendations contained in Lord Justice Taylor's Interim
Report and the non-statutory recommendations contained in the Guide
to Safety at Sports Grounds are already being ignored.

We believe it is essential that these recommendations are made
statutory at the earliest opportunity.   We have written to the
Football League  asking . that they conduct a full inquiry into what
happended at Highfield Road.

Yours sincerely,




Chair,
Hillsborough Working Party.
