  QCK'V     ;   :   s1
                    :■   I
       1f   r
                             January 6th. 1991s.

      r
      4 d Waddingtoa
Home Secretary.
10 Downing S t ,
LONDON.

Dear S i r ,               £
            I am \fi
                   l^/ting          the^report of
Hillsborough rece!Nj.y publi*9|jpd, jM is
only human’and fairSihat e qu a li t w s h o u l d
prevail always, a boxiSc^ring, owe against
one, Cricket, Fo&tbsll, iS^eyjfflftc, eleven
against eleven and so on, a N ^ a t the
Hillsborough Disaster, it was at least
ten angry supporters, who delayed their own
entry to the groiind for selfish reasons ,
against one policeman in a f a i r .average ,
of a mob estimated at 3,000.
         Why have a drink related Mob,
who became Hysterical , and were kindly
allowed into the ground, to get away
with the responsibility of this very sad
disaster by charging into the gromnd
without care for the safety of the real
supporters already in the ground, enjoying
the atmosp h e r e , whilst this mob were
enjoying the atmosphere of the pubs outside
the ground, its diabolical, and to condemn
the police is most unfair, out of order
and patheti?.surely they were not expected
to anticipate this# having controlled law
and abiding supporters
          We are now told that all seater
Stadiums are required for safety reasons,
is the Lord Justice Taylor aware that before
his report, this season on Sept 23rd 1989
at the match , Manchester City V Manchester
United before it started, therewas an unholy
  (in the seater stand)
J «*■' > i

       f'fight "between rival supporters by HUNDREDS
        of them, delaying the start for twenty minutes,
        one wonders whether he is fully informed,        ce
        so much for all seater Stadiums, the Manchester Pol
       would no doubt confirm, I was there at the time,
       and dont forget that there is plenty "amunition”
        in the stands.

                 Now what about t|ie same Liverpool
       Mob who were at Hillsborough, rioted again
       last night in Toxteth Liverpool, ( J an 5th)
       against the Liverpool Police, what has the
       Lord Justice Taylotftto say about that, The
       Sheffield Police should be publicly be exonerated.
                 •

                   Like Breather U s i n g a motorist,
      £aicSame sho‘al(3- apply to anyone going to the
              once inside, same limit,       should he or she
      appear under the influence. It should be printed
      m all programmes, tickets and turnstiles.
                    The Magistrates should respond
      W x t h sever penalties, if proved over the limit?

                 Please let me state that I am in no
      way connected with any Police Force, just
      sympathetic towards this injustice.


                       Youp^Ti^ulv.
