   10, DOWNING STREET,
    WHITEHALL S.W.l




With the Private Secretary’s

      Compliments
                                           ^      f*-




                             lO DO W NING STREET
                                LONDON SW1A 2AA
From the Private Secretary

                                                        13 August 1991




     The Prime Minister has asked me to thank you for your letter
of 17 July about Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and
Superintendent Murray of the South Yorkshire Police.

     The events at Hillsborough were indeed a shocking tragedy;
the Prime Minister has asked me to express to you his very deep
sorrow at your terrible loss.

     In conducting the inquiry which followed the disaster, Lord
Justice Taylor asked the West Midlands Constabulary to make
investigations on his behalf. Further enquiries then had to be
made to determine whether criminal or disciplinary proceedings
should be brought against any police officer, Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club, Sheffield City Council or their advisers. When
the enquiries were completed the results were very carefully
considered by the Police Complaints Authority.

     As you know, on Friday 12 July the Authority issued a
statement announcing their decision to direct that disciplinary
charges be brought against two officers of the South Yorkshire
Police.

     The Prime Minister realises that the issues relating to
Hillsborough seem to be taking a very long time to resolve, and
that this clearly makes the situation very difficult for you.
However, he cannot agree with your suggestion that this means
that the police are receiving some form of preferential
treatment.  Like anyone else, police officers are subject to the
ordinary law of the land, but they are also required to obey a
strict discipline code which is rigorously enforced by chief
officers. A police officer who is found guilty of a disciplinary
offence may, in the most serious cases, be dismissed from the
force.

     You seem to be assuming that Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray are guilty before they have
had an opportunity of being heard.  In accordance with the
police discipline regulations, as well as all the principles of
natural justice, any officer who faces disciplinary proceedings
has the right to a hearing and to defend themselves.

     The officers who are facing disciplinary charges in this
case will appear before a disciplinary tribunal which will
include two members of the Police Complaints Authority.  The
Authority is entirely independent of the police and the
                              -   2   -




Government.  It would therefore be wrong of the Prime Minister to
comment on the case in question.

     I do understand the reasons for the views you hold and I am
sorry that you will inevitably find this a disappointing reply.




                          W. E. CHAPMAN




Mrs. Patricia Joynes
