                                  THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                                               LIMITED
                                                                Founded 1863

                                                  Patron: H e r M a j e s t y T h e Q u e e n
                                                President: H.R.H. T h e D u k e o f K e n t
                                                    Chairman: S i r B e r t M i l l i c h i p

     Chief Executive:                                                                                Phone: 071-402 7151/071-262 4542
R.   H .   G.   K e l l y fc is
                                                                                                               Telex: 261110
                                                                                                         Facsimile: 071 -402 0486



                                    16 LANCASTER GATE, LO N D O N W2 3LW

                                    / 0 1   n                Your Ref:                   _
                          CFCH/MP/319                                                    25 February 1992

Mr. A.R. Baden
Sport and Recreation Division
The Department of Education and Science
Sanctuary Buildings
Great Smith Street
Westminster
London SW1P 3BT

Dear Tony

                                        INTERNATIONAL SPORTS INSTITUTE
                                    D IV IS IO N OF STADIA AND ARENA DESIGN

I have met with the professorial staff of the Civil Engineering
Department, of Loughborough University, to discuss the detail of the
above.

As a result of those discussions, Professor McCaffer has written to me
giving an outline of the role which Loughborough University could play.
Briefly, Loughborough University could :

1.         Provide objectivity with commercial impartiality.

2.         Undertake Project Management.

3.         Undertake cost analysis, thus ensuring costingsare correct                                            and
           represent value for money.

4.         Establish a system of quality control through the approach of
           Total Quality Management.

5.         Further the development of a modularised, prefabricated construction
           of stadia with the objective of reducing costs.

6.         Stimulate research and development in the areas of improved stadia
            design and spectator comfort.

Through the Loughborough University Business School, we could also deal
with the matter of football club business plans, either in terms of
analysis or preparation and presentation.


                                                                                          cont./....




                                                Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Gate, London W23LW
                                                Incorporated in London Registration Number 77797
            CFCH/MP/319                         25 February 1992


It would be possible, therefore, to deliver a service on a 'cradle to
grave' basis, or a part of that service, where required and appropriate,
to our football clubs.

I enclose, in confidence, a copy of Professor McCaffer's letter to me
which I think is self-explanatory and will assist our discussions on 5
March. A further copy is enclosed for your colleague whom I understand
will be accompanying you.

We shall look forward very much to welcoming you to the meeting on 5
March.

With kind regards.

Yours sincerely



                     r

C .F .C . Hughes
Director of Coaching and Education
C^TLENG INEERING                                                     LOUGHBOROUGH
                                                                               cr-J


LOUGHBOROUGH, LEICS. LH11 3TU UK
TF,r.:OW92«l7L TELEX:jU7>*2 FAX:0509610231 DD222600

Head o f Department: Professor Ronald McCarter
                                                                    OF TECHNOLO GY

           RM cC/LW


          24 February 1992


         Mr C F C Hughes
         Director of Coaching and Education
         The Football Association Ltd
         16 Lancaster Gate
         L ondon
         W2 3LW


         D ear M r     Hughes

         f 2 ^ ? , SED STADIUM AND ARENA DESIGN CENTRE AT
         LOUGHBOROUGH UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY


        A r l"    d£    £ &             ‘° ^          y° U “ d diSCUSS PI«       fW                ■*

        A dvantages of Locating SADC W ithin a University



        ia a h t.e s and other support such as library and specialist equipm ent

                 £      W:!hi" 3 universi'y ^ generally in a position of trust with
                  ndustry that permits ,t to act as an honest broker in bringing together

                 c o m m e r c i Z r s l t a t o n s lth * ^     ranSe ° f ProfeS5i<™'

               nf 15fa^ Ie tG-f ke an overviGW of   problems facing the development
                   stadia Without experiencing the commercial pressures brought to
               bear by companies wishing to sell one particular solution It can
                 erefore offer the opportunity of working objectively towards
               optim um , viable solutions to problem s in stadium development.


                                                                                         Cont/2.
             n \ ? i® J nd,and1dra"       existing research resources that will help
            in I I T       develoPments that football is seeking. This could
            include the m onitoring of other research and developm ent
            p ograounes, thus giving access to additional funding sources.

    This University and our Department are experienced in workine with

                                                          e*a m p te of th* “         -

    Departae„EtXPCrie"Ce                     ° f L»“8hboro„gh’s Civil Engineering


         !?yamr,lTafritm<!UtS 'inks        industr)' ar« particularly strong. For
                                              indudinS Wimpey, Taylor Woodrow,
          alfour Beatty, Sir Robert MeAlpine, Alfred McAlpine, Bovis Lain*
          eazer and many others, sponsor courses and students Maior
         consultancy practices and local authorities such as Mott MacDonald
         £ £ £ * > p' ^             Faber “ “ Suffo,k Coun*y c Z         ^ no f '
         students. In sponsoring courses the companies provide funds to the
         £ d e n * ^ “ i .! " f ~ " 8 ^ u d e n t s they provide t o d ” or S o
            dents; In this n a y we work closely with industry in meeting
         industry s needs for the supply of competent staff with relevant -Mil.

        J S        ^ f e m i ° iVU “ «ineerinS de P « ta e n ts , our D epartm ent has
        FxamplS of t h ^ 'n T Z ^          ’mnaSement        design of construction.
        X      P .o thls ln ° ur teaching include our MSc course in
        Construction Management which is in its 27th year of operation We




       This em phasis on the management aspects is the reason that our
       D epartm ent enjoys unrivalled support from industry for both our
       teaching work and for our research and development.

C ooperative Projects with Industry



S ~ = 5 ~ S £ li= -
      d e T g ^ o ? h e 4 S ° nv e n S n            “ <toi®n COSt control “ d “
•     Balfour B°eahtte; S                                     ^

                                                                         Cont/3....
        Charles Gregory and others in on-site cost control;
 *      Development of modularised, prefabrication construction for the
        Chartered Institute of Building;
        Kimbell Construction and Charles Gregory in the implementation of
        quality assurance systems; and
        Davy Morris in design and cost control of design of major cranes.

 The projects that are of particular interest to your SADC are:

       Estimating systems for Balfour Beatty; this comprised working with
       Balfour Beatty to develop a company-wide computerised estimating
       and on-site cost control systems. The estimating is supported by an
       extensive company database of production standards and outputs. This
       software is used extensively in the company for costing major projects.

       Design cost control for AMEC design and construction involved
       developing com puter systems to aid the costing of design work as it
       progressed to ensure that total cost of the designed project remained
       w ith the project b u d g et

      The work with the Chartered Institute of Building is directed towards
      recording the successful exploitation of prefabrication and
      m odularisation in m odern construction.

European Construction Institute (ECI)

       ECI is a research and development institute funded by subscription
       from 56 major companies (as listed in the Appendix). This provides an
      annual income of around £0.25m. Membership is draw n from
      Belgium, France, Germany, Holland, Italy and the UK. The work of the
      Institute is dedicated to research, development and consultancy
      services in the management of major projects. The Institute's mission
      statem ent is: ... to provide, through a process of research discussion
      and exchange, the knowledge necessary for a continual improvement
      in European construction efficiency and excellence.

      To this end the Institute has produced a num ber of reports and
      publications (as listed in the Appendix).

     Through ECI, our Department has been able to work with large
     companies who are world leaders in their field of operation on issues
     relevant to the execution of major construction projects. We are
     particularly proud that these major companies chose to house the
     Institute within our Department.

     ECI could well serve as a role model for SADC in terms of financial and
     organisational arrangements.
                                                                   Cont/4...
    •      There arc separate accounting procedures, which are administered by
           the University Finance Office and audited both by Institute members
           and by the public auditing procedures.

    D epartm ental Staff

    •    The professorial staff arc:

          Professor R McCaffer, FEng (Professor of Construction Management)
          Professor V B Torrance, CBE (Professor of Building), Past President of
               the C hartered Institute of Building
          Professor V I Hanby (Professor of Building Services)
          Professor D G M Roberts, CBE, FEng (Fellowship of Engineering
               Visiting Professor), Past President of Institution of G vil Engineers

    •    The D epartm ent has a wide spread of interests across civil engineering,
         building and building services, all essential areas of expertise in the
         construction of m odern stadia. The staff includes:

         14    chartered   civil engineers
          7    chartered   builders
          3    chartered   quantity surveyors
          4    chartered   building services engineers

          Specialist areas of work include: construction and project management;
          building technology; building services engineering; geotechnics; water
          engineering; and structures & materials.

•        Departm ental staff have published widely at home and overseas in the
         field of construction management, including:

•        Modern Construction Management, Blackwell Scientific Publishing,
              3rd Ed, June 1989
•        Worked Examples in Construction Management, Blackwell Scientific
              Publishing, 2nd Ed, 1986.
•        Estimating and Tendering, Blackwell Scientific Publishing, 2nd Ed,
              1991
•        Management of Construction Equipment, Macmillan Education Ltd,
              2nd Ed, 1991.
         Engineering Management: Construction Planning, Thomas Telford,
              1991.
•        A series of books in Estimating, Planning and Project Appraisal are
              currently being written for the International Labour Officc.




                                                                        Cont/5...



                                          4
  International Activity and Contracts

           At postgraduate level we can have up to 48 different nationalities
          manaiemi"nt ' eA d t v r m nnl' m ai‘' ly conslrtl<:tk>"  construction
          m anagem m t Additionally, we run a series of postgraduate courses in
          water & waste treatment, specifically for overseas countries

          t o l Y t n d ^ P £ aVf- W‘ !1-develoPed «>ntocts with countries including
           he Gulf Stote th n        1 CO" ntries- 311 the Commonwealth countriS,
              Gulf States' the Caribbean and Central and South America.

          We regularly supply staff to work overseas for the UK's Overseas
          Lrb0eurP(S ta n iA^ mini5:T l ° n' the BritiSh C° UnCiI' the ^ntGrnational
          p an -,A    f S ?n .        the LIN aid a8encies. Consequently, we have
          a good working relationship and contacts with these organisations.


 e x S n ^ 'a n d U S * " '                        " d            e*Perie" « is

Research


S s l X w ^ "t n rded
('SFRO r
                   f h by
                        J 1Tthe 7Science
                                  - re8'Uarly ^     ab0“ ‘ £075m P*r
                                         & Engineering Research Council
                                                                                    «

Sngft^dTco^rfftm
   l m ciude construction e
                          mtltS“ “)M
                             anagem   USbuilding
                                    ent, try- services
                                                 °f P "*^    re***ch
                                                       eneinccrin?




                                                     Lo“8hb“^          «—         * »f


slhr :^ ie^ x S e f sfhatcouldbeor«                           ^
      Consultancy, advice and auditing services for stadia projects.

      5   T o te 'm u a l ^ M 0f q U a % aSf Urance P ^ u r e s , using the approach
                       7 ff anaSement largely developed in other industries
      such as process plant and in manufacturing.

      The developm ent of a m odularised, prefabricated approach to the
      construction of stadia with the objective of reducing costs reducing
      installation tta e and improving Quality w ithout ne“       ly prod„8cine
     s“        d i « o t ll' at 3" lTOk ^       3nd l“ke    « “ “ « of different®

                                                                        Cont/6...



                                            5
           Stimulating research and developm ent in the areas of improved stadia
           design and spectator comfort. The examples we discussed included the
           use of air-curtains to keep heat within grandstands and air ccilings to
            'eep rain off. Some experiment and development is needed to prove
           that such techniques can work at the scale of a football ground. But
i          only research can take designer thinking forward,

           SADC located at LUT would be able to work closely with the other
           units of the International Sports Institute which would be associated
           with other departm ents and the University. This cooperation would
           be particularly beneficial in coordinating the work of the ISI as a whole.

    I hope the above crystalises the discussion we had on Monday last and I look
    forw ard to further dialogue with you.

    With kind regards.

    Yours sincerely*




    Encs




                                         6
                                          APPENDIX

|||||#            MEMBER S O F EUROPEAN CONSTRUCTION INSTITUTE
 fs$ § ^ '                         ABB Lummus Crest B.V.
‘I P if                            Acer Group Ltd
M*'                                A L Currie & Brown
if                                 Amoco Chemical Company
                                    Babcock Construction Ltd
                                    Badger Europe
                                   Balfour Beatty Ltd
                                   Bechtel Ltd
                                   B P Engingeering
                                   British Gas pic
                                   Brown & Root (UK) Ltd
                                   CCG Contracting
                                   Cenargo Shipping Ltd
                                   CFE
                                   Chevron UK Ltd
                                   Colin Draycott Group Ltd
                                   Darchem Ltd
                                   Davis Langdon & Everest
                                   Davy McKee (London) Ltd
                                  Dunn International pic
                                  Du Pont de Nemours B.V.
                                  Electrical Contractors' Association
                                  Faithful & Gould
                                  Fluor Daniel Ltd
                                  Foster Wheeler Energy Ltd
                                  Foster Wheeler International Corporation
                                  Freshfields
                                  Fugro-McCleiland B.V.
                                 GEC Alsthom Engineering Systems Ltd
                                 George Corderoy & Co
                                 Hertel (UK) Ltd
                                 High-Point Group
                                 ICI Engineering
                                 Iemants Staalbouw B.V.B.A.
                                 John Brown pic
                                 Masons
                                 M F Kent Corporation
                                 Mobil Services Company Ltd
                                 M W Kellogg Ltd
                                 National Power pic
                                NECEA
                                Nederlandse Aardolie Maatschappij B.V (NAM)
                                Northcrofts International
                                Nuclear Electric pic
                                Powergen
                                Preussag Anlagenbau GmbH
                                Shell UK Ltd
                               Simons Construction Limited
                               Snamprogetti
                               Stone & Webster Engineering Ltd
                               Taylor Woodrow Construction Ltd
                               Technip
                               Texaco Britain Ltd
                               Total Oil Marine pic
                               Wimpey Engineering
             February 1992
•   v         E U R O P E A N C O N S T R U C T I O N IN ST IT U T E                           PU B L IC A T IO N S

              CONFERENCES
             A pollo     H ole'"    EUr0f>e’        P a p e r s Pr*s *"«ed to             the co nf e re nc e, 25     April       1991, A m s l e r d a n
             Publication: COOl/l, July / y p/ .

             Construction In Euron<>              p anA).c
             7-8   November        1991,      H o li d a y   Inn        r       lo       the   2nd    E ur ope an    c on f e re n c e,
             Publication: C002U. j L u ^ i m .               "'** C r° Wr,t' P ,a M > Wiesbaden.

             EVENING         M EETINGS




                                                                                                                     II   M a rc h        1991.




            LAUNCH

           Z Z ? rT * nlT r ?                                                        ^                           ™        “ Q««n Eii^beth
           NEWSLETTER
           ECI N ews D ec 1990 onwards , Quarterly

          task       forces
          Market Analysis Task Force TFOOl




                                                              “ S6,eCted annotated WWiography,
         T h e construction industry in                             t
         presentation made by Philipp* Drcno.                                                 8nd P*r*pe« J v« .    Summary o f the
         Publication: IF 00U 3. December f 99[ .                            8   he        v d o f Advisors. June 1991.

         Client Management Task Force TF003

         S S L ^ r ^ / y ^ S i - y j p / 01*                       *he U m ,tat,0n         o f co n ten tiou s claim s.

         External Assessment Task Force TF004

        M a y 1991 issue. P u b l L t i o ^                                          CU rrent        rese^ c h   a ctiv ities,

        Supplem ent. Publication: TF004/2. expected March 1992.

        Total Quality Management Task Forcc TF006

        / > S ^ :                                                       task fo r c e > * » « e on e.

        Information Technology Task Force TF007



     Productivity Task Force TF008

     P M cmJ                                                                         fndulIr>* P L Allen



                                                                                           “ “ • ak' us,,°" -                    —
    L o ca tion factors.
    Publication: RT0OU2. expected January 1992.

C.Davis, February 1992 v.12
