Funded entirely by Littlewoods, Vernons, Zetters from their Spotting-the-Ball competition.


The Football Trust,                                     Chairman: The Rt Hon Lord Aberdare KBE GCStJ
Second Floor, Walkden House,                      Ijv               Deputy Chairman: Richard Faulkner
10 Melton Street, London NW1 2EJ.                 ■A                          Secretary: Mrs P Finney

Telephone: 01-388 4504                                                         Facsimile: 01-388 6688




MECHANISM FOR SPECIFYING AND PROCURING A CCTV                                 INSTALLATION
FOR USE IN A SAFETY ROLE AT A FOOTBALL GROUND.

1)      Establish the operational requirement for the system.

2)      Delegated members of the Advisory Group (1) conduct a
         survey   of   the   ground   in   conjunction   with   a
         representative of the club. Plot zones on a map of the
         ground showing the nature and extent of any risk
         indicating those which will need to be covered by CCTV.
         In zones to be covered by CCTV record the minimum and
         maximum light levels available, the type of lighting and
         indicate the degree of detail required in the video
         image.
3)      Submit the results of the survey to the Advisory                                  Group
         for vetting.
4)      Prepare the tender documents to include the operational
         requirement, the annotated ground plan and the survey
         results.   This will indicate to potential contractors
         the purpose of the system, the areas to be covered by
         CCTV, the nature of the viewing task and desired image
         size   as well as the      lighting conditions   to   be
         encountered.   Additionally performance criteria for the
         system such as CCTV system resolution will have to be
         specified along with procedures for measuring them.
         Specify operating and environmental conditions.     This
         system operating requirement should stipulate any codes
         of practice,   standards or regulations to be met by
        contractors.
5)      The system operating requirement devised above                                  should
         then be vetted by the Advisory Group and when                                  agreed
         form the basis for tendering.
6)      The tender package should now be submitted       to the
         Football Trust for their approval in cases where a
         Football Trust grant is required.     If agreed by the
         Football Trust the club to invite 3 tenders.
7)      Analyse    tenders   against   the   system operating
         requirement.   Arrange for  tenderers to demonstrate
         equipment and test it using the previously specified
        procedures.
8)      The Trustees will decide which tender is to be accepted,
        taking into account the advice of the local Advisory
        Group.   When the tender is agreed the contract will be
        placed by the club.
9)    Commission the system after installation and ensure that
      it complies with the system operating requirement.    If
      the system or any of its elements fails to meet the
      system operating requirement the contractor must remedy
      this.
10)   Accept system and submit the invoice to   the   Football
      Trust when appropriate.




(1) The term Advisory Group is used here with the meaning
defined in the Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor's Final Report into
the Hillsborough Disaster and to cover any other such Working
Group as is deemed appropriate by the local Licensing
Authority.
