                                                                ,-X=grjjfc/yb—I
                                                                              j ul   ~ f^ = e




                                                  From: Lionel Pimlott
                                                        SARD

                                                  Tel:   211 6079

        '     .                                   Date: 5 December 1996
2. Mr             I f^L
                                                  cc:    Mr Chesterton
3. Mr Marre                                              Mr Broadley
                                                         Mr Newsome

"HILLSBOROUGH" - GRANADA TELEVISION DRAMA

The ITV network is screening tonight at 9pm what appears to be a highly emotive
drama-documentary on the Hillsborough disaster. Attached are key-points and
background on what has happened post-Hillsborough to improve the safey of
football stadia.




L J PIMLOTT
                      To:     M   N   0 5 a?
                      Fax:          'm /in \
                      From:    UOrtCL P M rrfT
                      Date:          Z                   Paqes:

"HILLSBOROUGH" - GRANADA TELEVISION PROGRAMME ON
THURSDAY 5 DECEMBER AT 9 PM

Key Points


*     Government has taken radical measures, in line with Lord Justice Taylor's
       Report into the Hillsborough disaster, to ensure that the tragic events that
       occurred do not happen again. No major incidents since Hillsborough.


*     Government has made £139m available to the Football Trust to fund Taylor
       related work at football grounds for projects totalling £437m.


*     British stadia now recognised as being amongst the safest in the world, as
       commented on by overseas visitors and officials during EURO 96.


*     Certain Taylor recommendations were restricted to football due to the
      particular problems of safety and crowd control experienced in the sport.


*     Policing at football matches is a matter for the Home Office.


If Needed


*     Government remains fully committed to ensuring that the safe terracing and
      all-seater requirements for clubs in the Second and Third Divisions of the
      Football League are implemented by 1999/2000 season.


BACKGROUND

1.    On 15 April 1989, 95 people died at the Hillsborough Stadium, Sheffield,
during an FA Cup semi-final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest. Lord
Justice Taylor carried out an inquiry into the disaster and his final report contained
- 76 recommendations, one of the most important being that standing should be
  eliminated at all grounds designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
  (the 1975 Act introduced a system of safety certification for designated grounds).

  2.     The Government accepted the Report, but chose to limit the all-seater
  requirement to football, due to the particular problems of safety and crowd control
  experienced in the sport. In July 1992 it was decided that all clubs in the FA Premier
  League and the First Division of the Football League would be required to go all-
  seater by 1994, however, clubs in the Second and Third Divisions would be
  permitted to keep standing accommodation, provided the terracing was safe, and
  now have until August 1999 to meet this requirement.

  3.    The recommendations of the Report have been implemented through a variety
  of measures, including safety certification under the 1975 Act; the Football
  Spectators Act 1989, which created and empowered the Football Licensing
  Authority; the revision of the Government's Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds in
  1990; the Criminal Justice Act 1994; and the Football (Offences) Act 1991.

  4.     The Government has made money available through a 3% reduction in Pool
  Betting Duty to the Football Trust, which was founded by the pools companies, to
  help fund capital works to improve the safety and comfort of supporters in line with
  the recommendations of Taylor. Revenue to the Trust has fallen significantly since
  the introduction of the Lottery, and the Trust has made a case for extending the
  deadline for the implementation of Taylor, to which the Government is currently
  giving its full consideration.
