                                                   DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL HERITAGE
                                                   Horse Guards Road, London SW1P 3AL
                                                   Telephone: 071-270 5925
                      gTMflj*)                     Facsimile: 071-270 6026

From the Secretary of Statefor National Heritage
THE RT. HON. DAVID MELLOR QC MP

           The Rt. Hon. Kenneth Clarke QC MP
           Secretary of State for the Home Department
           Queen A n n e 's Gate
           London
           SW1H 9AT




                                 TICKET TOUTING IN RESPECT OF FOOTBALL MATCHES

           Thank you for sending me a copy of your letter ,of 26 June to Tony
           Newton. I agree with your proposal to introduce a short Bill this
           session to prohibit touting in respect of football matches. As
           you say the discharge of our commitment to introduce such
           legislation will be looked upon favourably in the football world.

           I am copying this letter to all those to whom you copied yours.




           DAVID MELLOR
          SECRETARY OF ST
          DEPARTMENT OF
          NATIONAL HER1TACl_
PROBILL
                                                               From:           MISS A J STEWART
                                                                               SARD
                                                                               3060-6370
                     SECRETARY OF STATE
                      DEPT. OF NATIONAL                                        8 July 1992
                           HEBiT£G!=
                                                                              PS/Secretary of State
                                                                              PS/Mr Key
                     PILING INSTRUCTION
                                                                              Mr Phillips
                     FILS !vo    ...................... .                     Mr Wright
                                                                              Miss Maclean
                                                                              Mr Ellingford
MR HOPSON
    'OPSON


           PROPOSED BILL ON TICKET TOUTING AT FOOTBALL MATCHES

1.    You asked for a note on the pros and cons of the proposal to
legislate against ticket touting at football matches.


2.    The     proposal             is            a direct          result     of    Lord Justice      Taylor's
recommendation            in his                    Final      Report on the Hillsborough                 Stadium
Disaster that           it      should be made an offence to sell tickets                                     for
and   on     the    day      of a football match without authority                                    from the
home club to do so. The arguments in favour of creating such an
offence are:-


       (i)     most       importantly                        the   sale       of    tickets    by   touts     are
               indiscriminate.                              They   are    likely      to   sell     tickets    to
               'away'        supporters for areas of the ground allocated to
               'home'           supporters                    or vice versa.          This    results     in the
               breakdown of segregation arrangements which can lead to
               trouble in the crowd;


       (ii) touts who position themselves on the routes to grounds
               can      cause                  obstructions              in   what     are    often       already
               restricted accesses;


       (iii) the resentment                                 against touts          felt by many supporters
                   can result                     in the touts becoming a focus                     for    public
                   order problems; and



                                                                                                                1
        (iv) the       prospect     of    obtaining        tickets      from    touts        can
               attract ticketless          supporters       to games which can lead
               to    public    order     problems    if     they   are      unable     to    buy
               tickets and gain admission to the ground.


3.     The arguments against the proposed Bill are:-


        (i)    there is a forceful body of opinion in the tourist and
               entertainment industries, as well as in sport, that all
               ticket touting should be outlawed.                  These arguments are
               based on moral objections to touting rather than those
               of public order as is the case with football. The Home
               Secretary has        of   course     argued that we          should     resist
               any    attempt     to     broaden    the     bill      to    cover     touting
               generally; and


        (ii) that to legislate in the way proposed would                            intervene
               in    the   operation      of   market     forces      and   constitute        an
               infringement on the liberty of an individual.


4.      As you will be aware the Taylor recommendation was accepted
by the Home Secretary when the Hillsborough report was published
and the Government is under a commitment to legislate as soon as
Parliamentary time permits. This commitment was reaffirmed in the
Prime    Minister's        letter   of    6 May     1992    to Tom      Pendry M P          (copy
attached). The proposed offence                 is supported by the Association
of Chief       Police Officers         and would be welcomed by the                  football
world. To go back on the commitment now would be awkward.


5.      On    this basis       I would recommend the Secretary                  of State to
give    strong       support   to the      principle       of   creating     the     offence.
However,      in the light of the Lord President's response of 3 July
to   the      Home    Secretary's        proposal    I     do   not    think     the    issue
justifies the Secretary of State pushing for early                             introduction
of the Bill.



MISS A STEWART
                                                                                                2
                               From:     T A Ellingford
                                         SARD C

                               Ext:      3060-6359

                               Date:       July 1992

                               Copy:     PS/Mr Key
                                         Mr Phillips
                                         Mr Wright
                                         Ms MacLean
                                         Mr Hopson
                                         Mr Baden (or)

1.   Mi^Ss Stewart
2.   ^Secretary of State

                 TICKET TOUTING AT FOOTBALL MATCHES
                        PROPOSED LEGISLATION

The background to the proposal to legislate against ticket
touting at football matches is set out in the Home Secretary's
letter. We have always supported the proposal and a letter
conveying your agreement to the introduction of a short Bill is
attached.




T A ELLINGFORD




                                                              1
                                                                                                     \     •


  Mfc SECRf^
                          k&jkffjrtouJe-
                                                          Q U E E N ANNE’S GATE L O N D O N SW1H 9AT



               1 1           I ‘              I     ••     0   /




                TICK ET TOUTING IN RESPECT O F FOOTBALL MATCHES


          I am writing to seek your and colleagues’ agreement to the quick preparation and introduction
this session of a very short Bill to prohibit ticket touting in respect of football matches.

Background

          You will recall that, in his final report into the Hillsborough Stadium disaster, Lord Justice
Taylor (as he then was) recommended the creation of four new football - specific offences: selling
tickets for and on the day of a football match without authority from the home club to do so; throwing
missiles; chanting racialist abuse; and going onto the pitch without due cause. The Government
accepted these recommendations and was last year preparing to legislate as soon as Parliamentary time
allowed.

         This process was overtaken by the introduction of a Private Member’s Bill by Sir John
Wheeler and his colleagues following the publication of the Home Affairs Select Committee’s inquiry
into policing football hooliganism. Sir John’s Bill encompassed only three of the four proposed
offences, omitting ticket touting. The Government tried, when amending the Bill, to include the
touting offence but was advised by the House authorities that such an amendment would be outside
the scope of the Bill. We therefore retain a commitment to legislate and have said on many occasions
that we will do so as soon as Parliamentary time allows.

C urrent position

         We are coming under increasing pressure in Parliament and elsewhere to discharge this
commitment to legislate. Most recently, Tom Pendry has written to the Prime Minister suggesting
that some of the time not required given the withdrawal of the post-Maastricht Bill might sensibly be
used for this purpose.

          Given that the Government was planning to introduce a Bill creating this offence, instructions
to Parliamentary Counsel were drafted. These would suffice for a very short Bill with a minimal
amount of topping and tailing. The Home Office is therefore in a position to bring forward revised
instructions to Parliamentary Counsel very quickly.

          Ticket touting at football matches can, as Taylor recognised, create public order problems.
This happens in two ways. First, the presence of ticket touts near grounds can constrict yet further
already restricted access routes and act as an unwelcome focus for public order difficulties. Second,
and perhaps more important, touts are indiscriminate in their sale of tickets and can easily undermine
segregation. The introduction of a short Bill would therefore have positive effects. The Association
o f Chief Police Officers supports such a measure.



The Rt Hon Tony Newton, OBE., MP.
Lord President of the Council
Privy Council Office
WHITEHALL, S .W .l.                                                                     /cont...
Problems

There are no real problems with the introduction of the offence as recommended by Taylor. The
main danger is that there might be attempts to widen the scope of the Bill to prohibit touting at other
events. There is a strong lobby, containing the tourist and entertainment industry as well as sport,
to prohibit touting not on the grounds of public order, which was Taylor’s concern, but, rather,
because, as they see it, it is morally objectionable. Wimbledon have tried to stop touting by making
it an offence to re-sell tickets. This is currently subject to challenge under European law. We should
not wish to go any wider than Taylor’s proposal that "it could be made an offence to sell tickets for
and on the day of the football match without authority from the home club to do so" (final report
paragraph 279) (save for a minor technical point).

Conclusion

         My judgment, therefore, is that we should take advantage of the window of Parliamentary
time available to us to enact this modest but positive measure. The Government could gain
considerable credit from the football lobby for doing so and it would discharge a commitment on
which our lack of action is becoming slightly embarrassing. The measure should be presented as one
to deal with public order, and we should resist any attempts to broaden it against ticket touting more
generally.

        I should be grateful for your and colleagues’ agreement to Parliamentary Counsel’s preparing
such a Bill.

         I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister, members of LG Committee, David Mellor,
First Parliamentary Counsel and the Secretaries to LG Committee.




                                                 KENNETH CLARKE
