                 h0=   «r S o lu stT   I
                       Mr Goddard      !
                                             H o m e O ffice
                                            QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                            LONDON SWIH9AT


                                              20 FED 19:




Dexxi-   m < -   M »e,ieS
Mr Patten has asked me to thank you for your
kind invitation to your meeting on
27 February.

Unfortunately due to other diary commitments
he will not be able to attend but he has asked
me to pass on his best wishes for the event.




                        /)«* ILJrr\    60


                     NICK HEARN
            Assistant Private Secretary




Trevor Hicks Esq
                    (5c> O tl9*s\.




                Hillsborough Family Support Group

House Of Commons,
London,
SW1A OAA.                                             6th February 1990.



          HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER / FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP

       further to our recent communication we would advise that the
above group will be holding its second "cross party" meeting with
H P ’s at 5.00pm. on Tuesday 27th February 1990, Committee Room 16,
House of Commons.

     The first meeting was considered by those present    to have
been very constructive and we all felt positive progress was made
towards the achievement of our objectives, (copies of which were
circulated previously).

     There are three objectives to this meeting:-

     1) To ensure the necessary legislation is brought forward to
     implement fully the recommendations of the Taylor Report.

     2) To consider ways to remove the shortcomings regarding
     compensation under the “Administration Of Justice Act 1982".

     3) Discuss "no -fault" compensation legislation.

should time permit, other matters relating to the this and other
disasters will be discussed and actions agreed.

     Thank you for your interest to-date,          we very    much hope you
can join us on the 27th.

                                        incerly,




                         Trevor Hicks                        Barry Devonside
                         Chairman                                 Secretary.




    &      on behalf of the HILLSBOROUGH FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP.
