                               From:    A R Baden
                                        SARD C
                               Ext:     3060-6371
                               Date:    15 May 1992
                               Copy:    PS/Permanent Secretary
                                        Mr Gunn
                                        Mr Fries
                                        Ms O'Mara
                                        Mr Wright
                                        Ms McLean
                                        Miss Stewart
                                        Ms Forsyth
                                        Mr Ellingford
                                        Mr Peters - HO
                                        Mr McPherson - SO
                                        Mr Cooper - WO
                                         (without Flags A and C
                                        apart from PS/Permanent
                                        Secretary, HO, SO and WO)
1.   Parliamentary Secretary
2.   Secretary of State

                       REVIEW OF ALL-SEATING
Summary and recommendations
1.   This submission invites you to agree:
     (i) a formal announcement of a review of the all-seating
     requirement at football grounds, but excluding the Premier
     League;

     (ii) the issues to be addressed in such a review, including
     the future remit of the FLA;

     (iii) an invitation to Mr Lang to extend the scope of the
     review to Scotland;
      (iv) the scope and nature of consultation on the review;and

     (v) to make the announcement via an arranged PQ and Press
     Notice.

2. Letters clearing the terms of this announcement with the
Home Secretary, in view of his fire safety and public order
responsibilities, and with the Secretaries of State for Scotland
and Wales are attached at Flag A. You may also wish to consider
whether the Prime Minister should be consulted. The draft
announcement is at Flag B. This would form the core of the Press
Notice.
Timing

3. We recommend that an announcement is made now on the terms
of the review, as at Flag A, to remove some of the damaging
uncertainty which has been created in football by spectator about
its scope and since it will take a few weeks yet before we are
able to announce the outcome of the review in view of the issues
involved. The Chief Executive of the FLA is content with the
terms of the draft announcement.
Background

4. Prior to the publication of Lord Justice Taylor's final
report into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster, in January 1990,
the intention was that there should be a move towards all-seater
stadia for the major clubs. Following the Hillsborough Disaster,
this was announced by the then Home Secretary in April 1989. In
deciding which clubs should be required to move towards all­
seating one of the main criteria was to be the likelihood of
crowd "surges" of the kind that occurred at Hillsborough. The
major clubs were to be all First Division clubs and a handful of
big clubs in the Second Division. Where a smaller club drew one
of these "major" clubs at home then the intention was to require
the host club to require tighter than usual crowd limits or even
to close the terracing altogether. It was also accepted that
because of the practical difficulties of achieving all-seating,
there would need to be flexibility in the Secretary of State's
powers to require all-seating, since not all clubs would be able
to meet that target by the same deadline.

5. Lord Justice Taylor, however, recommended all-seating at
First and Second Division grounds of the Football League, at
Premier Division grounds of the Scottish Football League and at
the national stadia by August 1994, and at all other grounds
designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975, by August
1999. The Home Secretary accepted these recommendations in
principle, and accepted the Taylor timetable for their
implementation at Football League grounds. However, following
consultation with the police and representatives of other sports,
it was decided to confine the all-seated requirement only to the
grounds of Football League and Scottish Football League and the
national stadia clubs.

6. In view of the reported views of the Prime Minister (Flag C),
the practical difficulties in making progress towards these
dates, the improvements in crowd control measures and crowd
safety technology since Taylor and the many representations which
have been received against introducing all-seating for the
smaller clubs, you may wish to consider reviewing the all-seater
policy to ensure that it targets those clubs where the risk is
greatest more effectively.

7. In your recent meetings with the All-Party Football Committee
and with the FLA, you have made clear that it would be wrong to
                                                                   2
abandon the all-seating requirement for Premier League clubs.
Retention of the requirement can be justified by reference to the
level of attendances at the great majority of these clubs with
the associated crowd control problem which was an important
reason behind the introduction of all-seating in the first place.
Furthermore, any club which has qualified to play in Europe has
under UEFA regulations to prohibit standing spectators at high
risk matches in UEFA club competitions from the 1993-94 season.
You took the view that Government would be undermining the
position of those Premier League clubs which had made good
progress towards all-seating, at great cost to themselves, and
conversely rewarding the dilatory, if it relaxed all seating for
the Premier League.
All-seatina review issues
8. Assuming that there is to be no review of the principle of
all-seating for the Premier League clubs, although the FLA is
prepared to accept an extension of the deadline in exceptional
circumstances, we suggest that the review should focus on the
follow'ng issues in England and Wales:
     i)    at Third and Fourth Division grounds should standing
           accommodation be allowed in those cases where the FLA
           decides it is safe subject to certain conditions or on
           the basis of a fixed capacity threshold (say 10,000)
           above which clubs must go all-seating;
     ii)   if i) is accepted, in view of average attendances at
           some Second Division clubs being significantly lower
           than in some Third Division clubs, it would seem
           anomalous not to consider whether standing
           accommodation should also be retained at those Second
           Division grounds. In line with the Prime Minister's
           reported views, however, it is suggested that any
           announcement of the terms of the review should
           nevertheless confirm the Government's commitment to the
           principle of all-seating for the majority of Second
           Division clubs who attract large numbers of supporters
           and who aim to join the Premier League;
     iii) by including the Second Division clubs in the review,
          even at the margin, the August 1994 deadline will
          almost certainly have to be relaxed for some clubs
          since re-development work will almost certainly be
          postponed during this close season until the outcome of
          the review is known. The review will therefore need to
          consider whether the deadline should be relaxed either
          for all clubs or on a case by case basis determined by
          the FLA. To announce that the review would be
          considering this would only serve, however, to
          undermine the progress being made to meet that
          deadline;
     iv)   whether transitional arrangements are necessary for
           clubs which are promoted and whether any special
                                                                    3
              arrangements are necessary for a cup competition where
              a big club is due to play an away game with a small
              club where all-seating is not required, or in a league
              game between two small clubs where a large attendance
              is anticipated?
         v)   if standing accommodation is to be retained does the
              FLA need new powers to require terracing to be brought
              up to a sufficient standard, and in advance of new
              primary legislation what temporary arrangements can be
              put in place.

    Position in Scotland

    9. The Scottish position has always been more flexible. The FLA
    has no authority in Scotland and there is a voluntary agreement
    to achieve all-seating by August 1994 for the Premier Division
    clubs and by August 1999 for designated grounds in the First and
    Second Divisions, so far as is practicable. We understand that if
    there is to be a review for England and Wales the Secretary of
    Sate for Scotland would almost certainly come under severe
    pressure to consult interested parties in Scotland on revisions
    to the present voluntary agreement on all-seating in Scotland as
    it applies to the Scottish First and Second Division clubs with
    designated grounds. Some of these issues at i) to v) above would
    be relevant to Scotland and advice on these points of principle
    is requested in the draft letter to Ian Lang.
    10. Scottish Office colleagues advise that the position of the
    Scottish Premier Division clubs should equate with those in the
    new Premier League. Since all can realistically hope to qualify
    for European competitions and attract large attendances,
    Scottish colleagues agree that all such clubs should still be
    required to go all-seated in order that they can cope more
    readily with larger crowds and comply with UEFA regulations. By
    comparison, there has been little pressure from clubs or
    supporters in Scotland for the retention of terracing. However, I
    understand that Scottish colleagues have come under some pressure
    from the police in Scotland for more rigorous implementation of
    safety requirements, including all-seated measures. Assuming that
    Mr Lang agrees to extending the review to Scotland, we will of
    course work closely with Scottish colleagues.

    Future of the FLA

    11. We assume you would want to take the opportunity to review
    the future of the FLA as well. In our view there is a good case
    for the FLA to continue for three main reasons: the all-seating
    requirement is to be retained at least for the Premier League?
    the probable need to ensure safe terracing at certain other
    grounds, and the important responsibility which the FLA has for
    keeping under review the discharge by local authorities of their
    safety certificate responsibilities under the Safety of Sports
    Grounds Act 1975. The latter is important because of the evidence
I                                                                      4
of varying standards in the past and the need to ensure that the
other safety recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor are
implemented.

12. However, we suggest that the review should consider the
following:
     vi) whether the FLA should continue to have a remit to
     address public order problems. Section 10 (12) (c) of the
     Football Supporters Act 1989, which gives the FLA the power
     to use the licence for this purpose, was inserted to help
     enforce the proposed national membership scheme;
     vii) should the FLA's remit be extended to cover comfort
     and amenity as requested by Mr Jacobs.



Future of the Licensing Regime
13. The Football Spectators Act 1989 is not now being used for
the purpose for which it was originally intended. The main thrust
of the licensing regime post Taylor is to effect the conversion
to all-seating, but the relevant provisions of the Football
Spectators Act 1989 were framed with the intention of supporting
the national membership scheme, which was subsequently shelved.
The licensing provisions are defective for the purposes of
requiring all-seating and it must be asked whether the cost of
licensing can be justified if the all-seating requirement is to
be relaxed. The Treasury are insisting on recovery of all the
FLA's costs from clubs via licence fees.

14. We suggest, therefore, that as well as examining what powers
the FLA may need to enforce safe terracing, a further issue would
be:

     viii) whether the objective of all-seating at certain
     grounds cannot be achieved through the safety certificate
     mechanism.
To do so would require amendments to the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975. You will wish to be aware at the outset of two
major difficulties in considering this. First, the basis of the
1975 Act is to ensure 'reasonable safety', and since the
requirement to install seats goes beyond that aim (standing not
being intrinsically unsafe) it may be difficult to frame
suitable amendments without doing violence to spirit of the Act.
Secondly, if we are not to extend the all-seater policy to other
sports, the amended Act will have to differentiate between
football and other sports grounds.

Consultations
15. After clearance with the Secretaries of State for Scotland
and Wales and the Home Secretary, you may wish to check whether
                                                                   5
the Prime Minister is content with the terms of the announcement
in view of his reported comments. It would then be made via an
inspired PQ and a Press Notice.

16. In addition to the representations you have asked from the
All Party Football Committee and the FLA, we would propose to
invite comments from the Home Office (both fire safety and public
order) FA, FA for Wales, the Football League, Premier League,
PFA, Football Trust and the two main supporters organisations.
We think it reasonable to allow a four week period for
consultation, given that most positions are well known, which
would enable us to report to you and a decision to be made by the
Summer Recess. It is course for the Secretary of State for
Scotland to decide who to consult there but it would naturally be
helpful if a similar timetable could be followed. A difficulty
here is that since the Secretary of State for Scotland wishes to
consult about the principle of the review in Scotland, it may
preclude my pre-Recess joint announcement.
17. Are you content with the terms of the draft announcement,
for the review to examine the issues at i-viii above, its
possible extension to Scotland and with the proposed timetable
and consultation arrangements?



A R BADEN
Rm 3.63
Sanctuary Buildings




                                                                   6
