{
    *"------      FOOTBALL MEMBERSHIP AUTHORITY SUB-COMMITTEE
     MINUTES OF A MEETING HELD ON THURSDAY, IOTH AUGUST 1989, AT THE
     O FFIC E^ O FT H E FOOT BALL~ASS OC1AT 1ON, LANCAST ER GATE, LON~DON W27
                                                                                    A   IS

     Present:   - l.H. S to tt (Management Committee) - in the Chair

                  T.R. Phillips (Commercial Director)
                  R.H.G. Kelly, F.C.I.S. (Football Association)
                  G. Kirton (Footbail Association)
                  D. McDonald (Department of the Environment)
                  N. Kinghan (Department of the Environment)
                  R. Adams, M.A. (Association of Chief Police Officers)

                  K.P. Stein (Arthur Young)
                  C. Metcalfe (Arthur Young)
                  P. Rowlinson (Chief Inspector, Merseyside Police)
                  C.J. Whalley (Football League)




     The meeting commenced a t 2.00 pm.
     APOLOGIES FOR ABSENCE

     Apologies for absence were received from Mr, W.G. McKeag (Management Committee)
     and Mr. J.A. Crawford (Football League).

     The Chairman welcomed Mr. Adams, Assistant Chief Constable with Merseyside
     Police, to the meeting as the nominated representative of ACPO.

     MINUTES OF LAST MEETING

     The Minutes of the last meeting held on 26th April 1989 were taken as read
     and signed by the Chairman as a correct record,

     SELECTION OF SUPPLIERS

     Mr. Metcalfe reported that the shortiist of suppliers was now down from 11
     to 10, as Logica had merged with Systems Reliability. He further reported that
     Arthur Young had prepared a draft Statement of Requirements, which had been
     circuiated round the table and issued to the shortlisted suppliers on 14th July.
     He added that Arthur Young and Trevor Phillips would be meeting each of the
     shortlisted suppliers over two days on 31st August and 1st September and at
     these meetings the suppliers would be asked If they intended to bid. He felt
     that this would reduce the field to 4 or 5 suppliers, who would then be invited
     to tender. The tenders would then be evaluated and from them 2 would be
     selected and ranked accordingly. The highest-ranked of the two would be invited
     to submit a presentation to the FMA Sub-committee.

      Mr. Stein emphasised the need for members of this committee to read and
      comment on the draft Statement of Requirements In order that a final version
      could be prepared. He added that there would have to be many months of testing
      before full implementation of the scheme. It'w as his view that the earliest
      date possible for implementation would be early 1991 and might even be August
      1991.




                                                            Continued/2
Mr. Kinghan stated that the Government hoped that the scheme would be in
place in the early months of the 1990/91 season. Mr. McDonald added that
the Government had acknowledged th at implementation could only come about
if the technology was satisfactory.

Mr. Phillips felt that the first day of the scheme would be chaos unless it had
been marketed correctly. He said th a t there should be time to market the scheme
in advance. He added that funding the initial marketing would present a problem.

FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL

Mr. Kinghan reported that the Football Spectators Bill had completed its Committee
stage in the House of Commons. After the summer recess there would be a
Report and a Third Reading on one day in October, followed by one day in the
House of Lords to consider the amendments made in the Commons. It was
anticipated that the Bill would gain Royal Assent by the first week in November.

Mr. Kinghan ran through the amendments made in Committee. He confirmed
th at the exemptions written into the Bill were still the same as when it had
left the Lords and the clauses providing for a national membership scheme had
not been materially changed In .Committee. A provision had been added giving
the Secretary of State the power to make additions to the framework of the
scheme. This would, for instance, enable the Secretary of State to deal with
anything in the final Taylor Report about the scheme.

Mr. Kinghan reported th at during Committee the Minister had been pressed to
write into the Bill specifics concerning the FMA, for example an Independent
chairman, the number of members, supporter representation etc. and the Minister
had undertaken to consider an additional amendment on this matter. Mr. Kinghan
felt that, subject to Ministerial approval, this was something which could be
discussed with The Football League and The Football Association before drafting
any amendment.

Mr. Kinghan added that the main changes to the Bill in Committee had been
in the area of safety. A provision had been added for a Football Licensing
Authority (FLA) to be set up to carry out the licensing function and the Government
had also added a power to the Bill for the FLA to have a monitoring role on
safety certificates and local authorities. The FLA would also have a role to
advise the Secretary of State on which grounds should replace standing areas
with seating.

Mr. Kin&han confirmed that the FLA would not have power over the FMA.
Mr. McDonald added th at it would not be inconceivable for the FLA and FMA
to have common members.

Concern was voiced a t the costs which the FLA could ask clubs to pay for a
licence., Mr. McDonald stated that the Government accepted that it would have
to pay for th at part of the FLA which would have a supervisory role on safety.
The issuing of a licence to operate a ground under the national membership scheme
had always been a part of the Bill and there would have been a charge of some
kind. Mr. Kinghan offered to consult The Football League and TheFootball
Association on the level of licence fees.

Mr. Kinghan outlined the anticipated timetable afte r Royal Assent, which was
expected to be in early November. On receipt of the final Taylor Report, which
is expected at the turn of the year, the Government would ask Parliament for
approval to appoint the FMA and probably to set up the FLA. The parliamentary
debate would probably be in January or February. The Government would hope
that the FMA would submit a scheme to the Secretary of State very shortly
after its appointment and there would be another debate after the FMA had
submitted the scheme.

                                                       Contlnued/3
There was a brief exchange of views on the age limit for exempted children
(10 years of age) written into the Bill. Mr. Kinghan's view was that the Bili
would not now be changed and the FMA may put forward a higher age limit
when it comes to submit the scheme.

DRAFTING OF SCHEME

The Chairman put forward a proposal that three separate sub-groups be formed
along the following lines:-

i)     club implementation (the putting-in of the scheme a t club level)
       - the Chairman, Mr. Whalley, Arthur Young and a t least one representative
          of FLESA.

ii)    financial/marketing/technology
       - the Chairman, Mr. Phillips, Mr. Kirton and Arthur Young.

iii)   legal aspects (court procedures, police procedures, appeals etc.)
       - Mr. McKeag, Mr. Adams, Arthur Young, the Department of the Environment
          and possibly the Home Office.

The Chairman's proposal was agreed by the meeting.        It was also agreed to
consult the supporters' organisations.

There was a short discussion on possible procedures a t the turnstiles when a
card is shown to be invalid. If it is accepted that the card-holder cannot back
his way out of the turnstile, how should he be dealt with on being let through
the turnstile? Mr. Adams pointed out that even with a fairly conservative card
failure-rate of 1%, this would mean 80 people In an attendance of 8,000. He
said that there could not be enough policemen inside the ground to cover each
turnstile and furthermore he would not wish police officers to be involved where
there could be a problem of false arrests. The Chairman pointed out that there
would be two grades of invalid cards - one where the card Is shown on the
blacklist (red light) and one where the card can simply not be read for some
reason (yellow light). He felt that in view of Mr. Adams' comments the red
light cases would present a major problem, but wondered if the yellow light
cases could be dealt with by letting them in to watch the match but the club
keeping their cards - the cards could then be Investigated separately by the
club. Mr. Phillips commented that the card failure-rate could be as high as
4% or 5%>a fte r 12 or 18 months of operation'and that would produce an enormous

                    flv -X .
                                          offer to provide a Government lawyer
to assist with the drafting and he confirmed that the offer was still open. It
was agreed that this would be helpful.

NEXT MEETING

it was agreed to hold the next meeting (of the full committee) on Monday, 11th
September, 1989, a t The Football Association, Lancaster Gate, London a t 2.00 pm.

There being no further business, the Chairman closed the rfieetlng at 4.20 pm.




                                                  Chairman

                                                   Date
