                                                                   2 ^    \   2 0 I ° 4-
                                       Department of Education and Science
                                       Elizabeth House York Road London SE1 7 PH

                                       Direct Line   01-934       999 8
                                       Switchboard 01-934 9 000
                                       GTN Number 2914

                                       Telex 23171
P E Bolton Esq
Home Office                                g I' January 1991
Fire and Emergency Planning Division   Your reference
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London                                 Our reference
SW1H 9AT




LEAGUE FOOTBALL: STRATEGY FOR IMPLEMENTING ALL SEATED ACCOMMODATION
Following    your letters to me of 19 December and 16 January, our
subsequent    telephone conversation and sight of Gordon Dunkley's two
letters to    you of 17 and 18 January, I am writing to set out in more
detail our    reaction to the FLA's statement which you sent me and your
suggestion   of a Government statement on all-seating.
Let me start by confirming our support for a Government statement
along the lines you suggested in your letter of 19 December. I am sure
that the more that could be said in such a statement about what the
Government is looking to clubs to do to satisfy the all-seating
requirement, the better. Indeed it might be helpful if the FLA. (who
will no doubt wish to continue to emphasise their independence from
Government) were to follow up any Government statement with a more
detailed account of what it will be looking to clubs to do to satisfy
the Taylor requirements on all-seating. This may need to cover such
issues as a definition of a seat and what it will be looking to in the
way of any ancillary works to ensure that a proper standard of amenity
is provided.

As I said in my letter of 14 December it also seems to us that going
beyond any statement of principle it will be most helpful if the FLA
could indicate when it expects to be able to draw up an implementation
plan of what it expects to see at each ground and by when having
regard to local circumstances, initially concentrating on First and
Second Division grounds. Having now seen Gordon Dunkley's letter of 17
January which sets out in general terms the inspection timetable, I am
most concerned at the likely delay in such an implementation plan. I
wonder if there is scope to bring forward the FLA work on all-seating
by suggesting that the Inspectorate should concentrate initially on
just the First and Second Division clubs? Perhaps we could have a
meeting before the discussion with the FLA and the Trust to discuss
these matters at the meeting which is to replace the one planned for 5
February.

On the FLA statement I endorse what you said in your letter of 16
January to Gordon Dunkley about reducing the density of standing

                                                                                           1
V    /




    accommodation and creating any impression that Third and Fourth
    Division clubs need do nothing at present. Indeed on the latter point
    we found the 19 December statement to be significantly less
    satisfactory than the 23 November draft. Paragraph 4 seems to take
    away much of the force of the statement in the second paragraph about
    Third   and Fourth Division clubs needing to go all-seater by August
    1999.  In addition to the points you madeto Mr Dunkley we would have
    preferred any wording based on paragraph 9 to make clear that it was
    only initially that the FLA would be concentrating on those First and
    Second Division clubs which did not satisfy that they were going to
    achieve the Taylor timetable. Gordon Durikley's letter to you is
    helpful up to a point on this but still leaves it open how far the
    Authority will go along with Taylor in relation to these clubs. As you
    know our Minister's view is that there may be scope for relaxation on
    the timing in relation to particular clubs but not on the principle of
    the need to go all-seating and clearly it would be for your Department
    to decide whether the circumstances in any particular case justified
    such an extension of the timetable.
    I am   grateful to you for continuing to keep me informed and I hope
    that   we can meet to discuss these matters further in advance of the
    rescheduled Liaison meeting.
    Yours sincerely




         VAUGHAN




                                                                         2
