                                   Department of Education and Science
                                   Elizabeth House York Road London SE1 7PH

                                   Direct Line 01-934 0 6 6 6
                                   Switchboard 01-934 9000
                                   GTN Number 2914

                                   Telex 23171
R Hough Esq
Home Office                          Z ° l January 1991
G2 Division                        Your reference
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London                             Our reference
SW1H 9AT




             QUESTIONNAIRE ON TAYLOR IMPLEMENTATION

I understand that the football liaison meeting on 5 February is
unlikely to take place now for lack of business and that we will
attempt to cover the ground in correspondence. One of the items
which was due to be on the agenda for the meeting was the
Football League's questionnaire on the implementation of the
Taylor recommendations. I am writing now with our rather overdue
comments as promised for you to take into account in any letter
which you may write to the League. In my view the best way
forward on the questionnaire might be to convene a meeting with
the League, the FLA and the Trust as soon as the results of this
first   questionnaire are available      in order to discuss
improvements to it. All three Government Departments will
presumably need to be represented.

On questions 1     and 2 we endorse fully the Treasury view that
there should be     6 monthly monitoring dates, preferably 1 April
and 1 September     to tie in with roughly both the financial year
and the start of    the football season.

On question 4 it might be helpful to attempt to break down the
rather omnibus category of "major developments", for example to
identify cover separately. Let us see how respondents have
handled this question.

Question 6 seems a rather ad hoc collection of questions and with
a very open ended f) . Question g) exposes a potentially more
serious problem which is that the treatment of safety and ground
improvements is handled differently at each of the three main
stages ie. work carried out in 1990, work currently in hand and
work not yet started but planned in the future. It is surely
desirable to ask questions about the same categories of safety
and ground improvements at all three stages? I would therefore
suggest that consideration be given to using the same definitions
of safety works and ground improvements as set out in questions 3
and 4, in questions 6g) and 7a).
5'




     It would be helpful if expected seating at 1 September each year
     could be used as the reference point in question 7c) in order to
     provide    a check on likely implementation of the Taylor
     timetable.

     I would be grateful to hear your reaction to these suggestions
     and to be copied in to any correspondence which you may have with
     the League on this subject.

     Yours sincerely




     A R BADEN
     Sport and Recreation Division




                                                                     2
