                                                             ANNEX A


NOTE OF A MEETING ON 2 MAY 1989
AT MTF OFFICE, GRAEME HOUSE, LIVERPOOL
TO DISCUSS ACTION AFTER HILLSBOROUGH

Present:       Dennis Morrison           Controller Urban Affairs,
                                          Merseyside Task Force
               Jeff Hopcroft             Merseyside Task Force
               Alan Chape                Deputy Chief Executive,
                                          Liverpool City Council
               David Mason               Director of Social Services
                                          Liverpool City Council
               Pauline Farrell           Director of Social Services
                                          Sefton MBC

1 •    Alan Chape explained that: the purpose of the meeting was to
discuss the way forward for seeking Government support for an ongoing
initiative to deal with the effects of the Hillsborough disaster. The
5 local authorities in Merseyside, the 2 adjoining county areas -
Cheshire and Lancashire - and the cities of Sheffield and Nottingham
have been working closely together since the disaster.

2«      David Mason detailed the wide ranging nature of     the co-
ordinated effort, including the Probation Service and many other
organisations - statutory and voluntary - who are promoting, through
the co-ordinating machinery, the recovery of the many who need help
and assistance.

3.    In due course, the cities of Sheffield and Nottingham would
withdraw but he was certain that there would have to be a continuing
and co-ordinated arrangement for the next 2/3 years to ensure that the
special needs of an unknown number of people could be met.     To meet
those needs, a special "Regional Disaster Organisation" was needed,
led from the social services expertise of the local authorities.

4*     Pauline Farrell re-affirmed the need for joint working to
facilitate the timing of assistance, the co-ordination of effort and
the most appropriate form of expertise required in the many different
cases (up to 40,000 people could be affected by the tragedy, directly
or indirectly).

5.     There was a need for central Government support for such an
organisation.    The costs had been estimated at £350,000 for each of
the next 2/3 years.     That level of resource would provide the Help
Linecosts,   Drop    In Centre,    the   Data  Base on    people/treat­
ment /timing/organisations etc, training costs and the staff costs.

6.      David Mason also explained that there would be extra costs in
the order of £lm per year for the additional counselling staff (perhaps
60 in number) to be employed within the mainstream social services
departments of the local authorities.
 *     ^ number of funding agencies were being approached to support
that work, including the EEC, the local authorities themselves, the
private sector (including national/international organisations) and
central Government.

8*    Dennis   Morrison   advised that   anysubmission     to central
Government for special funding should be a joint approach from all the
local authorities at the political level.    He was not aware of any
statutory   fund in the Department of the Environment which catered
specifically for the extra-ordinary costs of disasters.     The severe
storms in South East England had secured some special help from the
Government towards the capital costs of cleaning up and tree
replacement etc but his recollection of the terms of that assistance
was that the special help came over and above a particular threshold,
below which the costs were met by the local authorities affected.

9.     He considered thatthe most appropriate    Department to consider
any request for special assistance for the £350,000 per annum ongoing co­
ordinating initiative or support towards the £lm per annum costs of
additional counselling within the local authorities, would         be the
Department of Health, given their inspectorate role for the local
authority   social services.      Clearly it would be open        to the
authorities to also inform the Secretary of State for the Environment
and for Social Services of their request as undoubtedly the issue
would be considered inter-departmentally.

       Dennis Morrison made it clear that we could not speculate on
the chances of success of the proposal.

       David Mason accepted that position and the spirit in which the
advice was given.

12.      Detailed papers are attached.




J HOPCROFT
MTF
2 MAY 1989



JH/PVB
