                                                            SGP5
SPECIAL GRANTS PROGRAMME 1992-93

GRANT APPLICATION POLICY APPRAISAL FORM
Checklist of   questions to be considered on handing a grant
application.   (Please continue overleaf if necessary.)

NAME OF ORGANISATION:
AMOUNT OF GRANT SOUGHT:
PURPOSE OF GRANT:

1.    ORGANISATION
1.1 Is the organisation and its works known to you? Please say
what contact, if any, you may have had with the organisation. (If
you doubt the organisation's status as a voluntary organisation,
please state this.)




1.2   Do you believe the organisation to be effective?




1.3 How capable are the people responsible for running the
organisation?




1.4   Is the organisation involved in pressure group activities?




2.    ACTIVITIES
2.1 In the case of grant sought towards a local project please
say whether the project would have national, or at least
regional, significance, and if so, what?




 2.2 In what way would the programme of work be relevant to the
 achievement of the Department's objectives?
2.3 What would the Department gain from the proposed programme
of work?




2.4 How highly would the work programme rate with current
Ministerial priorities?




2.5 Does the work duplicate or cut across any other work on this
field?




2.6   Is the proposed programme of work realistic?




2*7   Are the objectives sufficiently defined for adequate
monitoring of progress and measuring output and performance?




2.8 Is any part of the work programme political in intention,
use or presentation?




3.    COSTS

3.1   Are the salary costs reasonable?




3.2   Are the other costs reasonable?
  4.    RECOMMENDATIONS

  4.1   Does the project represent value for money?




 4.2 How worthy of support under the SGP do you consider this
 application to be?




 4.3    How much grant support do you recommend?




 4.4 How long a funding period would you recommend (up to 3
 years). ^ Should any grant offered be tapered beyond Year 1?
 Please give reasons for your recommendations.




 4.5 How would the activity become self-financing at the end of
 any agreed funding period?




                 anY asP®c t s .of this application which you would
support?         °r amen      lf the Department were to offer grant




4 .7  Would your Division/Region be prepared to provide a
Nominated officer to administer a grant? If not, please indicatS
where you consider responsibility lies.




SIGNATURE:
NAME (BLOCK LETTERS)
OFFICIAL ADDRESS

DATE
