                             From      A R Baden
                                       SARD C

                             Ext       3060-6371

                             Date      15 May 1992

                             Copy      Miss Stewart (OR)
                                       Mr Ellingford
                                       Mr Seal

Mr Corner

              RTPI LETTER OF 22 APRIL TO MR MELLOR

1. I am replying on behalf of Miss Stewart, to the request for a
contribution from the sport point of view to your draft reply to
the above letter.   I am sorry that your deadline of earlier in
the week was missed due to our need to consult the Sports Council
but I understand that you are still able to take on board our
comments today.

2. As the letter makes clear the RTPI1s involvement has not been
directly with SARD, but rather with the Sports Council. We
understand that the RTPI has been helpful in assisting the Sports
Council in developing its register of recreational land and in
contributing to the DOE's Planning Policy Guidance Note 17 on
sport and recreation.   We also understand that the RTPI has had
discussions with the FSADC on developing planning guidelines for
new stadia with a view to guidelines coming out in the future. In
our view the RTPI is in danger of overstating the role that it
has hitherto played in relation to sport, although that is not to
say the potential is not there.

3.  In your advice I suggest you therefore explain that the RTPI
has only been helpful at the margins in relation to sport,
although there are a number of issues on which it could perhaps
play a much more helpful and constructive role which would be
worth encouraging in any meeting with Ministers. A good example
of this would be in the RTPI encouraging a more positive role to
be taken by local authorities in responding to the challenge of
the Taylor report in enabling the relocation of football clubs to
new modern grounds.




A R BADEN
Rm 3.63
Sanctuary Buildings




                                                                1
