hs. 12.19/ambserv.dm


                                         cc   Mr Bolton

Mr Rhodes
F8 Division



PROVISION OF AMBULANCE SERVICES AT FOOTBALL MATCHES

Thank you for your note of 13 December with the letter from the
Leader of Sheffield City Council about ambulance provision at the
designated football grounds in Sheffield.

Recommendation 42 of the Interim Report envisages a "fully
equipped" ambulance from the appropriate ambulance authority.
The idea behind this recommendation was, we think, that the
professional ambulance service and health authority should be
thought in to determine the standard of ambulance cover needed,
and that, notwithstanding the availability of the services of
others such as St Johns, to provide it (even though there is no
duty as such to provide a stand-by service of this sort). What
constitutes "fully equipped" is for the ambulance authority. If
an army or police ambulance were provided by or on behalf of the
authority, that would, in our view, fulfil the Inquiry's
recommendation.

The next question of course is what if no ambulance of any
description can be provided by or on behalf of the ambulance
authority. You may feel it better not to speculate on this. If
you feel comment is needed I think the line to take is that
alternative cover could be provided as long as the ambulance
authority agree that it is up to the required standard.

A slight complication in all of this is that we are unsure
whether, strictly speaking, safety certificates issued by local
authorities can lawfully include terms and conditions relating
to medical/ambulance provision. Even so, in the current climate
of opinion such terms and conditions are unlikely to be
challenged.  I enclose a draft contribution for consideration.




                                         D J MOULD
                                         G2 Division

2r9 December 1989



FEP/89 35/40/2
^DRAFT CONTRIBUTION


Terms and conditions contained in a safety certificate are a
matter for the issuing authority.        Compliance with recommendation
42 of the Hillsborough Inquiry Interim Report has the effect of
drawing the relevant ambulance authority into the consideration
and provision of the ambulance cover necessary if a crowd of at
least 5000 is expected at a football match. Our view, therefore,
 is   that   an   ambulance   provided   on   behalf   of   the   ambulance
authority [or alternative ambulance cover approved by the
authority] would fulfil the objective of that recommendation.
