                          hoc   Hr Dear, HMIC    |
                                M rs
                                Miss Edwards
                                Mr Goddard/^
                                                        f    H o m e O ffice
                                Miss Harrison,              QUEEN ANNE'S GATE
                                Mrs Moody                    LONDON SW1H 9AT




                                                     November 1991




                fs/oi9<x£k.

Thank you for your letter of 5 November to the Home Secretary
about the policing at the Hillsborough tragedy.
I can well understand your concern. We all feel deeply for
all those who lost relatives or friends in that tragic
incident. The whole Government was, as you know, greatly
saddened by this dreadful disaster. That is why we have tried
to ensure that the circumstances which caused it should be
fully investigated and openly exposed.
At least four investigations of the events have been
undertaken in order to ensure that all the relevant issues
were properly covered. I do not, therefore, think that it is
entirely fair to say, as you do, that "no detailed
investigation around the responsibilities of those concerned
has yet been undertaken or published".
The first of these investigations was, of course, the formal
inquiry by the Lord Justice Taylor which was commissioned by
the Home Secretary on the second day after the disaster.

The investigation, which was inaugurated by the Taylor
inquiry, involved some 440 officers from the West Midlands
police force. They took some 3,776 statements as well as
taking advantage of video films from 3 separate sources which
provided, in all, some 71 hours of further evidence.
This vast store of evidence was carefully sifted, and X think
that it is fair to say that the interim report of Lord Justice
Taylor on the disaster gives a very clear picture of police
activity on the day.


                                                      /The inquest....


George Howarth Esq MP
House of Commons
•r.m m rm   svn a   oaa
The inquest into the deaths at Hillsborough constituted a
second inquiry into these events. This took over 100 days for
all the material facts to be examined.

The inquest served a separate additional function, in that the
law states that its purpose is to ascertain the identity of
the deceased and how, when and where he came by his death.
The Coroners Rules provide that neither the coroner nor the
jury shall express any opinion on any other matters. The
rules also specifically prohibit the framing of an inquest
verdict in such a way as to appear to determine any question
of criminal or civil liability on the part of a named person.
Any issue of criminal or civil liability is a matter for the
criminal or civil courts and is not a matter for the coroners
inquest.

If anyone is dissatisfied with any aspect of an inquest
including the verdict - and I understand that some relatives
are - it is open to them, under section 13 of the Coroners Act
1988, to apply with the authority of the Attorney-General for
the High Court to quash the verdict and to order a fresh
inquest to be held, either by the same coroner or by a
different one from the same administrative area.

Coroners inquests may also be challenged by way of judicial
review. Anyone contemplating such a course of action would,
though, be well advised to seek legal advice at an early
stage.

In a third inquiry, which followed up their work for
Lord Justice Taylor, the West Midlands Police Force conducted
a further major investigation with a view to discovering
whether the disaster resulted from, or was made worse by,
criminal activity on the part of any individual.

The Director of Public Prosecutions concluded that the results
did not indicate that any one should be made the subject of
criminal proceedings.

Perhaps I could add a ^c o mment on this. The conclusions at
which the Director of Public Prosecutions arrived mean that,
so far as anyone can discover - and the evidence which has
been amassed has been considerable - this terrible disaster
was not the result of criminal activity. The result is that
neither Chief Superintendent Duckenfield nor Superintendent
Murray - nor, for that matter, any other person - has been
charged with any crime.

For anyone other than a police officer that would be the end
of the matter. For police officers, though, there remains the
question of whether, without having good or sufficient cause,
they failed to fulfil all the requirements of their role as
police officers.



                                             /The fourth.
The fourth investigation of the events of the day, therefore,
covered complaints which had been made regarding police
behaviour. This investigation involved the taking of a
further 5,341 statements as well as the scrutiny of all the
material which had previously been examined. It was
supervised throughout by the Police Complaints Authority.
The Police Complaints Authority subsequently expressed
themselves as satisfied that it hatS been properly and
thoroughly conducted. The privacy of people, who complain
against the police, is protected by the courts. The results
of this investigation cannot therefore be published.
In order to maintain discipline within the force, the Police
Complaints Authority and the Deputy Chief Constable are
required to consider whether there are ways in which the
officer may have failed in his duty. If so, they are required
to arrange for a formal hearing of the charges against him.

This was done. After receiving the report of the complaint
investigation, the PCA decided that Chief Superintendent
Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray should face disciplinary
charges.

A police disciplinary hearing is held in private. It is
concerned only with whether or not the officer concerned may
have failed to conform to police discipline. The hearing
would not, therefore, in any way contribute to public
knowledge of what happened on the day, nor would it do more
than receive and consider the evidence, which is already
known, as to the propriety of Mr Duckenfield's conduct.

There is one important issue in relation to police discipline
which is often ignored. There are a number of punishments
which can be imposed for bad discipline. The most serious
punishment, though, which a disciplinary tribunal can impose,
is that of dismissal or of requirement to resign.

This is the heaviest punishment which it is possible to award
an officer for the very worst offence which he could have
committed. In other words, his conduct must have been so bad
that it would be inappropriate for him to remain as a police
officer.

By retiring, in advance of whether or not he had been found
9uilty, Mr Duckenfield has, in fact, done what the worst
disciplinary judgement could have imposed upon him to do. He
has resigned. He is no longer a police officer. A
disciplinary hearing can no longer be undertaken against a
person who is not a police officer.




                                             /I am sure.
I am sure that you will understand that it would not be proper
for me to comment on the detail of Mr Duckenfield's case other
than to say that it needs to be remembered that it is by no
means certain that the disciplinary tribunal would have found
Mr Duckenfield guilty of whatever charges had been preferred
against him.
Whilst our sympathies are all very much with those who were
caught up in this terrible tragedy, the position of
Mr Duckenfield needs equally careful and just handling.

If Mr Duckenfield is a sick man, as seems to be the case, it
would not be right to refuse him retirement on medical grounds
in order that charges should be heard against him, which may
or may not be proved, but whose most serious result could only
be that he should leave the service which he has already asked
to leave voluntarily.
This is very much a matter for the South Yorkshire Police
Force and its police authority as are the other matters which
were raised in your letter. If you wish to pursue these
matters further, I suggest that it would be correct for your
concerns to be discussed with them.
Your main concern, however, in writing to the Home Secretary
was, if I have read your letter aright, that there is a
feeling that there should be some further investigation of
police operations at Hillsborough as a whole.

In practice, successive Home Secretaries have only
commissioned major inquiries into the conduct of a force where
they considered that the whole conduct of a force, in relation
to the community which it policed, had been called in
question. This is not the case with the South Yorkshire force
despite the terrible events at Hillsborough.

In the light of the very wide range of investigations which
have already been conducted, together with the lapse of time,
I find it difficult to see that any additional useful
information or conclusion could be produced by yet another - a
fifth - investigation.

I do understand how deeply you and all those involved with tjie
Hillsborough tragedy feel. We here do, too, and we have a
very deep personal sympathy for all those who have been
bereaved by this terrible event. But I really do think that
every stone has been turned over and every avenue pursued in
order to seek such justice as is possible and in order to
ensure that, as far as is possible, a similar tragedy should
never occur again.




                                             /I am sending.
I am sending copies of this letter to those to whom you
copies of yours.




                              L.
                            FERRERS
                  H O U SE OF CO M M O NS
                      L O N D O N SW1A OAA                 -»/       \

 5th November 1991                    ^

 Rt Hon Kenneth Baker M.P.
 Home Secretary
 50 Queen Anne's Gate
 London SWIH 9AT
                                                      3,

                                                                 I

 Dear Home Secretary                                         /
                                                  .   f t   4
RE:- HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER                    '


I am writing to protest at the way in which South
Lancashire Police have effectively side-stepped the
proposed disciplinary investigation into Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield for his part in the
Hillsborough tragedy.

As you are aware, the policing of the Hillsborough
tragedy has consistently been a subject of criticism,
not least in the Taylor report. However, to date, no
aetailed investigation around the responsibilities of
those concerned has yet been undertaken or published,
ihis means, in effect, that specific responsibility
tor certain decisions will never, unless you
intervene, be fully pinned down.

Let me say that I am not seeking to hound Chief
 Superintendent Duckenfield, or question the fact that
  5              to take earlY retirement on the basis
of his ill-health, which, I understand, has been the
subject of a proper medical examination. However,
if- the families of those sadly killed at that event,
           ' ??V of *he survivors, are to be "satisfied
rnat the justice they were promised by the then Prime
Kinister has been obtained, then surely the policing
of             R e s p e c t i v e of the medical circumstances
ox anybody at this time, must be subject to a detailed
investigation. Whether this is achieved by a
disciplinary process or some other means, does not, it
seems to me, really matter.


                                             (continued).
Having met a large group of the families, I can assure
you that they are far from happy at the whole process
which has so far taken place up to and including the
Coronor1s Inquest and this latest decision, which
incidentally they predicted several weeks ago to me and
my colleague, Peter Kilfoyle, only adds to their sense
of frustration and injustice.
I have written separately to the Attorney General, arising
out of a letter from the Prime Minister's office to one of
the families and hope to meet him in the near future.
However, I do believe it is within your ppwers^ffv t
very closely at the implications of Soura^Lancashire's ~)
Police decision to effectively evade an inv§5~fcargatxoar-rnto
the role of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.
Although I have copied this letter quite widely to a
number of interested parties, it has not been written with
a view to publication.>
There is, however, a very serious issue at stake here,
namely the fact that at the time of the Hillsborough tragedy,
the families were given very clear assurances by not least
a person than the then Prime Minister, Mrs Thatcher, that
everything would be fully investigated and that no stone
would be left unturned.
Vvhilst I realise that it might be convenient to leave this
matter as it stands, I am painfully aware that all of these
people are left feeling that every promise they were made
has not been honoured, either in the spirit or the letter.
 It is ML-tMs_£art that I seek your _intervention in finding
 some way—-oJT pregtea^ly investigating in detail the role of
 S o u t h (Lancashire Police in general and the role of the
 officers-1— responsible specifically, in the policing of
 that day of that event.

Yours sincerely




 c.c. Mr   Peter Joynes
      Mr   P Hammond, Hillsborough Family Support Group
      Mr   Peter Kilfoyle M.P.
      Mr   Eddie O'Hara M.P.
      Mr   Eddie Loyden M.P.
      Mr   Eob Parry M.P.
      Mr   Bob Wareing M.P.
      Mr   Frank Field M.P.
      Mr   Joe Benton M.P.
      Mr   John Evans M.P.
      Mr   Gerry Bermingham M.P.
