                                                   DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL HERITAGE
                                                   Horse Guards Road, London SW1P 3AL
                                                   Telephone: 071-270 5925
                                                   Facsimile: 071-270 6026

From the Secretary of Statefor National Heritage
THE RT. HON. DAVID MELLOR QC MP
                                                                   Cc

        C92/3615/^^


        R G Noades Esq
        Chairman
        Crystal Palace FC
        Selhurst Park Stadium
        LONDON
        SE25 6PU                                               June 1992




        Thank you for your letter of 22 May      setting out your
        suggestions about funding for ground improvements and the
        Taylor Report.
        You will by now have seen the announcement I made in the House
        on 4 June about our plans to re-examine the all-seating
        requirements at Third and Fourth Division clubs in the Football
        League.    I will also be looking at the position of Second
        Division clubs with very low average attendances.      We have
        asked a number of interested organisations to let us have their
        views   and have specifically asked them whether standing
        accommodation should be permitted only at grounds with a
        maximum capacity of, for example, 10,000.    We have asked for
        these comments within fourweeks and I        will announce my
        conclusions as soon as possible thereafter.
        I note your suggestion that the Football Trust should provide
        loans to clubs as well as grant-aid.   I know that the Football
        Trust has the question of loans for Premier League clubs in
        certain circumstances under consideration, although this would
        not be in addition to the reduction in Pool Betting Duty monies
        which you are calling for.

        VTou suggest that these loans should be funded by the Government
        or by the National Lottery.        I would point out that the
        National Lottery will not be in operation until 1994% n d it is
        not possible at this stage to say precisely how the proceeds
        will be used.       In addition you will be aware that the
        Chancellor has announced that he will extend the reduction in
        Pool Betting Duty for an additional five years provided clubs
        have plans in place to finance out of their own resdiirdes the

                                                       1
cost of necessary ground improvements to implement the Taylor
recommendations. Government action is therefore already making
available a sizeable contribution to the costs of implementing
the Taylor recommendations.    It is therefore incumbent upon
football to make its own contribution to improving grounds and
I hope that a substantial proportion of the new money going to
the Premier League clubs will be use for this purpose rather
than on inflated transfer fees and players' salaries.
I note what you say about all clubs being treated the same by
the Football Trust for grant purposes irrespective of their
division.  This is a matter for the Trust.    However, I should
point out that within the grant-aid ceilings which they have
set for each division the Trust is committed to taking full
account of the needs and resources of all clubs in considering
applications for grant.    They have also said that should the
reduction in Pool Betting Duty concession be extended they will
concentrate the extra resources on the smaller clubs that are
most in need of assistance.
I do not accept that the August 1994 deadline for all-seating
is totally inadequate.    My announcement of 4 June made very
clear our commitment to the principle and timetable for all­
seating for our top clubs.    The Football Licensing Authority
have made clear, however, that it is incumbent on clubs to
inform it of any circumstances which prevent them from
achieving all-seating by that date.



                      Vvj
                            Ji\vV

DAVID MELLOR


S!
SECRETARY OF STATE
DEPARTMENT OF
NATIONAL HERITAGE




                                    2
                           ■1 HERITAGE

  A C T iC N   i I{ it

  BY           | 1)         l ct £l"2 ~ '                                                                           L ,   <uuV J^X |
  FCH INFGh^AnCi'j:                                                               SECRETARY OF STATE
                                                                                   DEPT. OF NATIONAL                          y^s-ts'


                                                                                      2 8 MAY 1992
                              ^             ^                                  | FILING INSTRUCTIONS
  DNH                                                                          j F!L£ No ................. ......



           SELHURST PARK STADIUM ; LONDON SE25 6PU ; TEL: 081-653 4462 FAX: 081-771 5311


The Rt. Hon. David Mellor MP
Secretary of State for National Heritage
House of Commons
London SW1 1AA
                                                                                  22nd May 1992




I have some thoughts which may be of interest to you with regard to
football and the Football Trust grants, and also the Taylor Report,
which I would like to briefly suggest:

1.      The Football Trust should be allowed to make substantial loans
        towards ground development where it involves stands and new seating,
        perhaps on an interest-free basis, but with the borrowing Club
        repaying over a 10-20 year period.   This would replenish the Trust
        funds to enable the money to be recycled and used for the further
        development of other grounds.   As loans are repaid it would then be
        available for relending.

2.      The loan should not be restricted to the £2M ceiling because almost
        all the new stand developments would cost E5-10M, and it is extremely
        difficult for any Clubs, other than the major ones, to fund the
        balance of the monies required for these schemes.

3.      Clubs should be referred to as CLUBS and not as Premier League or
        Football League Clubs.   There should be no difference as on a number
        °f occasions a Club like Wimbledon, Oxford, Watford, etc. have gone from
        the 4th Division to the 1st in four seasons.   All Clubs should be
        treated almost identically and not subject to their "temporary" status
        based on their Division.

4.      Any Club prepared to voluntarily limit its capacity to a maximum
        10,000 should be exempt from the all—seater requirement.

5.     The *94 deadline for the Taylor Report seating is totally inadequate
       and having acquired a planning consent for a new stand at Selhurst Park
       I have just been told that because the roof design needs to be changed
       they will require a whole new application.    The Taylor Report does not
       allow for design, planning, building regulations, funding arrangements
       and the construction period.    It is simply not feasible.

                                                                                                                           Tuhp
                                                                                                                           computers
                     Club President: 6tanley Stephenson, Chairman: R.G. Noades, Manager: Steve Coppell
               Directors: R.E. Anderson, B. Coleman, A.S.C. DeSouza, G. Geraghty, S. Hume-Kendall, M.E. Lee,
                                    G.H. Lucking, P.H.N. Norman, K.A. Sinclair, B.O. Umunna
                                 Company Secretary: D.A. Miller Club Secretary: M.A.G. Hurst
CRYSTAL PALACE F.C. (1986) Ltd; Reg. Office: Selhurst Park, London SE25 6PU. Reg. in London: 1844765. V.A.T. Reg. No. 452 3166 66
The Rt.Hon. David Mellor MP
Page 2                                             22nd May 1992




       May I suggest that the FLA be invited to give a report on
       the feasibility of the '94 deadline so that they make
       suggestions with regard to the timing and implementation
       of a programme that is possible to achieve. After all, they
       should by now know enough about the problems to advise
       Government.

6.     I believe the Football Trust could also advise on the feasibility
       of the '94 deadline, and could possibly support an FLA report.


Clubs are wary that if the Football Trust introduces a loan system that
they will, in effect, lose the present Grants system that exists and my
suggestions of a loan scheme should be separate from the Grant Aid
scheme that operates now and not affect individual clubs allocation of
grant monies.

I am really looking for Government funding or National Lottery funding,
which over a period of time could be repaid because the new developments
will produce revenue, and be self—funding by virtue of their design and
use, compared to facilities that exist at present.

I trust the above views may be of some value to you and to football
generally.

Yours ever




R.G.Noades
Chairman
H
O
