                                              SAR/P/197/260/l/B

j                                   From     Miss G Houldsworth
                                             SARD C
                                    Date     9 March 1992

                                    Copy      Mr Horne
                                              Miss Stewart
                                              Mr Oliver
                                              Mr Ellingford


    2. PS/Mfp'ATKINS

    LORD DORMAND OF EASINGTON1S PRIVATE PEER'S BILL ON SPORTING
    EVENTS (CONTROL OF ALCOHOL ETC)

    ISSUE
    1.    Lord Dormand's Bill is to amend the Sporting Events (Control
    of Alcohol etc) Act 1985.    Under section 3 of the 1985 Act the
    sale or supply of alcohol at licensed premises inside grounds is
    prohibited unless an exemption order has been obtained form a
    magistrates' court.   Section 4 of the Act provides that the
    duration of the exemption will be for 5 months.    Lord Dormand's
    amendment seeks to extend the duration of the exemption to 12
    months.


    RECOMMENDATION
    2.   This submission is for information only and no decision is
    necessary at this stage.


    3.   TIMING
    The Bill is due for Second Reading in the Lords on 10.3.92.


    BACKGROUND AND ARGUMENT
    4.   The Minister will remember that Arthur Sandford raised this
    matter at their meeting of 19 June 1991 when he asked for the
    Minister's support in securing an extension to the exemption
    period.   The League were concerned that clubs could not properly
    budget for the whole of the financial year since exemptions had
    to be renewed every 5 months, and maintained that the clubs acted
    responsibly in the sale of alcohol.    It was explained to Mr
    Sandford that there was little hope of the Government amending
    the legislation as there was no suitable vehicle available and
    little Parliamentary time.    We pointed out, however, that it was
open to them to approach individual MPs to persuade them to
introduce a private Member's Bill.   Lord Dormand's Bill appears
to be a result of that suggestion.


5.   Since the Minister expressed himself sympathetic to the
clubs' problems on this issue, and given that the police have
confirmed that they do not object to any such extension of the
exemption period, we have written repeating the Minister's
support and asking that the Bill is not blocked if it obtains a
Second Reading.


6.   As the Minister is aware, the Home Secretary has now written
to colleagues expressing his approval of the Bill and
recommending that it receives Government support.


CONCLUSION
The Bill is unlikely to proceed because of the election but we
will keep the Minister informed.




Gillian Houldsworth
Rm 3Q3 x 6358




                                                                   2
