T 0M FIRE SERUICES INSPECTORATE/FEU           11,07,1989 12:16            HO, 5          P. 2
                                      ¥\\Cs
                                                                   Suy^liC<A^j HP {w*
 ^ p -.lllsborough Disaster                                                                 fcy& fxlr

                                                                 c*y   C >a |'<a ^ y o   ^Itf /1)^
     On 15 April 1989 at Hillsborough Football Stadium, 95 people died
     and over 400 were injured during an FA Cup semi-final match
     between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest.

     Two days later the Home Secretary set up an independent Inquiry
     and appointed Lord Justice Taylor to carry out that Inquiry with
     the following terms of reference:

            "To inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday
            football ground on 15 April 1989 and to make
            recommendations about the needs of crowd control and
            safety at sports events,"

     Lord Justice Taylor has conducted the Inquiry in two phases. The
     first phase was to discover the facts and causes of the disaster
     and allow him to make any immediate interim recommendations
     necessary in the short term.

     Lord Justice Taylor provided a brief summary of causes. He found
     that the immediate cause of the gross overcrowding which occurred
     at Hillsborough was the failure to cut off access to the central
     pens on the Leppings Lane terrace which were already overfull
     when a further gate (Gate C) allowing access was opened. He
     found that there was a lack of control and monitoring of crowd
     density and an inability of turnstiles to cope with the large
     numbers arriving over a short period of time.

     The main thrust of the Interim Recommendations was to reduce
     numbers on the terraces, to increase vigilance and to achieve a
     proper balance in crowd control between prevention of disorder
     and maintenance of safety.   In short to prevent overcrowding and
     crushing on terraces and improve safety procedures. His Interim
     Report was published on 4 August and in it he made 43
     recommendations which he considered to be the minimum necessary
     to ensure that existing football grounds "can for the present be
     used safely".   Of these recommendations 28 were asked to be
     carried out before the start of the 1989/90 football season. The
     remaining 15 were asked to be implemented as soon as possible.

     The Interim Report asks for a reduction of 15% on all terraced
     areas after arriving at the Green Guide figure and that the
     numbers of spectators entering each pen or terraced area should
     be carefully monitored in order not to exceed the maximum
     capacity for that area. There should be continuous checking of
     crowd conditions on the terracing by police officers/stewards
     whose sole duty is to look for possible overcrowding or distress.
     The Interim Report makes further detailed recommendations of
     perimeter fences and gates and crush barriers.  It also deals
     with duties of police, club, local authorities and the emergency
     services and seeks the provision of adequate and sufficient first
     aid facilities.
FROM FIRE SERUICES INSPECTORfiTE/FEU       11.07.1989 12:17   NO. 5   P.
 ’    The clubs have reacted positively to the recommendations. It is
      the case that a very small number of clubs have not fulfilled
      everyone of the urgent recommendations. However this is

  •   primarily due to reasons other than not wishing to seek
      compliance.  For example, thebe clubs have not been able to
      provide sufficient cutting equipment for perimeter fence because
      of the nature and structure of the existing fence. The Advisory
      Group on each case are satisfied that other safety arrangements
      are sufficient.
      The second phase of the Inquiry will be directed to making final
      and long term recommendations about crowd control and safety at
      sports grounds. The Report is expected late December/early
      January 1989/1990.
