13-3.AH

From       Keir Hopley               cc   Mr Sutton
           F8 Division                    Mr Burns
           Ext. 2367                      Mr Boys Smith
           5 March 1992                   Mr Goddard
                                          Mr Moorey
                                          Mr Hillier
                                          Miss Pugh
                                          Mr Kerpel
                                          Mr Grantham
                                          Mr Baden, DES



1. Mr Wilson
2. Mr Lockyer
3. Miss Wilkinson

LORD DORMAND OF EASINGTON'S PRIVATE PEERS BILL ON SPORTING
EVENTS (CONTROL OF ALCOHOL ETC)


Mr Wilson's note of today requested advice on the Government's
approach to this Bill.


Purpose of the Bill


2.     If football clubs (or other organisations managing
designated sports grounds) wish to sell alcohol on their
premises, they require a order under the Sporting Events
 (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985. By virtue of section
 4(1)(b) of the 1985 Act, the maximum period for which an order
 may be issued is five months.    The Bill seeks to extend this
 period to 12 months.


 Background

 3.    During the commons stages of the Sporting Events (Control
 of Alcohol Etc) Bill, concern was expressed by members of the
 Opposition that the period before renewal should be kept as
 short as possible.     The Government was anxious not to impose
 an unnecessary burden on the courts by requiring over frequent
 renewal and a compromise period of 5 months was agreed.
Recent Developments


4.    There has been increasing pressure recently for this
interval to be extended.    The Football League have been co­
ordinating the lobbying.    The argument put forward is that the
current interval places an unnecessarily high administrative
burden on the football clubs,    and for that matter, the
magistrates' courts which are required to hear the
applications.     The Minister for Sport is known to be strongly
in favour of the amendment.


5.    Following the First Reading of Lord Dormand's Bill, we
consulted ACPO.     They have said that they would prefer to
maintain the current position on the grounds that to relax
requirements in respect of alcohol at football matches would
be to send the wrong message about the need to maintain
constant vigilance and strict controls on the consumption of
alcohol.


Recommendation


6.    Despite these views, we understand from the police that
football clubs have behaved responsibly over the sale of
alcohol.   In any case, the police have the powers to step in
and close bars if they foresee a particular problem.        The
amendment contained in the Bill would not relax any of the
controls on the sale of alcohol, simply reduce the
administrative burden on ground authorities and (marginally)
 on the courts.    We therefore see no good reason to block the
 Bill and, despite ACPO's views we recommend that the Bill
 should receive the Government's support.

 7.    If Ministers agree, the Home Secretary may wish to write
 to the Lord President as in the draft attached.    Given that
 the Second Reading is scheduled for Tuesday 10 March, it is
 important that the letter issues before the weekend.
8.   We shall provide material for Lord Astor to use in the
debate by close of play tomorrow as requested.




                         KE1R HOPLEY

                          KEIR HOPLEY
 DRAFT LETTER FOR THE S OF S TO SEND TO


 Rt Hon John MacGregor OBE, MP
 Lord President of the Council
 Privy Council Office
 Whitehall SW1




 LORD DORMAND OF EASIN6T0N'S PRIVATE PEERS BILL ON SPORTING
 EVENTS (CONTROL OF ALCOHOL ETC)                          ®



Lord Dormand's Bill is down for Second Reading on Tuesday 10
March and I am writing to seek your concurrence, and that of
colleagues, to its receiving the Government's support.


Under the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol Etc) Act 1985,
football clubs wishing to sell alcohol must obtain an order
from a magistrates' court.   The maximum period for which such
an order may be granted is five months.   The Bill seeks to
extend this period to 12 months.


The Football League and others has been lobbying hard for such
an amendment and I understand that the Bill has the support of
the Minister for Sport.   I too, am anxious not to place an
unnecessary burden upon football clubs and indeed on the
magistrates' courts.   The police tell us that there have been
few difficulties in respect of the renewal of these orders.
It therefore seems reasonable for the interval to be extended.



I realise that the Bill is unlikely to proceed very far
because of parliamentary pressure.   Nevertheless I believe
that the Government should support these practical measures if
there is a division on Second Reading.


I am copying this letter to Members of LG, to the Secretary of
State for Education and Science, to the Minister for Sport to
First Parliamentary Counsel and to the Secretaries to LG.
