     HOME OFFICE
           G2 DIVISION
 Fire and Emergency Planning Dept
Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
          Tel; 071- 273
          Fax: 071-273 3964
        With Compliments         v


                                      \
                                     <=>\^




             di
             Fire. Don?give it
                 achance
nJLiA ^
    * • *
#   hs.11.5/sground.rjm


    From:     R J Miles                        cc   Mr   Turney
              G2 Division                           Mr   Vaughan, DES
              x3322                                 Mr   Goddard
                                                    Mr   Peters
              5 November 1991                       Mr   McPherson, SHHD


    Mr Pickering


    SPORTS GROUND SAFETY: ALL SEATED ACCOMMODATION AT SPORTS GROUNDS
    OTHER THAN FOOTBALL LEAGUE GROUNDS

    This submission recommends Ministers not to implement the
    recommendation of Lord Justice Taylor's final report into the
    disaster   at  Hillsborough   Stadium   to   eliminate  standing
    accommodation at all sports grounds designated under the Safety
    of Sports Grounds Act 1975 by extending the mandatory all-seated
    spectator accommodation requirements to them regardless of the
    sport.

    Background
    2.   In his final report into the Hillsborough Disaster, Lord
    Justice Taylor recommended that standing accommodation be
    progressively eliminated at all sports grounds designated under
    the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (those which accommodate
    more than 10,000 spectators).    The government, in its response
    to the report,     indicated that it intended applying the
    recommendation in the case of UEFA high risk football matches,
    the 4 football league divisions and the national stadia, and that
    it would consider further the application of the provision to
    Scotland and the position of sports other than football.
    Subsequently the Football Spectators Act 1989 empowered the Home
    Secretary to impose requirements, by Order, in respect of seating
    of spectators at designated football matches in England and
    Wales.

    3.      The response continued:

                 The application of a recommendation to
                 Scotland and to other sports cannot be
                 achieved under the Football Spectators Act
                 1989 but the Government will in any case
                 wish to discuss it with the sporting
                 authorities concerned.    Designated sports
                 grounds under the 1975 Act include cricket,
                 rugby union and rugby league grounds which
                 are not all enclosed grounds and which it
                 may not be practicable to deal with in this
                 way ...

    Any decision to extend the all-seated requirement to sports other
    than football would require primary legislation.
•   4.   We have had discussions with representatives of both rugby
    union and rugby league.      While both supported the idea of
    additional seating at rugby grounds neither sport would wish to
    have a requirement for all-seated accommodation extended to them,
    other than in the case of Twickenham, which is already well on
    the way to becoming all-seated.    Cost is also a consideration.
    Football Trust funds are not available to rugby so there would
    be considerable pressure for government assistance if all seated
    requirements were to be imposed on rugby. Most cricket grounds
    already provide seats for most if not all spectators and we do
    not regard what standing there is in respect of the rather
    different   atmosphere   of  cricket   as  a   particular   risk.
    Consideration of this matter has been held up to await the
    completion of the Rugby World Cup.

    5.   We have also written to the Association of Chief Police
    Officers who are in broad agreement that primary legislation is
    neither necessary nor desirable at present although they warn
    against complacency.

    6.   Ministers are therefore recommended to continue to encourage
    the voluntary introduction of all-seated accommodation for
    reasons of safety and comfort for spectators at all sports which
    take place at sports grounds designated under the 1975 Act,
    especially those which take place at national stadia, but to
    leave the Taylor recommendation to extend mandatory all-seating
    spectator accommodation to sports other than associated football
    unimplemented. However, the matter should be kept open in case
    it is necessary to review it at some future date. If agreed, it
    is also recommended that this decision should be publicised by
    means of an arranged PQ.

    Other matters
    7.   Tom Pendry MP has shown considerable interest in the Taylor
    recommendations and has asked a number of PQs about them. Three
    such questions asked in May were directly concerned with
    extending mandatory all-seating accommodation to sports grounds
    other than football stadia (see Annexes A and B ) . In response
    to the questions about which organisations and individuals had
    been consulted (Annex B), Mr Patten explained that discussions
    had been held with the Rugby League, Rugby Football Union and the
    Welsh Rugby Football Union.    He also remarked that comments of
    the Association of Chief Police Officers were awaited.     In the
    course of this response, he added that another statement would
    be made in due course.

    8.   Now that the Rugby World Cup tournament has ended without
    any serious spectator safety incidents and the comments of ACPO
    have been received the further statement is due. An answer to
    the arranged PQ would fulfil this commitment.   A draft PQ and
    answer are at Annex C.

    9.   Colleagues at the Department of Education and Science and
    the   Education  Department   of  the   Scottish  Office  with
    responsibility for sports and recreation are aware of this
    submission and support it.
Summary

10.    Ministers are urged:

       (i)   not to take forward the Taylor recommendation to
             extend mandatory all-seated accommodation to sports
             other than association football;

       (ii) to announce this by means of an arranged PQ a draft of
            which with suggested answer are at Annex C.




                                          R J MILES



Encs
