REVOFLTR.SUB
                                      FROM:     MISS A J STEWART
                                                SARD
                                                925 6370

                                      DATE:     3 June 1992

                                      cc:       Parliamentary Secretary
                                                Permanent Secretary
                                                Mr Wright
                                                Miss O'Mara
                                                Mr Pittman
                                                Miss Macleap-
                                                Mr Baden
                                                Mr Cooper WO
                                                Mr McPherson SO
                                                Mr Mackay
                                                Mr Hopson


SECRETARY OF STATE


RE-EXAMINATION OF ALL-SEATING AT FOOTBALL GROUNDS: OFFICIAL
LETTER TO BODIES TO BE CONSULTED


Issue
1.      It would be helpful to have your agreement to:


        -    the terms in which I propose to write to bodies to be
             consulted following Thursday's announcement;


        -    the list of the more detailed issues which those bodies
             should be invited to consider;


             the list of bodies to be consulted.


Recommendation
2.      I recommend that you should agree to:


        -   the draft letter at Flag A which would issue over my
             signature;


            the list of issues to be considered at Flag B ; and


            the list of bodies to be consulted at Flag C .
                                                                      1
Timing
3.   I am proposing that my letter should issue on the day of the
announcement.   I will therefore need to know by Thursday morning
whether you are content with the text.


4.   You will want to note that I have proposed a 4 week period
for the receipt of responses. These would be due in by Friday 3
July.




MISS A J STEWART




                                                                    2
                                                               A
RE-EXAMINATION OF ALL-SEATING AT FOOTBALL GROUNDS

I am enclosing with this letter a copy of today's announcement by
the Secretary of State that he has been re-examining the all­
seating requirement for Football League grounds. Mr Mellor is now
inviting further representations from a number of interested
organisations before taking a final decision.


Today's announcemnt focuses on the shape and scope of the re­
examination. You will wish to note in particular that the
Secretary of State has ruled out any review of the principle of
or timetable for all-seating at First Division grounds in the
Football League (the new Premier Division).


He is also firmly committed to the principle of all-seating for
the majority of Second Division clubs. The re—examination is
therefore centring on whether there are any circumstances in
which standing accommodation can be retained at Third and Fourth
Division clubs in the Football League. It is also   looking at
Second Division clubs with very low average attendances, with a
view that there should be as few anomalies as possible. The more
detailed issues which are being addressed are set out in the
annex to this letter.


It would be helpful to have your views on these points by Friday
3 July. A list of bodies from whom views are also being elicited
is attached.




MISS A J STEWART
[Annex A]




                                                                   1
                                                                 B

ISSUES TQ BE CONSIDERED DURING THE REVIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S
ALL-SEATER POLICY IN ENGLAND AND WALES


The Government has decided that it would be wrong to review
either the principle or the timetable for all-seating at First
Division grounds in the Football League (the new Premier League).
The Government also remains committed to the principle of all­
seating for the majority of Second Division clubs who attract
large numbers of supporters and who aim to join the Premier
League.


The Secretary of State is therefore focusing his examination on
the following issues:


     i.    whether standing accommodation should be allowed at
           some Third and Fourth Division grounds. If so, should
           this be:


           a.   in all cases (subject to the FLA determining that
                the terracing is safe); or


           b.   on the basis of a fixed capacity threshold     (say
                10,000) above which clubs must go all-seating;


     ii.   whether,   in view of average attendances at some Second
           Division clubs being significantly lower than at some
           Third Division clubs, standing accommodation should
           also be retained at those Second Division grounds;


     iii. under what circumstances could an extension of the
           August 1994 deadline be relaxed for any Second Division
           club)
    iv.    what transitional arrangements,   if any, will be
           appropriate for clubs which are promoted;


    v.     whether any special arrangements should be made for a
           match in a cup competition where a big club is due to
                                                                      1
            play "away" at a small club where all-seating is not
            required, or for a league match between two small clubs
            but where a large attendance is anticipated.



[Annex B]




                                                                   2
COPIES TO GO TO:

The Football Association

The Football League

The Premier League

The Football Association of Wales

The Professional Footballers Association

The Football Licensing Authority

The Football Trust

The Football Stadia Advisory Design Council

The Association of Chief Police Officers

The National Federation of Football Supporters Clubs

The Football Supporters Association



[annex]
