FROM D J MOULD G1 DIVISION HOME OFFICE QUEEN ANNE'S GATE




  FOR THE ATTENTION OF MR HUMPHRIES

           B THOMPSON PTNERS

               RICHMOND HOUSE

               RUMFORD'PLACE

                LIVERPOOL

                L3 9SW




                                ft         A




  &    (X/T^



 ,$ex€ O^V'CJ OlaAsJ
  HOME OFFICE
  Horseferry House Dean Ryle Street London SW1P 2AW
                              Telephone      01 “ 21 1    ^O t



                                            Your reference
The Chief Executive of the
   County Council                           Our reference ENT/74    47?/1 V 1

The Director-General of the                 Date         29 August 1975.
   Greater London Council




Dear Sir,

HOKE OFFICE CIRCULAR NO 150/1975

SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975


1.   Aa foreshadowed in paragraph 1 of Home Office Circular No.129/1 975
of 24 July, the Safety of Sports Grounds Bill has now received Royal Assent.
The purpose of the new Act is to implement the main recommendations
contained in the Report of the Inquiry into Crowd Safety at Sports Grounds
(Cmnd 4952:1972) which was prepared by Lord Wheatley following the serious
accident at Ibrox Park football ground in January 1971 when 66 people died.
A copy of the Act, together with an explanatory note, is attached.

2.   The Home Secretary has now made an order under section'19(6) bringing
the whole of the Act into force with effect from 1 September 1975. From
that date, therefore, local authorities will be able to exercise, if necessary,
the powers of entry and inspection in respect of sports grounds conferred
on them by section 11„ It will also be open to them, in an emergency, to
apply to a magistrates' court for an order under section 10 prohibiting or
restricting the admission of spectators to the whole or any part of a
sports ground. It will be noticed that these two sections are concerned
with sports grounds generally (as defined in section 17).

3.   Most of the Act, however, is concerned with designated sports stadia and
will not therefore apply until the first designation order has been made.
Before making such an order the Home Secretary is under a duty to consult
such persons or bodies of persons as appear to him requisite. The necessary
consultations will accordingly begin with the local authorities, the
footbalJ interests and other bodies concerned as coon as possible on the
scope and timing of the first designation order,. Further guidance on the
procedure to be followed when a ground is designated under the Act as
requiring a safety certificate will be issued in due course.




                                     1
4.     Aitho^the
r o S t i S= £ 1'S v a na f a u th o r ita tiv e « l l » g on poin ts o f law. ,


                            Yours faithfully,




                                          /   kajL c ^*,


                             (j McIntyre)




     ENGS:
     Issued to:    County Councils in England and Wales and the
                   Greater London Council


     corUB




                                      2
                              Annex to Home Office Circular No.150/t975




SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975



NOTE BY THE HOME OFFICE




BACKGROUND

1.     The purpose of the Act is to implement the main recommendations
contained in the Report of the Inquiry into Crowd Safety at Sports Grounds
(Cmnd 4952: 1972). This report was prepared by Lord Wheatley who undertook:
his inquiry, at the then Government's request, following the tragedy at
Ibrox Park football ground in January 1971 when 66 people died and over
140 were injured.

WHEATLEY RBPORT
20   Lori Wheatley had no doubt that present controls over safety at
football grounds were inadequate. He found that the existing voluntary
system of certification of grounds introduced by the Football Association
some years ago laid down no requirements as to the competence of persons
who carry out the annual inspections of grounds and there were no guidelines
to assist those persons in their assessment of safety standards. Moreover,
a review of the statutory provisions relevant to the safety of spectators
at football grounds convinced Lord Wheatley that the law also fell short of
providing proper and effective control over football grounds as a whole.
The building regulations, for example, provide for the basic structural
safety of new buildings within a football ground but they do not apply to
existing buildings, except where alterations are to be carried out, nor
do they apply to a ground as a whole. In any case, most football grounds
were built before national building regulations were introduced.

3o   Lord Wheatley concluded that only a specially devised statutory scheme
could ensure comprehensive controls at football grounds in the interests
of safety. He recommended a statutory licensing control administered by
the "top tier" of local authorities. He proposed that these controls should
be introduced by stages, the larger or more important grounds, broadly
speaking, being dealt with first. Lord Wheatley also recommended that there
should be a right of appeal for the clubs concerned against any decision
of the licensing authority. What is quite clear throughout the report is
Lord Wheatley's awareness of the need to reconcile the paramount aim of
ensuring the safety of spectators with what would be reasonable and
practicable for the clubs.

4. Lord Wheatley also provided, as a technical appendix to his report,
guidelines to safety standards at football grounds designed to assist the
local authorities in their task of enforcement.

CONSULTATIONS ON THE REPORT

5»   When the Report was published, those bodies mainly concerned, including
the local authority associations and the football authorities, were
consulted about Lord Wheatley's proposals. The football authorities made
it clear that they were apprehensive at the financial implications for the




                                  1
clubs, but there was general agreement with the proposals themselves.
Detailed consultations were held, on the guidelines contained in the
technical appendix to the Report and these, duly amended, were finally
published by the Home Departments in November 1973 as a special booklet,
"Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds".

GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS

60   The Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds has no statutory force. Its
primary purpose is to set out principles or guidelines which the local
authorities will no doubt wish to keep in mind in enforcing the Act.
The Guide therefore deals with matters such as the provision of adequate
entrances and exits, means of escape, the slope of terracing, the
strength and siting of crush barriers, the construction of staircases,
and measures to ensure the safe movement of spectators both under normal
and emergency conditions. The Guide is not a set of requirements to      (
be rigidly applied, regardless of individual circumstances. As
Lord Wheatley recognised, it is important to maintain the maximum
flexibility in any system of control so as to take account of the
differing circumstances at individual grounds: factors such as age,
size and mode of construction differ widely from ground to ground.

7.   While the basic principles set out in the Guide are relevant to
all sports stadia, modifications may well be necessary where sports
other than football are involved. These will be discussed with the
appropriate authorities at the time. A copy of the Guide is attached.

THE GENERAL APPROACH TO THE ACT

8.   Lord Wheatley recommended that the introduction of any system of
control should be phased so that the more important grounds, regularly
attracting the larger attendances, should be dealt with first. It is
intended, accordingly, that only those grounds consistent with
Lord Wheatley's category 1 should be dealt with first, that is to say,
the international grounds, the English First and Second Division and
the Scottish Premier Division Clubs, about 60 In all. But the full
system of control under the Act will not apply to Lord Wheatley's
category 4 > namely, grounds with accommodation for fewer than 10,000
spectators. The intention is that safety at these grounds should be
secured largely by voluntary action on the part of the club concerned in
consultation with the local authority.

9.   The main instrument of control under the Act is the safety
certificate issued by the local authority. A safety certificate will
be needed in respect of every stadium which is the subject of a
designation order made by the Secretary of State. The certificate will
enable the local authority to impose such terms and conditions as are
necessary to ensure a reasonable standard of safety at the ground in
question having regard to the circumstances.

10. The Act has been designed with football stadia chiefly in view.
But other stadia, if necessary, can be brought within the system of
local authority control as well as places such as racecourses where
large numbers of spectators may be crowded together in stands. Nothing
will be done, however, without full and prior consultation with those
concerned.



                                    2
SUBSTANCE OF THE ACT

11,,  The first 5 sections establish the main system of control under
the Act, that is to say, the safety certificate, issued by the local
authority, which will be required for every sports stadium designated
for that purpose by order of the Secretary of State.

12<> Section 1 empowers the Secretary of State by order to designate
any sports stadium having accommodation for more than 10,000 spectators
as requiring a safety certificate. A safety certificate is issued by
the local authority for the area in which the stadium is situated, that
is to say, the county council in England and Wales and the appropriate
regional authority in Scotland. Safety certificates are to be of two
kinds, general and special.     A general safety certificate will be the
main continuing form of control and will be issued for an indefinite
period in respect of a specified activity or activities regularly
taking place at the stadium. A special safety certificate may be issued
at the discretion of the local authority for a special event or other
circumstances not covered by the general safety certificate. Such an
event might be an evangelistic rally which might call for special
arrangements if, for example, seating were provided for the congregation
on the playing area. A special safety certificate can be issued only in
respect of a sports stadium for which a general safety certificate is already
       Th*e contents of safety certificates are dealt with in section 2.
The local authority is empowered to include in the certificate such
terms and conditions as are necessary to secure, at the stadium in
question, a reasonable degree of safety. Without prejudice to this
general power, the section requires certificates to contain terms and
conditions relating to major matters such as entrances and exits, means
 of escape in an emergency, the number, strength and situation of crush
barriers, and the. maximum number of spectators who may be admitted to
the stadium or any part of it„ To remove any possibility of doubt,
sub-section (3 ) makes it clear that a certificate may include a
 condition relating to the keeping of records relating to attendance and
 the maintenance of safety.
                              1.



14.   In imposing conditions, local authorities will doubtless follow
the principles set out in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds, although
as already explained, this document has no statutory force. It is
envisaged that there will be a good deal of consultation between the
local authority and the club, as well as the building authority, the
police and the fire service, in the process of drawing up the certificate
conditions. For example, if a ground is rarely filled to capacity,
the local authority is free in such a case to base its requirements on
actual levels of attendance over a given period rather than maximum
capacity. On the rare occasions a capacity crowd was expected, the
procedure of the special safety certificate could be invoked so that
more than the normal permitted number of spectators might be admitted
subject to special additional safeguards such as more attendants,
admission by ticket only and so on. Again, if a stand were found to be
structurally weak, the local authority might restrict admission to it
until it had been strengthened. But the club would have the choice
whether to have the necessary remedial works carried out, so that the
restriction could be removed, or to accept the restriction indefinitely.

15„   The earlier Bill, which was introduced in 1973> limited the term3
and conditions imposed under a safety certificate to what was necessary
to secure a reasonable degree of safety for members of the public.



                                   3
There was so*e difficulty over this ^ e c a u s e                                                «'

rrn p::i rs.”d5iSg«"
foSsay, any person occupying a ^ o d a t i o n g ^ e ' ^ S S
                                                                    -ti* n. *.*is        onThe

5 j s r y . * S i “«               t s : - s r ,
sirsuss:.^.-^: “ .‘.SiT-ssi-; «—
X S S t Z S at the ground                              ^        oLf^ioate
local authority under section 2(1) to include             reference to
such terms or conditions as        neof       a      t         Se^Stadium” ,
people and speaks » ^ y of se<                         %     L s not include
 (although the term safety , as del m e             rOTvt-ain provisions
danger arising from participation in a spor ).              ,          after
must, however, be specifically I m k e d with spectatoro U h o re
a l l / t h e people the Act is                  £ *   £    £   certificate
greatly m the major y).         _ onp.rtators who may be admitted, and it
 to state the maximum number of spectators who ay              spectators to
 is a serious offence, under section 12(0 ^ ) or                *cate is in
 fee admitted to a designated stadium where no ^afety cerxn
 operation.
 ifi     Section 3 sets out the broad procedure to befollowed when a




 ; 0sS ifn io p                                  i ^ € l € £ a!dd C io ioiT s u fr ed
 general°safety°certificate^to                                                     f ^      £ * *

                                              L^ i r f e r t S c ^ e ^ r t h i f
           works have been completed, ine saie y
 : f t l n ° ; e issued af ost frS tf outset a n d ^ n b e -
 of continuing control.       The issue ot      P      authority, asalready
                 n    +~      r-iTqfrption ofthelocal auouux-Lo.y, ^
 however, is left to the aiscr                         -it iq appropriate to
 explained, because only they can judgewhether it is appropr
 issue it for the special occasion m question.

  17    The local authority are required to send a copy
  application xfor a certificate
                        j-*-p • »»+■ ^ f n fV ip - n o l i c e 3 Jfici t o "tli6 b u i l d i n g
                                         to the police                          conditions to be
  authority, and must consult them about t e                           -                 nn is self-
  auinony,                              The need for such consultation is s e n
  included m the certificate.                       . ,.              f j.jle interests of the
  different a ^ r i ^              S L S S    ^   S   ^    h   l   ^       n   t    aspects of
  safety at football grounds.
  18.      Section 4 provides for the amendment, replacement, transfer,
  surrender and cancellation of            haJe*1power to a^iend a safety
  importance that a local authority o                   do so, for example,
  certificate where it                                that a 'part of a
  if they find m the course of a routine      p   immediate restriction on
  ground has become so dangerous as to demand ^                  have
  its use or some other necessary sa egu r •        certain improvements
  power to relax a requirement where, for example, certain _u,P
  have been carried out to make this possi le.

   19.   Section 5 provides for
   decisions or requirements of the local out or                       |             of 3tate>         In
   t             S             f             ^              Lord Wheatley’s proposal that


                                                  4
appeals should be heard by a specially constituted tribunal. But apart
from the need, to avoid creating more special tribunals than necessary,
most appeals are likely to be on technical matters and it therefore
seems appropriate for appeals in this case to be made to a Minister.
But the Secretary of State will have power to set up a formal inquiry
along the lines recommended by Lord Wheatley, should the need arise.

20.   Section 6 (2 ) empowers the Secretary of State to make regulations
relating to the safety of spectators at sports grounds. This is in
the nature of a reserve power which could be used, for example, to
give backing to requirements of the local authorities which in the
light of experience had been shown always to be essential. This
section also empowers the Secretary of State to make regulations for
various other purposes connected with the Act.

21o   Section 7 provides for some supplementary matters on determinations
and appeals. Sub-sections (1) and (2j provide for the deemed with­
drawal of an application for, or the surrender of, a safety certificate
when a local authority determines that a person is not, or has ceased
to be, qualified to hold it. The section also provides for the
suspension of a condition in a certificate pending determination of an
appeal against the inclusion of that condition, although a court, on
the application of the local authority, may order that such a condition
remain in force pending the determination of the appeal.

22.   The holder of a general safety certificate is required by
section 8 to notify the local authority of any proposed alteration or
extension of a stadium., The purpose of the clause is to guard against
any alterations being made, without the local authority's knowledge,
which might affect the safety of spectators.

23o   Section 9 provides for the harmonisation of the Act with, other
legislation which may affect sports stadia.

24.   Section 10 is an important emergency power. Should a magistrates*
court, on the application of a local authority, consider that the risk
to spectators at any sports ground is so great that their admission
should be prohibited or restricted until remedial action has been
taken, the court may make an order accordingly. This power applies
to any sports ground whether or not it is required to have a safety
certificate. In practice, it is not expected that the power will
often need to be exercised. In the case of a small football stadium,
for example, not subject to the designation order procedure,
consultations between the local authority and the club concerned are
expected to secure the provision of a reasonable standard of safety on
a voluntary basis.

25« Section 11 confers rights of entry and inspection on persons
appointed by the local authority and others involved in the ta3k of
ensuring crowd safety at sports grounds. Section 12 deals with offences
and penalties.

26c    Section 13 deals mainly with civil liability. Its purpose is to
make clear that while nothing in the Act itself confers a right of
action in respect of a contravention of regulations or of conditions
in a safety certificate, the existing rights of a spectator injured
at a; football stadium to bring an action for negligence against the
occupiers is entirely unaffected by anything in the Act.



                             5
/




    27.   The Secretary of State is empowered by section 15 to extend to
    classes of sports grounds other than sports stadia such provisions of the
    Act as are not already expressed to apply to them. For example, it
    enables the Secretary of State by order to extend the safety certificate
    procedure to such places as race-courses. Only a class, of sports ground
    may be the subject of an extension order under this clause: an individual
    sports ground (other than a stadium) cannot be designated until section 1
    of the Act has been applied by an order under section 15 to the class of
    sports ground to which it belongs.

    28.   Section 16 applies the Act, subject to necessary modifications,
    to the Crown. Section 17 deals with interpretation.

    29.   Section 18 provides that orders and regulations except commencement
    orders, made under the Act are subject to the negative resolution
    procedure. It also imposes a duty on the Secretary of State, before making
    any orders or regulations, except commencement orders or orders relating
    to the Isles of Scilly, to consult with s u c h persons as appear to him
    requisite.




     Fire Department
     Home Office
     London SW1
     August 1975.!




                                   6
