70-10.AH                                         cc   Mr   Bolton
                                                      Mr   Clayton
                                                      Mr   Goddard (o/r)
                                                      Ms   Jago




Miss Edwards
Legal Adviser's Branch




TAYLOR: RECOMMENDATION 4


I have (in Mr Goddard's absence) seen your note of 25 October,
about which we spoke today.


2.   My feeling on this throughout has been that there is a
separate issue about what obligations (whether confirmed in some
written form or not)      should be accepted by a police force in
respect of stewarding at a ground.


3.   At Hillsborough the police were held by Sir Peter Taylor
to have acquired an obligation to steward the Leppings Lane
terrace, and the absence of stewards there was therefore their
omission.    I rather agree with Sir Peter that where the club
delegate    responsibility   for something having as          important a
bearing on safety as stewarding, that there should be a clear
statement in writing setting that out.           The situation cannot be
allowed to recur where a new police commander assumes control
unaware of such a crucial obligation.


4.   Legal Adviser's Branch believe very strongly (and I do not
dissent)    that   the   police   should   not    submit    themselves     to
contractual obligations to undertake (eg) safety stewarding at
grounds.    But the converse point is whether it is right for a
club to delegate a vital safety function to anyone (police or
notV without firm agreement.       Assuming they should not, I think
the police should not therefore accept any obligation to carry
out a safety function, however that is expressed (ie written or
not) .
5.   The police feel sore about their position.   I have listened
to officers who see the police as the fall guys however things
work out:   they have to prop up the lame and infirm when the
club's stewards are inadequate; and when it all goes wrong the
blame falls on them.


6.   The answer seems to me to keep the police firmly out of this
altogether and have them object, loud and clear, if a club's own
stewards are inadequate. The club's response should be to employ
professional stewards who are up to the job.




                                         F J SMITH
                                         F8 Division




26 October 1989
