                                                       1 8 JUN 1991

.R.
      27-6.JS
                                                                      0
      From:     J L Goddard                  c: Mr Vaughan, SARD,DES
                F8 Division
                Ext. 3314
                17 June 1991




       fill,
  M r Bolton



  EXTENSION OF ALL SEATED ACCOMMODATION REQUIREMENTS FOR RUGBY
  UNION AND RUGBY LEAGUE GROUNDS


  Thank you for copying to me your letter of 12 June to
  John Vaughan.


  2.   I agree that we should recommend to Ministers the line
  that at present primary legislation to extend the all seater
  requirement beyond association football is not planned.
  However, in order to cover possible eventualities, I suggest
  that Ministers should also announce that they will keep this
  matter under review.


  3.   As to differentiating smaller football clubs from rugby
  union and rugby league clubs, our normal line seems to remain
  justified: the potential for public disorder at football
  matches is significantly different from that at other sporting
  events.




                               J L GODDARD
                                                          (Jo       (ft)


h s .6.12/rugby1.peb

                                                        3322




                                         12 June 1991


John Vaughan Esq
Department of Education & Science
Sports & Recreation Division
Room 1/67
Elizabeth House
York Road
LONDON    SE1 7PH




Dear John
EXTENSION OF ALL SEATED ACCOMMODATION REQUIREMENTS FOR RUGBY
UNION AND RUGBY LEAGUE GROUNDS
You will recall that the Taylor report recommended that all
seated accommodation should be required at all sports grounds
designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.       In
practice the only sports affected other than football are
cricket, rugby union and rugby league.         The majority of
designated cricket grounds are already entirely or substantially
seated.
Last year we had discussions with officials of the Rugby Football
Union, the Welsh Rugby Football Union and the Rugby League.
Twickenham is now substantially all seated but in every other
case arguments of principle and of a practical nature were
advanced why rugby should not be required to go down the same
road as association football. The arguments included the numbers
of people, the nature of the crowd behaviour, the traditional
movement of the crowd at half time at rugby league matches and,
not least, the fact that neither of the rugby games enjoys the
income which would enable them to improve facilities to the same
extent as is being expected of the league football clubs and the
national football stadia.
I recently put all these points to the Association of Chief
Police Officers. I enclose a copy of a reply which I have had
from Sir James Anderton, the Chief Constable of Greater
Manchester. I also enclose a copy of the letter which I sent to
him.
As you will see his reply is cautious but he says that the view
of his colleagues is that at present primary legislation to
extend the all seated requirement beyond association football is
neither necessary nor desirable.
My inclination is to accept this and to put it to Ministers.
I imagine that you will want to put it to the sports Minister at
the same time, so I shall be glad to know whether you agree in
principle with my conclusions.     There have been a couple of
recent Parliamentary Questions on this issue which will need to
be followed up. It may seem a slightly odd decision following
so soon after the Government's response to the Home Affairs
Committee suggestion that some relaxation should be afforded to
the requirement in respect of the smaller football clubs. We
shall need to take some care in the way in which the decision is
made public.
I shall be glad to receive your comments. I am also copying this
letter and the enclosures to John Goddard in our Police
Department.
I have written to you separately about the application of the
Taylor recommendation to "high risk" football matches as defined
by UEFA.
                                         Yours sincerely




                                         P E BOLTON
                                         (Fire and Emergency
                                         Planning Department)



Encs
