                                                                                       '2D *




Mr Lee


CHIEF SECRETARY'S LETTER TO COLIN MOYNIHAN


1.    You asked for my advice on the attached letter from the Chief Secretary. I am
sorry not to have replied sooner.


2.    I think you told me that the only expenditure that was likely was a payment to
the Football League/Football Association to acquire copies of the tenders they have
already received.     I can't recall now what sum envisaged was but I do recall that it
was not large (a few £l,OOOs?).     I also recall that, if at all, it was likely to be
spent this year, 1989-90.     I presume it would be existing SARD staff that would
carry out the assessment wanted by the Minister.     No additional staff or other
running costs would be required.     Once analysed, no further work on the schemes is
contemplated.


3.    In such circumstances, and exceptionally, I can see no reason why you should not
reply so as to reassure the Treasury.     As a general rule, of course, the Department
should not indicate to HMT that it can take on a new     work or new expenditure within
current provision.     I consider that this case is not subject   to that rule on de
minimis grounds.     I also do not imply financial approval of any particular
expenditure proposal, which would need to be sought in the normal way.


4.    You should not imply to HMT that any expenditure of the order of £1 - 2 million
(the figures mentioned by the Permanent Secretary recently) is capable of being met
         ^sting provision.




P HARRIS
FDSIA
Room N3/10A
276 3833

     February 1990

cc   Mr Emery
st.ps/3nl29.1/let 3
                                CONFIDENTIAL




                           ^rs, P arlia m en t S treet, SW1P 3AG




  The Hon Colin Moynihan MP
  Minister for Sport
  Department of the Environment
  2 Marsham Street
  London
  SW1P 3EB
                                       2 °l January 1990




  FOOTBALL MEMBERSHIP SCHEME

  1 have   seen your   letter of   26 January to    David Waddington
  suggesting that   a reference   to continued work on the type of
  Membership Scheme envisaged in the invitation to tender should be
  included in his statement on the Taylor Report.

  2     The  intention was that the Football Membership Scheme would
  be run by the football industry itself and be self financing.        The
  costs   to the clubs would have been met by the members themselves
  through a membership    fee.   I am concerned     to know       how  the
  continued work to develop suitable technology for possible future
  use would be   financed when the     scheme  itself    is   not   to be
  implemented.    It seems to me unlikely that either       the companies
  who responded to    the   invitation to tender,     or    the   football
  authorities,   would be prepared to meet these development costs.
  In these circumstances further work would not    take     place   unless
  supported by public f u n d s . I could accept the reference to this
  further exploration of the technology only on the understanding
  that any such funding will be met from within existing provision.

  3    I am   sending copies   of this letter to the Prime Minister,
  Geoffrey Howe, Douglas Hurd, David Waddington,   Malcolm   Rifkind,
  Patrick Mayhew,   the Lord Privy Seal, Timothy Renton    and to Sir
  Robin Butler.




                                NORMAN LAMONT
                            cifp/weoL (y -ft-eScc+etnyy
                            ^          V/VA   lA /tb   ftJ o U L A   SJL
