♦   Football Licensing Authority
    Chairman: Mr Norman Jacobs
    27 Harcdurt House
    19 Cavendish Square
    London WlM 9AD
    Tel: 071-491 7191
    Fax: 071-491 1882


       The Secretary
       All Football League Clubs                   ‘ 1 August 1991




       FOOTBALL SPECTATORS ACT 1989 - LICENSING

       I am writing to give you early notice of the Football Licensing
       Authority's intentions regarding the implementation of Section 10
       of the Football Spectators Act 1989 under which the Authority
       will be granting licences for the admission of spectators to
       grounds to watch designated football matches.      The Authority
       anticipates that the licensing scheme will be brought into force
       in time for the start of the 1992/93 football season.

       A primary purpose of the licence is            to  implement the
       recommendations   in Lord Justice Taylor'sReport on           the
       Hillsborough disaster that all Football League first and second
       division grounds become all-seater by the start of the 1994/95
       season and all third and fourth division grounds become all-
       seater by the start of 1999/2000 season. In its recent response
       to the House of Commons Home Affairs Committee report on policing
       football hooliganism, the Government indicated that it was not
       convinced that any re-examination of its proposals on all-seater
       accommodation was necessary. In other words, the 1994 deadline
       for clubs in the top two divisions, however they may be
       constituted or defined at that time, remains firm as does the
       1999 deadline for the two lower divisions.     The Authority will
       ensure this under the licence scheme.

       The Authority envisages waiving the 1994 requirement only for
       clubs promoted into the second division at or after the end of
       the forthcoming season: these will be required to go all-seater
       bY "the start of the fourth season following their promotion or
       1999, whichever is the earlier.

      As you know Lord Justice Taylor recommended that, as from
      August 1990, clubs should steadily reduce their standing capacity
      by 20% each year in the first and second divisions and by 10%
      each year in the third and fourth divisions. The Government has
      indicated that these reductions should not be enforced rigidly
      since the phasing of the work required to convert grounds to all-
      seater will not necessarily follow such a mathematical formula.
Nevertheless, the Taylor formula should be used as a yardstick
of progress.

The Authority supports this view. Thus; while the Authority does
not anticipate incorporating the specific reductions recommended
by Lord Justice Taylor into its 1992 and 1993 licences, it will
nevertheless be looking for substantial reductions in standing
capacity in the run up to 1994 and 1999. Any significant falling
behind the programme set by Lord Justice Taylor will have to be
justified.                                             *



In this connection, the Authority gives notice that it is minded
to link the granting of all licences in 1992 to a requirement
that clubs submit full particulars of their proposals for
converting their grounds to all-seater by the appropriate Taylor
deadline. These particulars should set out both the steps to be
taken and the timescale for achieving this. If these proposals
are satisfactory, clubs will be expected to adhere to them.
Clubs, especially any in the first and second divisions, who have
not already formulated detailed proposals for converting their
grpunds to all-seater, or who anticipate having difficulty
meeting the appropriate deadline are strongly advised that it
would be in their best interest to draw this to the attention of
the Authority as soon as possible.      They should not await a
formal request from the Authority.

I am copying this to the Secretaries of all Football League clubs
plus Berwick Rangers FC, the Stadium Managers of Wembley and
Cardiff Arms Park and," for information, to the Stadium Manager
of Twickenham and the Chief Executives of the Football League and
Football Association.




                                              J R K DE QUIDT
                                              Chief Executive
