                                                   2 2 FEB 3990     (5 )


hs.2.22/fsafsc.peb

From:   P E Bolton                       cc   Ms   Dent
        G2 Division                           Mr   Turney
        X3322                                 Mr   Goddard
                                              Mr   Smith
        22 February 1990                      Mr   Mould
                                              Mr   Godfrey

Miss Nicholson


The attached letter of 6 February from Tony Goulbourn, Chairman
of the Football Supporters Association (FSA) seeks a meeting with
the Home Secretary, at which the Federation of Football
Supporters Clubs would also be present.
2.   The Federation recently requested a meeting with Mr Moynihan
but they were referred to the Home Office as the matters under
discussion appeared to relate to safety matters and the functions
of the Football Licensing Authority. I understand Environments
response was copied to Lord Ferrers* office.
3.   The Final Report recommends that local authority Advisory
Groups should consult with recognised supporters1 associations.
It does not suggest that consultation should take place on a
national basis. But it is important that the Home Office is seen
to be prepared to discuss the implementation of the Taylor Report
with the national supporters' organisations. We do want to carry
them with us.
4.   I would like to suggest that the FSA and FFSC be offered an
initial    meeting  with   Lord   Ferrers,   in view    of   his
responsibilities for sports ground safety, and police issues.
The FSA and the Federation have set up a joint working party in
order to put forward co-ordinated views. I would propose however
that at the meeting they should be encouraged to feel that the
normal avenue for them to pursue their ideas would be with
officials.
5.   If Lord Ferrers agrees, you should perhaps write to the FSA
asking them to contact you to find a suitable date. We should
also seek to establish the items for discussion and those likely
to attend on their behalf. A draft letter is also attached for
this purpose.




                                         P E BOLTON


Encs
                    ^ £ ?rj *— ^ t - v £ T /jg C * J3fc\         ' FS3 1330 loCW^f

i ^            r           f      -      yli j ltj ^Z^7^T3uTTI
             crs-                                                                A jt^v
                                        .■p.—                                                    «
      THf fOOTMLL SUPPORTERS flSSOCIflTIOn
                                                             in this instance reply to:

                                                            CC iWs-^AOvi




      Mr Waddington MP                       The Chairman,
      Home Secretary,                        The Football Supporters Association,
      Home G'f'fice,
      Queen Anne Gate,
      London SW1                             6 February 1990.




      THE~ LORD   JUSTICE          INQUIRY    REPORT s     THE    FOOTBALL         SUPPORTERS:
      ASSOCIATION



      I am. writing on behalf of the FSA to confirm our broad welcome of :
      the proposals set out in the Taylor Report.

      As you will recognise, the report has great significance to
      football supporters and their relationship with the football
      authorities, the clubs they support and the police services.

      Consequently, X M o u ld like to suggest a meeting with you and your
      Department and organisations representing football supporters
       (The Federation of Football Supporters Clubs and the FSA) to
      discuss what role football supporters can play in helping to
      implement the report.

       I hope you can agree to this request.

       vL

      TONY GOULBOURN




                               P.O. Box 11 Liverpool L26 1XP
I am writing in reply to your letters of 6 February to the Home
Secretary and to the Minister for Sport in which you sought
meetings to discuss the implementation of the Final Report into
the Hillsborough Disaster.


The   Minister   of   State,   Lord   Ferrers,   whose    particular
responsibilities encompass safety at sports grounds, police and
fire matters, would be happy to meet representatives of the FSA
and the Federation of Football Supporters Clubs.         Perhaps you
will contact me so that we can try to arrange a convenient time
and date.


Your letter provides a general area of discussion but I am sure
that there are specific points that you will wish to raise with
the Minister,    It will be helpful if you can kindly provide a
list of those items in advance of the meeting.       I shall also
require a list of those attending and it will be helpful if you
can indicate their positions in the respective organisations.
