hs.11.24/owlerton.dm


Note for the File


OWLERTON STADIUM SHEFFIELD

A Mr Littlewood, Managing Director of the Sheffield sports
stadium (Owlerton) telephoned me on 21 November. I gather he
had previously been in touch with the Secretariat to the
Hillsborough Inquiry.
                          s
In essence Mr Littlewood fehought guidance on difficulty that he
was experiencing with the Sheffield City Council who had closed
down the stadium some weeks ago (by section 10 procedures). He
was due to meet the safety team on 22 November. He complained
of an unreasonable attitude and an insistence on sophisticated
requirements in order to secure safety at the ground for an
average spectator attendance of about 800. He said the maximum
number using the ground was 2,500 once a year. The ground was
no longer used for either speedway or rugby league - which was
the basis for its designation in August 1986. Greyhound racing
took place there 3 nights a week.

Mr Littlewood told me that about £200,000 had been spent on the
stadium but each time money was expended in one area more demands
seemed to be put upon him.      The latest requirements were to
provide a much larger first aid room (he said larger than that
required at Sheffield United football ground) and to provide a
doctor trained in advanced first aid.     He maintained that to
provide such a person 3 nights a week for an average crowd of 800
was, to say tfy&least, harsh.     He said there seemed to be no
commonsense            the City Council who were applying to the
Owlerton stadium standards which were rather more applicable to
the 2 large soccer stadia within the City.
As I understood him there were 4 main reasons for closure of the
ground: accumulated rubbish underneath seats which he said was
grossly exaggerated because the cross section underneath the
seating was regularly cleaned and hosed and the amount of rubbish
was minimal. The seats have now been removed and the area now
allocated to standing accommodation;        secondly structural
weaknesses by which was meant there were cracks in the 2ft 6in
high perimeter wall; insufficient exit signs; and inadequate
emergency lighting. He maintained that all of these points have
now been remedied but he felt helpless to combat the further
demands being made about first aid and medical provision.
I sympathised with his difficulty but pointed out we had no power
to intervene.   I drew his attention to the appeal procedures.
He said they had considered appealing against the notice but
felt that the sensitivities within the area were such that an
appeal would be pointless. I suggested that, given the work now
done, it seemed unlikely the ground could now be such that no
spectators at all could be admitted. I suggested that he might
approach the local authority safety team to seek a determination
of how many Owlerton was now considered s a f e ^ to hold and that
if more work was needed how many more people could then be
accommodated.

As for the Hillsborough Inquiry recommendations I explained that
they were aimed primarily at football grounds but that the
principles applied to other sports grounds where large crowds
gathered. I have since copied to him Home Office Circular 68/89
giving advice to local authorities on application of the
Inquiry's recommendations to sports grounds other than football
grounds. He thought this might help.
What also emerged from this conversation is that the Owlerton
stadium did not have a safety certificate. I rather suspect that
this was the reason it was closed down by section 10. Clearly
the City Council not only "overlooked" Sheffield United's
football ground but appear also to "overlooked" issuing a safety
certificate for Owlerton.

Mr Littlewood seemed to appreciate the sympathetic if somewhat
unhelpful response to his problems but said he would appreciate
something in writing. I expressed a willingness to write to him
but explained that I did not think anything which I said would
be of a great deal of assistance and that he should approach us
first in writing. He agreed to do this but asked that we respond
quickly.




                                          D J MOULD
                                          62 Division

24 November 1989

FEP/89 35/62/
FEP/89 35/278/6


cc   Mr Bolton
     Mr Stickley
