copy Jo De*ni**. S F , ...          jT A Y L 0 R REPORT    #_
                   m£ r^na_ £                              6r                  29th Jan 1990
Sir,    50 0   *             gate
      iritainlief4j^»i9l9dniinaL y so.     The justification for a Taylor Football report indicated
it, tie superficial, irre}.evan conclusions of the Taylor report confirm it.
   Vi: h the,lord,C^e,fl'.j|u6tice called a dinosaur, one solitary judge declaring he speaks for the
silen majority;
            __ . Uhe remainder of the judiciary speaking for an exclusive Establishment minority.
the Scottish “juVfidi&fy*Ttfveal'ibg widespread latent tendency to sexual perversion, why a judge to
^ead 6 football enquiry?           Vhy not a scientist, academic, businessman, journalist, entertainer,
a trades' union leader., a leader of men or morons?
   The Taylor report is flawed from initial 'cock-up' (printing terminology first capital letter)
to final punctuation.       Taylor repetitively refers to football sport.       Football is not sport:
it might be loosely termed entertainment, it is first, foremost, and last, a business.
   Motivated by, obsessed with sick money, football is now to be directed, controlled, regulated
with still more money.       Football, and iaereasingly most other 'sport' is contaminated by money,
gambling, both legal and illegal, insider dealing, lottery exploitation, property and advertising
speculation, the criminal element, the Jewish City Mafia at its most venal.
   ID CARDS - for those who lack purpose, domicile, identity and hope?       Fantasy indulgence'.
   Decades ago football should      _ have been re-sited in urban, or semi-rural areas in multi­
purpose sports/leisure stadia.       The football grounds (and other similar venues) should have
never been permitted to occupy valuable inner-city locations; Craven Cottage, Stamford Bridge, High­
bury, Brentford, Filbert Street, Hillsborough, Bradford, Stoke, Volves, under-utilised, a source
of aggravation to the non-participating trapped local community.       Green-field multi-purpose
sports/leisure amateur stadiums should have anticipated the creation of the motor car and transport­
ation of the Brasses.      One hundred years after the creation of the car we in Britain in parti­
cular have still to come to terms with the car.         The car means mobility, fantasy indulgence
(qv.ID Cards!), escapism (escaping from undesirable alien neighbours)., the car as the great equal­
iser, Reliant and Rolls-Royce, taxed, insured, roadworthy, equal in law, equal before the eyes of
the impartial judge!
   Taylor says Britain gave football to the world.         Shame on Britain, pity the cursed world'.
   Britain also 'gave' the world the trades union, the sham of pseudo- democratic Parliament, the
non-political highly Political Civil Service, the uniformed thug, the institutionalised VAT bully,
hypocrisy, the moral, political, spiritual, cultural vacuum.
   No mention in the Taylor report on the origins of football.          Initially, a part-time amateur
activity for the chinless-wonder; the inadequate,.physically under-endowed professional middle-
classes.       Later, the middle-classes conspired r*ri.th the financial community to build profitable
inner-city stadiums and abandoned the 'sport' to'the moribund working-class.          The toothless,
suspect, diet-deprived working-class took to football thus producing the football 'athlete' with
the notorious physique of under-developed chest (the result of short, infrequent bursts of effort)
and over-developed out-of-proportion lower limbs.           It required the introduction of the physi­
cally dominant,ithyphallic exotic-alien’biological anarchist to improve and change the nature of
'sport'.        We now have the violent, aggressive black player, awash with money, gravitating to
the 'Tramp' club and cocaine orbit, flash car, and even flashier blonde slut on his ample arm.
  _The Anglo-Saxon cretin fan has been reduced to a schizophrenic indulging in hero-worship and envj
   Taylor does not question sport and leisure, or attempt to distinguish between health and fitness.
   Beyond judicial comprehension perhaps?     As a society we must pursue health, not fitness.
   Healthy, nothing organically wrong, but unfit.        Most sportsmen and footballers arefit, but
unhealthy; morally degenerate, emotionally unbalanced, spiritually destitute.
   Since football is a business must it be played before spectators if that business and auditorium
is to be focal point of violence, crime, antisocial behaviour?        Has spectatorless football
been considered?        Vith the advent of global, multi-ehannel TV and Video sport do we need live
British football?       Could football not be reduced to a computerised robotic video financed by
the mixed-race pornographic commercial break, eliminating corruption, interference, the results
scrambled, unpredictable to satisfy the armchair spectator and pools' promoter alike?
    As a measure of football and what it means, has done t»<the Anglo-Saxon psyche one mustlisten
 to a recent BBC Radio interview with one of football's all-time greats.      By common consent cer­
 tainly the greatest, most revered footballer England has ever produced; a true sporting hero of
our times.        Asked what was his greatest footballing moment our aged hero did not hesitate.
Vas it being the then youngest-ever to represent his country, his most important of many internat­
 ionals, that rare, but invariably decisive winning goal, his cup appearances, and ultimately, cup
winners' medal?        No, not for one moment did these past glory's count.       Vhat lingered most
.in the memory, gave our sporting hero most reflective pleasure, w%s the opportunity to travel the
world free, at someone else's expense., that of the mesmerised fan and myopic soccer supporter.
    That shameful interview summed up the womb to tomb dependency-culture of the average Briton.
   All future organised 'sport' is destined to become a political, financial, social, racial, sex­
ual, nationalistic arena of stress, tension, conflict, replacing the battlefield of conventional
military warfare.       The vocal orifice of Downing Street should contemplate the corrupt gain
accruing to the venial State by way of various taxes before criticising money and excessive trans­
fer fees.       Livestock is free of VAT, not so professional footballer and sportsman.
   The 'asset' value, transfer fee of the footballer is subject to VAT making hin a fiscal chattel
somewhat lower than farmyard swine.        Can Thatcher and her eunuchs now deny VAT has changed
the nature, purpose of life itself - the solution is not to extend VAT, but repeal entirely this
evil, alien, inflationary impost.     All conveniently overlooked in the futile Taylor report.
   Eleyated menopausal-vagaries, hormonal imbalanced ignorance cannot depart global-ego media expo­
sure too soon for this lapsed 'cottager'!     Let football expire in self-immolation.
The Editor

copy to -
                                                                          tiUtn April
Sir,
       Speak/write for yourself, Ms Lesley Garner.
  Not all of us watched television blood-drained, ashen-faced as events unfolded at
Hillsborough.
  Modifying a piston on my recently completed Dean/Gooch steam locomotive in the studio/
workshop, a newsflash of Hillsborough came over the background radio.       With sport on
two other gtrwnn»lg,   youngest daughter and I instantly switched the radio off, just as I
did with Heysel earlier.
  Harrods Knightsbridge, Hyde Park, Bradford, Zeebrugge, Kings Cross inferno, Lockerbie,
Piper Alpha, Clapham, the M1, and now Hillsborough - these so-called disasters seem only to
occur when the fortunes of Mrs Thatcher and her Judaean economic sycophants are on the wane.
  I subscribe to the effigy pin-sticking conspiracy theory of Mrs Thatcher to enable her to
exploit, indulge, with indecent haste, in appalling middle-class, tasteless, mammary-pound­
ing, pious hand-wringing, ghoulish shroud-pursuing.      The first on the scene should be
the minister with overall responsibility.      Next, after a digified pause, should come a
member of the Royal Family, discreetly, low-profile.      If a prime minister must prome­
nade it should be much later after some return to normality.     Like Most British politi­
cians Mrs Thatcher is a personality, celebrity., not a leader, philosopher.
  She is manipulated, led by cretinous male acolytes.

  Three elections are in the offing - local, county, andEEC.
  The Liverpool soccer fans are being permitted to surface and function once again as peri­
odic electoral fodder.      In the view of Thatcher, right up to Hillsborough, the soccer
fan and kin, especially the Kop variety, are the indescribable scum of the earth, fit only
(when not required as voting offal) to be confined to theirghettos,mobilityrestricted
with a computerised identity tag, canine/bovine fashion.      I'llwager, despite  the Oscar­
worthy public platitudes, Mrs Thatcher still regards the soccer fan as expendable, super­
fluous detritus.
  My secondary reaction to Sheffield was this is yet another example of British youth dis­
playing a death-wish, self-immolation.
  Remonstrating with anti-social youth on a number of occasions over the past few months I
have met with verbal abuse., been offered violence in three instances.       Father of three
students, the scribe is an authority on youth trauma.
  I have perceived (in isolation to date), identified the white of today, specifically the
white male, with now British Press confirmed reproductive anatomy deficiency, is afflicted
with sex/race related death-wish psychosis.       Their public conduct, the manner in which
they walk, carry themselves, how they drive/ride with contempt for the machine and its
European civilisation industrial heritage, disregard for money, value, worth.
  The drinking, the drugs (even the vital sexually-stimulating, fantasy-inducing multi­
racial physiology equalising variety), the aimlessness, lack of self-control, purpose, yet
contradictory purposeful 'mindless' behaviour; all indicate severe mental emotional distur­
bance.      As a lifelong, former competition motorcyclist, I have latterly addressed nume­
rous quite irresponsible lunatic fellow young riders,       The response - dismissive.
  "So what, you've got to go sometime, why not now?       Is there anything to live for?
   I'm bored (in Thatcher's Judaean materialist society this indicates lack of inner res­
ource, soul).        I dont care about myself, the Country, or you".
  You would have got a quite different, bravado-type reaction thrity years ago if one then
questioned reckless, foolhardy riding or driving.        The white youth today are aliens in
the land of their birth.      What they do not readily say, fail to reveal, except when
drawn or provoked, and then the social/ sex/race factors out.       Social, domestic, urban,
and soccer aggression, violence is now clearly gender sexually, racially based.
  Imposed irresponsible Sex Equality/Equal Opportunity legislation has changed the role,
prospects, nature of the threatened male; damaged his psyche.      The imported anti-culture
exotic alien has further impaired his already suspect libido.
  The fault lies not not with the young, but with their elders, superiors!
  There is a total absence of example, moral guidance, leadership, for the simple reason
throughout history Britain has been dominated by personalities, not leaders, and more rec­
ently by covert political civil service dictators.        Thatcher does not possess the
solution, panacea to the social carcinoma., being female she is part of the dilemma!
  Her Government's comprehension, response to social, economic catastrophe is to grant still
greater police-state powers to the Revenue in the Budget!
  For decades successive governments and political civil servants have been denying self-
sufficiency, subordinating the personality, inhibiting the individual.
  Is the character-flawed thuggish, brutal, vicious, cowardly, bullying Briton, from whom
all enforcers are also recruited, ie., policemen, VAT inspectors, Poll Tax spies, tax
collectors, judges and magistrates, at long last rotating, evolving?
         2JU.1 . o r   o U m   i'U.



copy to Downing St                    TAYtOR   REPORT
w XP j      i
                                                                            29th Jan 1990

     Britain is sick, terminally so.       The justification for a Taylor Football report indicated
it, the superficial, irrelevant conclusions of the Taylor report confirm it.
   With the Lord Chief Justice called a dinosaur, one solitary judge declaring he speaks for the
silent majority; the remainder of the judiciary speaking for an exclusive Establishment minority,
the Scottish judiciary revealing widespread latent tendency to sexual perversion, why a judge to
head a football enquiry?       Why not a scientist, academic, businessman, journalist, entertainer,
a trades' union leader., a leader of men or morons?
   The Taylor report is flawed from initial 'cock-up' (printing terminology first capital letter)
to final punctuation.       Taylor repetitively refers to football sport.      Football is not sport;
it might be loosely termed entertainment, it is first, foremost, and last, a business.
   Motivated by, obsessed with sick money, football is now to be directed, controlled, regulated
with still more money.        Football, and increasingly most other 'sport' is contaminated by money,
gambling, both legal and illegal, insider dealing, lottery exploitation, property and advertising
speculation, the criminal element, the Jewish City Mafia at its most venal.
   ID CARDS - for those who lack purpose, domicile, identity and hope?       Fantasy indulgence!
   Decades ago football should         have been re-sited in urban, or semi-rural areas in multi­
purpose sports/leisure stadia.       The football grounds (and other similar venues) should have
never been permitted to occupy valuable inner-city locations; Craven Cottage, Stamford Bridge, High­
bury, Brentford, Filbert Street, Hillsborough, Bradford, Stoke, Wolves, under-utilised, a source
of aggravation to the non-participating trapped local community.       Green-field multi-purpose
sports/leisure amateur stadiums should have anticipated the creation of the motor car and transport­
ation of the masses.       One hundred years after the creation of the car we'in Britain in parti­
cular have still to come to terms with the car.         The car means mobility, fantasy indulgence
(qv.ID CardsI), escapism (escaping from undesirable alien neighbours)., the car as the great equal­
iser, Reliant and Rolls-Royce, taxed, insured, roadworthy, equal in law, equal before the eyes of
the impartial judge1
   Taylor says Britain gave football to the world.        Shame on Britain, pity the cursed world!
   Britain also 'gave' the world the trades union, the sham of pseudo- democratic Parliament, the
non-political highly Political Civil Service, the uniformed thug, the institutionalised VAT bully,
hypocrisy, the moral, political, spiritual, cultural vacuum.
   No mention in the Taylor report on the origins of football.         Initially, a part-time amateur
activity for the chinless-wonder; the inadequate,.physically under-endowed professional middle-
classes.       Later, the middle-classes conspired .-with the financial community to build profitable
inner-city stadiums and abandoned the 'sport' to-the moribund working-class.         The toothless,
suspect, diet-deprived working-class took to football thus producing the football 'athlete' with
the notorious physique of under-developed chest (the result of short, infrequent bursts of effort)
and over-developed out-of-proportion lower limbs.          It required the introduction of the physi­
cally dominant,ithyphallic exotic-alien'biological anarchist to improve and change the nature of
'sport'.        We .now have the violent, aggressive black player, awash with money, gravitating to
the 'Tuamp1 club and cocaine orbit, flash car, and even flashier blonde slut on his ample arm.
  _The Anglo-Saxon cretin fan has been reduced to a schizophrenic indulging in hero-worship and envj
   Taylor does not question sport and leisure, or attempt to distinguish between health and fitness.
   Beyond judicial comprehension perhaps?      As a society we must pursue health, not fitness.
   Healthy, nothing organically wrong, but unfit.        Most sportsmen and footballers are fit, but
unhealthy; morally degenerate, emotionally unbalanced, spiritually destitute.
   Since football is a business must it be played before spectators if that business and auditorium
is to be focal point of violence, crime, antisocial behaviour?        Has spectatorless football
been considered?        With the advent of global, multi-ehanne1 TV and Video sport do we need live
British football?       Could football not be reduced to a computerised robotic video financed by
the mixed-race pornographic commercial break, eliminating corruption, interference, the results
scrambled, unpredictable to satisfy the armchair spectator and pools' promoter alike?
   As a measure of football and what it means, has done ta-cthe Anglo-Saxon psyche one must listen
to a recent BBC Radio interview with one of football's all-time greats.       By common consent cer­
tainly the greatest, most revered footballer England has ever produced; a true sporting hero of
our times.       Asked what was his greatest footballing moment our aged hero did not hesitate.
Was it being the then youngest-ever to represent his country, his most important of many internat­
ionals, that rare, but invariably decisive winning goal, his cup appearances, and ultimately, cup
winners' medal?       No, not for one moment did these past glory's count.        What lingered most
in the memory, gave our sporting hero most reflective pleasure, was the opportunity to travel the
world free, at someone else's expense., that of the mesmerised fan and myopic soccer supporter.
   That shameful interview summed up the womb to tomb dependency-culture of the average Briton.
   All future organised 'sport' is destined to become a political, financial, social, racial, sex­
ual, nationalistic arena of stress, tension, conflict, replacing the battlefield of conventional
military warfare.       The vocal orifice of Downing Street should contemplate the corrupt gain
accruing to the venial State by way of various taxes before criticising money and excessive trans­
fer fees.       Livestock is free of VAT, not so professional footballer and sportsman.
   The 'asset' value, transfer fee of the footballer is subject to VAT making hin a fiscal chattel
somewhat lower than farmyard swine.        Can Thatcher and her eunuchs now deny VAT has changed
the nature, purpose of life itself - the solution is not to extend VAT, but repeal entirely this
evil, alien, inflationary impost.     All conveniently overlooked in the futile Taylor report.
   Elevated menopausal-vagaries, hormonal imbalanced ignorance cannot depart global—ego media expo­
sure too soon for this lapsed 'cottager't     Let football expire in self-immolation.
The Editor SOCCER 1-0-CARDS


oxr,                                                        10th November 1953
    It would be asking too much of political pygmies like Colin Koynihsn KP to pause
and comprehend the sinister magnitude and reciprocal political subversive potential of
his (and Mrs Thatcher's) proposed identity card for soccer fans.
  Any mainframe computer system can be thrown into total confusion by the introduction
of a few small magnets placed in strategic areas within the computer.      A handful of
iron filings scattered randomly throughout the computer will destroy the monster comp­
letely.     There must be numerous soccer fanatic computer technicians with the know­
ledge and accesE to the proposed 'Soocer Control' computer capable of taking a 'backs
to the wall' initiative.       A skill computer technician could easily reverse the flov
of information to any one of the proposed ninety two soccer ground terminals back to
the the mainframe computer to plant a cancer, virus, or simply wipe the existing memory.
  With twenty thousand fans outside the 'Den' or 'Kop' baying for admission, with the
computer immobilised or on the blink, what would the political cretin then advise the
ground officials do?      Run?
  6.5 million fans to be identified and placed on this state police computer?
What sort of mixed-race Anglo-Saxon ordour would submit to such dictate?      Surely not
the very same servile, compliant, bovine Anglo-Saxon cretin who is expected in 1992 to
up ~.n^ capture the export markets of the world?    Currently banned from Europe, come
1992, the English fan must be granted automatic access, computer or no computer.
  Why bother with a'lid' to contain the mobile soccer hooligan when the social cauldron
is irreparably split asunder?
  Jhe writer’.is quite prepared to forego the occasional visit to Craven Cottage, reject
computerisation, and observe soccer's continuing decline until it withers and dies.
  With multi-choice satellite television sport the writing is on the 'storyboard'.
  It never ceases to amaze that the Anglo-Saxon soccer fan pays unsound money (Thatcher
money) to stand and watch an increasing number of over-paid ethnic players kick the
ball (and opponents) about.       Ethnic players on divisive salaries, perks, and life­
style those same fans will never everachieve; plus theadaditional amoraldegenerate
attraction to the mutually responsive miscegenist.
  Surely .the pattern for the political . radical anarchist of the future is to reject
the indiscriminate primeval bomb and bullet, mainfing and killing the enemy, sundry
enforcers, and the innocent victim alike, and concentrate instead on the vulnerable
State regulation, control, and direction computers.
  England is finished as a stable, homogenous,unified country; it is going to fragment
disintegrate, go tribal into cults, creeds, mutual self-interest affliaticns, soccer
fashion.       Ulster and Ireland will eventually come to their dormant senses and unite,
not over Religion, but Race, to preserve their identical cultural integrity and harmony.
Scotland too, will take the same separation path to avoid the fate of multi-ethnic
England.      Wales, too small for autonomy, will almost certainly develop a nationalist
strain not unlike that of the IRA.
  Sport is now part of the political arena.       Far from forlornlyattempting to eli­
minate the soccer fan, denying him access, etc., the 'Thatcher government should stop
intervening and leave the soccei^ro confront fellow soccer fan.       Crushing soccer
(fan and club) will transfer the problem to cricket, rugby, Wimbledon, and any public
sporting venue attracting a congregation, guaranteeing an audience.       In the few
years left for Remembrance Day to be observed even that occasion will/can become the
object of political demonstration.     It is truly surprising it has not become so now.
  This, after all, is supposed to be the government that never intervenes, leaving
matters to the 'free' market.      This government of menopausal Thatcher, and her
menagerie of acolyte eunuchs, have intervened in every aspect of life and social
affairs to a greater degree than any government in living memory.       This is a deli­
berate ploy to divide and pre-occupy the population, divert attention from the myriad
cancers eroding society., to develop a form of social aeurosis known to the more per­
ceptive as the slack bowel, loose stool syndrome.       The interventionist State para­
site, thug, and bully(and coward) only understands, reacts, and retreats when faced
with violence, hence the remorseless rise and rise of the socctr-playing exotic alien!
   Life is War, War is Life.      Man needs conflict, conflict without contact,
aggression without violence, positive not passive.     The alleged soft-centre of
masculine Thatcher and her emasculated followers must be confronted by the assertive,
positive, creative hard-centre of the true man if he is to survive as a man.
  The people the writer feels most sorry for are the reserved, meek,shy, sensitive,
and fearful among the young (f..k the old who are responsible for this state of affairs)
who are condemned and treated as excreta.
  Go to it you computerised soccer fans - reciprocity is the name of the new league
game - you have nothing to fear but fear itself.
The Editor   - ID CAROS                               ______________________________________
                   _ ,                                            18th June 1988
copy to Buckingham Falace

Sir,
    The neutered male Home Office sycophants sheltering behind the transparent skirt of
Thatcherism should ponder the possible reaction if they succeed in confiscating the passports
of those mobile soccer fans with a penchant for positive physi*al action.
The intelligent soccer fan (sans passport) could easily make availability for jury service,
completion of a tax return, responding to mobilisation or conscription, compliance with the
Poll Tax, dependent upon the return of his passport.
  Before contemplating confiscation of passports of potential cannon-fodder I would much prefer
the Home Secretary elaborate on his plans to contain and eliminate the inner-city rapist and
mugger Cparwin1s imported biological anarchist) in the event of a national emergency.
  Like the best informed defence sources the writer subscribes to the view that Britain, as a
pagan, amoral, multi-racial pornographic brothel, will never ever again witness total, mass,
or even partial, mobilisation, whatever the crisis or emergency.
  It is naive of Mrs Thatcher to reciprocate and threaten the soccer hooligan with the cudgel
of State incomprehension, ignorance.     The Europeans have only themselves to blame for being
captive hosts to pandemic British violence.      When political treachery took Britain into the
Common Market did the Europeans imagine for one moment they were getting a stable, mature,
worthy, wholesome and healthy addition to the socialist club?     Cretinous Edward Heath took
one look at Britain's mounting economic, industrial, social, sexual and racial problems,rightly
decided they were insoluble by internal domestic resolve, and bolted for Europe and an imposed
external solution to these problems.     The myopic, greedy, grasping Europeans (lustfully
coverting Britain's North Sea energy resources, Britain's massive overseas investments, plus
Britain as an offshore dumping ground for their surplus manufactured products and excessive
agricultural produce) thought it would be all selfish one-way gain for them.
  Did the Europeans not stop to think that a'free, independent, sovereign *island of 55million
moral-fibre deficient citizens, dominated by institutions and 'Pillars of Society' rotten to
the core, incapable of producing leaders and developing a survival philosophy and culture, was
anything but a terminally sick society?
  Soccer and social violence is merely symptomatic of a deeper, more widespread and sinister
malignant cancer in Thatcher's Utopia.     After Heath's demise, Mrs Thatcher, as a female globa
egotist, was elevated by a Tory Central Office clique to frustrate debate and dialogue of
Britain's intractable racial and sexual problems.      In addition to the gender fa«tor Central
Office decided upon a form of pseudo-monetarism, which in reality is venal Hebrew economics
of materialism and consumerism, to pre-occupy the population.      Thatcherism comprises a
Judaean 'Epidemic of Spending' coupled with the endorsement of safe pre-marital sex - Licence
replacing Freedom as a means of regulating, controlling, directing society.                    __
  A parallel exists here with Brazil where an intolerable rate of annual inflatioa, ehronic
poverty and social division,is made tolerable by periodic ritualistic worship of a 'Frenzy of
Fucking' (BBC idiom).     The massed soccer fans merely represent troops without leadership,
example, faith or hope.     The pitiful pathetic recourse to the Union flag by the soccer fan
indicates a yearning of a former national identity lost in the vassal status of Britain in a
Federal Socialist Europe.
  Absolutely no stone must be left unturned in the dissection of soccer and social violence.
What is the composition of massed collective soccer activists?        Do they include police
officers, prison warders, servicemenj, customs' officers .,and sundry other civil and public
service enforcers?     A busman's holiday in reverse?     Are they aliens in their land of birth?
  The soccer fans in Germany were exclusively white.      Did the other variety remain at 'home'
to continue in their remorseless mission to indulge in miscegenation?        Are the white male
soccer Cans artisan craftsmen from what remains of Britain's manufacturing industry reacting
against the system which has put the unskilled, unequal amoral female police officer on average
earnings double of theirs?     The imposition of irresponsible, subversive Sex and Race Equalit
Unequal Opportunity has dealt a mortal blow to the male psyche, undermined the role of male and
father in society, whilst importing the exotic alien (to the delight of certain female native
turpitude) has compromised the chaste Caucasian libido.       Do the soccer fans' include self-
employed artisans and craftsmen (the last generation of indigenous skilled industrial strivers
reduced to documentation fodder and administrative grist, travelling abroad to seek temporary
respite from the antics of the highly political index-linked inflation-proofed parasite and__
institutionalised tax bully and VAT thug?     'Poor White- Trash1 small businessmen consigned to
'gutter' travel and packaged travel as a consequence of the VAT poverty-trap turnover limit?
  A terrifying political, qjoral, and spiritual vacuum prevails under Thatcher.
This was predictable, inevitable, avoidable.     After three elections and ten years of 'leader­
ship* Mrs Thatcher 'is still running a European bureaucrat dominated socialist interventionist
economy., intervening now in the proposed confiscation of passports.
  The Labour Party meanwhile, after generations of anti-work ideology (catering for those unabl
to determine their own dubious worth), reduced hours, higher pay, increased leisure, sow
describes the white male mobile soccer fan as over-paid with           surplus money.
Is the Labour Party advocating a low wage economy to deter and inhibit the itinerant hooligan
soocer supporter?
  Mrs Thatcher and her poisoned chalice of materialism are destined to be buried with the depth
swiftness, remote anonymity reserved for the seventeenth-century plague carrier as the future.
Tory Party adopts Tebbitism, Jibweism, Lawsonism (God forbid!).
  England no longer a nation, the English no longer a race?
