from fire   SERVICES INSPECTORATE/FEU
                                                                      L 03.1990   14.*27                    NO. 8      P. 1

                                                        IMMEDIATE BY fACSIMILIE                      lO                a      .

                    '"IFT "-1"           "r
                                          f
                                          "

                                  DATE staho
                                  TIME           3.3(3

                                  NUMDER OF PAGES                     (a.
                                  (Excluding this sheet)


                              TO:
                              NAME               PM /

                             oiv/room             fS jib7     $AGJ>
                   -
                   »
                   ■          -- .(
                             BUILDIHG            q rt-pi&svt^ srrmer



                            FROM;
                            NAME Dcujtd mc>nJjp(
                            DIV/ROOM 61©*- 'fut o<Xy^rCjjz^ta^ fUtrun^cn^
                            8UILDEMG OAX£ULt‘\- Ansuis) GclLh
                            TEL >10:             <sr?3 3 0 W


               3   APR   ! c)pj    i d   . ^ o

                                   Ixay jw'                                                                PAGE.001
                                                                                  . [ U jt / X . W   ▼       _




                                                                                                          the line


                         yelco                                               hicti                        Foo-tfeall
                                                                            ha                             to Lotd
                              & INSPECIORfllE/FEU                  04.03.iyyw w,y       HU. B    r, L


a s   .   4   * 3 /   f   a   f   l .   p   e   b




From:                     P E Bolton                                cc   Miss Nicholson
                          G2 Division                                    Mr Turney
                          X3322                                          Mr Goddard
                                                                         Mr Mower
                          3 April 1990                                   Mr Mould



Ms Dent



MEETING WITH THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION AMD THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE

The Home Secretary has agreed to meet representatives of the
Football Association and the Football League at 3pm on Wednesday
4 April.

2.   The meeting was requested in Mr Millichip’s letter of
19 February setting out the Football Association's response to
the recommendations of the Taylor report.    That response/ in
summary:

                 (i)              welcomes the report's recommendations; but

                (ii)   considers some of Lord justice Taylor's strictures
                unfounded;

                (iii) points out that the-. FA has limited powers in relation
                to crowd control and safety;

                (iv)   welcomes Lord Justice Taylor's                    suggested strategy
                against hooliganism?

                (v)   accepts that the bulk of the finances                         for ground
                improvements must come from the clubs;

                 (vi)                   seeks a reduction in pools betting tax.

3.   Since Mr Millichip wrote, we have heard from the Football
League that the 2 organisations have agreed to set up an Advisory
Design Council (Taylor recoiwnendation number 5} to collect and
disseminate information and expertise on the improvement and
design of football stadia.

4.   All these are positive contributions. Accordingly the line
to take recommended for this meeting is to:

               (i)    welcome the positive response which the Football
               Association and the Football League have given to Lord
               Justice Taylor's fi»a.l report;
           & INSPECTORATE/FEU
                                                            hu .   tf   r, o



     (ii)  indicate that th& Home Office is convinced that our
     joint interests and those of the football supporters are
     likely to be best served ii!; we approach the Taylor report
     recommendations in a co-operative manner?

     (iii) say that this meeting provides an opportunity for a
     brief discussion of any general points ariiiing from the
     report which the 2 organisations want to rai»e;

and at the end of the discussion

     (iv)   encourage the 2: organisations to maintain a close
     working relationship with officials on the detailed
     application of the Taylor recommendations while {of course)
     expressing the readiness <;f Ministers to respond if there
     are any matters which cannot be resolved in that way.

5.   Briefing on particular issues is contained in the annex to
this note.   Points which we can expect the Association or the
League to raise are as follows:;

     (a) the arrangements and timing for the setting up of the
     Football Licensing Authority;

     (b) whether there is liksly to be any flexibility in the
     timetable for the introduction of all seated accommodation
     at football grounds;

     (c)   whether the Government proposes to legislate to
     introduce the new offences proposed in the Taylor report;

     (d)   financial issues: (under this item we may hear of
     proposals by the League and/or the Association to make
     monies available to the Football Trust from their own
     resources for ground improvements. They may, however, want
     to reserve their contribution to the First and Second
     Division clubs where the crowd/accommodation problems are
     likely to be moat acute)s

     (e)   planning problems:   Mr Moynihan had hoped to attend
     this meeting but is unable to be present.    A DoE official
     will be present to register any points which are raised (eg
     difficulties over planning consents) which can be taken back
     to him;

     (£)  the possibility of an interdepartmental working group.
     (We do not know what is behind this proposal.)

6.   The Home Secretary may care to note that DoE have already
had discussions with the Pools Promoters Association and the
Football Trust with a view to securing an agreement on the
disposal of monies made available by the proposed reduction in
the football betting tax.   (The League and the Association will
be aware of this.)  The Trea.?sury have said that the money will
be made available as soon as agreement has been reached.
        ;£S INSPECTORUTE/FEU              03,1998   14<‘ 29   HO, 8   F, 4


/*   The Football Association is the national organisation for
football in England.  (There are separate FA sj for Scotland and
Wales«)
8.   The Football League represents the 92 clubs which are full
(Divisions 1 and 2) or associate (Divisions 3 and 4) members of
the league which is currently .'sponsored by Barclays Bank. The
league covers England and Wales,.

9.   The Association will be represented by:

     Mr F A (Bert) Mi.llich.ip ** Chairman
     Mr Graham Kelly - chief Executive
     Mr Adrian Titcombe - Hftad of Competitions and Regulations

The League   will be represented by:

     Mr W Fox - President (and Chairman ofBlackburn Rovers)
     Mr Arthur Sandford - chief Executive
     Mr David Dent - Secretary.




                                        P E BOLTON
       *CES INSPECTORfllE/FEU             04. 83. \ m   lr.u   nu,   u




                                                               ANNEX



ALL SEATED ACCOMMODATION (TAYLOll RECOMMENDATIONS 1-4)

The overall objective is to achieve the targets set down in the
Final Report ie
     (i)     from 1993/4 season at UEFA high risk matches.

     (ii)    Divisions 1 and 2 fi-om 1994/93.

     (iii)    other league grounds froa 1999/2000.

Line to take:
(a) overall objective - The Government's objective is to achieve
all seated accommodation within the timetable.    We acknowledge
however that Taylor's proposed staged move towards all seating
may cause anomalies and practical difficulties in particular
cases. Looking to clubs to set their timetables to achieve the
overall objective in the first instance.       Accept that some
flexibility to take account of individual considerations arising
at particular grounds may nevertheless be desirable.

(b) Method of Introduction - Express hope that clubs are already
formulating plans to comply voluntarily with the Taylor
timetable.   Football Licensing Authority (FLA.) will licence
grounds occupied by league clubs and other- designated grounds
where international matches are held or where league clubs play.
That licence may (if Home Secretary directs) contain conditions
as to the seated accommodation for the ground.      Envisage at
present that direction will apply only where FLA considers that
progress towards all seating is unsatisfactory.

(c) Non-League grounds - It was made clear from the outset that
the Government expected to apply the all seated requirement to
the 92 Football League ground;*, The position of the small number
of non-league grounds which are designated under the safety of
Sports Grounds Act 1975, will be kept under review. Not intended
to impose the licensing requirement for matches normally played
at these grounds at present.



FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY (FLA)

The Authority will have two principle functions.

     (i)   The issue of licenses under Part I of the Football
     Spectators Act (which will contain conditions, as necessary,
     on the introduction of all seated accommodation.)

     (ii) To keep under review functions of local authorities
     under the J975 Act - with the object of securing a
     consistent  approach to   safety  certification  (Taylor
     recommendation 6).
      '0ICES INSPECIORRIE/FEU



Line to take:

(a)  Membership - Not yet finally decided.    Maximum membership
is Chair plus between 4 and 8 members.      Envisage presence of
senior ex-fire and police officers, as well as people with a
background in engineering/construction or building control. Want
to include people who have a particular knowledge of football.
Express willingness to consider any nomination from the FA/FL,
(provided they do not have an inappropriate pecuniary interest)*

(b) Timing - FLA is to be set. up from 1 June 1990 becoming fully
operational as soon as possible thereafter.

(c) 'Parent* Department for FLA - Explain that current proposal,
subject to PM agreement, is for responsibility for setting up the
FLA to be transferred to HO from DoE.



ADVISORY DESIGN COUNCIL (TAYLOR RECOMMENDATION S)

Line to take:    Applaud the action proposed by the FA/FL in
responding to the Final Report recommendation to set up an
Advisory Design Council. (Mr Sandford of the Football League has
written on this and Secretary of State has already replied.)



PLANNING PERMISSION (if raised)

Line^to. fea)ce? ~ Planning permission is a matter for Secretary
of State for Environment. Note any concerns or points which are
raised and agree to pass the:;a on to DoE.



SAFETY MATTERS ARISING FROM THE FINAL REPORT

Line to take:

(a)  Maximum crowd densities for terraces - maximum densities
will be reduced in the next edition of the Green Guide.    Clubs
should nevertheless have already been required to reduce numbers
by amendment to safety certificates following Home Office
circular to local authorities,

(b) Pitch/perimeter fences The Government has already indicated
its support for the general move by the Taylor Inquiry to reduce
their 'fortress' like appearance. Removal of high barriers style
fencing altogether a matter for clubs in association with the
certificating authority and police.

(c) First Aid/Medical Facilities Support improved first aid and
medical provision and urge compliance.
        m s   imcrmr E / F E u             u      ia.,
                                           0 4 , 8 3 , 19y0 14:3S       |j0 g


(3)  Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (the "Green Guide'H
Revision is taking place as quickly as possible in the light of
the Inquiry recommendations,   Welcome views from F A / F L on any
other points that should be considered in the process.

(e) Application of Taylor recommendations to sma.il/non-league
clubs - recognise possible difficulties to non-league and 3rd/4th
Division clubs; willing to consider any particular areas of
difficulty. Point out that HO Circular 11/1990 sent out with the
Final Report to police and certificating authorities highlighting
the need for them to pay attention to individual needs.      (For
example police control boxes and CCTV may not be justified in the
smallest grounds if there is normally no significant police
present.)



FINANCING CHANGES PROPOSED BY TAYLOR

Line to takes

(a) Seduction in pools betting tax - express the hope that this
will provide a substantial contribution to the move to obtain
better, safer grounds.

(k)   Additional ...funding from FL/FA - question what funds the
FA/FL have in mind to allocate to ground improvement, for example
from TV fees or transfer fees.,

( c) Allocation of_ the funds released bv thti reduction in pools
betting tax.

     (i) agree importance to ensure best use made of funds; need
     for close working relationship between FLA and the Football
     Trust;

     (ii)   express caution over any suggestion that 3rd/4th
     Division clubs should bs excluded in preference to 1st and
     2nd Division clubs.     Accept that the problem is more
     immediate for the larger clubs but remind that all
     4 Divisions are expected to become all seated in due course.

Note: It is possible that the football authorities will wish to
allocate much of the available finance to upgrade Division 1 and
2 grounds. This would direct funds at the most attended ('higher
risk') grounds leaving tha less well attended grounds to
systematically reduce the use of terraces as a w a y t o comply with
the phasing of all seated accommodation.     This formula is not
altogether without merit but unless carefully presented might
suggest:

(a) a weakening of Government resolve in relation to Divisions
3 and 4.

(b)   an acceptance that such grounds do not merit                  priority
attention (even though many are run-down),
                    «


We believe that in principle small league clubs should move
towards all seated accommodation, but we will be relying on the
FLA to make recommendations on the fine-tuning of the programme
in the light of particular local circumstances.
             INbPtUUKHIt/htU                                   HU, s   r, 3




B-4.AH


BRIEFING FOR THE HOME SECRETARY'S MEETING WITH THE FOOTBALL
ASSOCIATION AND THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE, WEDNESDAY APRIL 4


SPECIFIC OFFENCES IN THE GROUND


Lord Justice Taylor expressed concern at the undercurrent of
unruly behaviour which can result in disorder.      He paid
particular attention to three iictiviti.es: (i) throwing coins
and other missiles,      (ii) chanting obscene or racist abuse, and
(iii)    going onto the pitch without reasonable excuse.      The
first two activities are outlawed in general tentis by the
Public Order Act 1986 but Lord Justice Taylor's recommendation
71 is for each of the three activities at a designated sports
ground to be made a specific offence.


Line to take


We are carefully and urgently considering Lord Justice
Taylor's recommendations on creating new offences.      We are
currently consulting ACPO and other Government Departments
about the proposed offences.      Too soon to say what our
conclusions will be.


TOUTING


Lord Justice Taylor was concerned that the activities of touts
at football matches can put &z risk the maintenance of safety
and the prevention of disorder.


Line to take


We are carefully and. sympathetically considering this
recommendation [In the past we have seen difficulties in
proposing a ban on ticket touting but we are looking at it
again in the context of the particular circumstances of
football],
            'cts i m c r m i E / F E u
                                                       M J lim   HI32      H0: 8   Pi s

      f
    ELECTRONIC TAGGING


    At present the electronic monitoring of sentenced offenders is
    on a voluntary basis.           To impose 'tagging' upon offenders,
    including convicted football hooligans, would require
    legislation.


    Line to take


    We are urgently considering Lori Justice Taylor's
    recommendation.       One of the objectives of the electronic
    monitoring pilot studies was to provide information about its
    usefulness.    It is too early to reach conclusions.


    THE ROLE OP THE POLICE


    Lord Justice Taylor paid tribute to the police generally for
    their invaluable work in maintaining order at football grounds
    Saturday after Saturday.             He expressed cautious optimism about
    the future of crowd behaviour at football grounds.             He saw the
    National Football Intelligence Unit and the use of video
    systems to monitor crowds as :he two major planks of the
    police strategy against hooliganism.


    Line to take


    We are vigorously supporting the police in their operations
    against football hooliganism.             We are developing the full
    potential of the newly-formed National Football Intelligence
    Unit to enable the police to target the ringleaders more
    effectively.     We are encourjjging the enhancement of optical
    evidence gathering systems e.t football grounds in this country
    and the training of their operators.


c
        <CES INSPECTORATE/FEU
                                               04,03,1990    14: 32   HO, 8   p.ig




[If pressed on funding for CCTV:


It is for football to bear the costs of CCTV,               The Football
Trust has made generous grants towards these costs in the
past-   I hope they will continue to do so.]


TAYLOR RECOMMENDATIONS


Lord Justice Taylor made several recommendations for the
police in his Final Report concerning, in particular, training
and procedures.


Line to take


The police service reacted speedily to implement the practical
recommendations in the Interim Report.          I have no doubt that
chief officers are responding just as positively to the final
recommendations,


COST OF POLICING FOOTBALL


Lord Justice Taylor recommends that police authorities should
ensure that charges made to clubs for policing inside grounds
are realistic.


Line to take


We support the recommendation on charging and are encouraging
consistency of practice, subject to the need, recognised in
the report, for local discretion.


STEWARDS


More, and better trained, stewards would help to reduce the
policing requirements.          Manning gates, directing spectators to
the correct areas, keeping gangways clear and monitoring the
density of packing in pens and enclosures are all mentioned by
       -Ctb INbf'tl'IUKHIt/htU         y4.yj.iyyy   W liI   H U i   B   f/ ' U




Lord Justice Taylor as examples of duties which could be
carried out by suitable, properly trained stewards.


Line to take


We very much favour a move towards less policing and more
stewarding at grounds provided adequate safety is maintained.
As Lord Justice Taylor recommended, stewards must be fit,
active and robust and fully trained.
         ,i'CES IHSPECTORfiTE/FEU                  8UU998    m s
                                                                      HO. 8

WORLD CUP (ITALY, 8 JUNE - 3 JU^Y)



The potential for disorder in Italy is being taken very
seriously by all concerned.              A constructive steering group
chaired by DoE official has met several times and. is attended
by Home Office (Frank Smith, Ffi-), police and FA,


An important English police liaison team will visit Italy
during the World Cup to advise the Italian police eg in
Cagliari, Sardinia where England will play initially; Rome, to
liaise with the central Italian police committee; and Genoa
where large numbers of supporters may gather at the ferry port
en route for Cagliari.              Scottish officers will be present in
Genoa and Turin.


World Cu p    - c osts of po l i c e liai s o n


We are grateful to the FA for being prepared to meet the costs
of the English police liaison team which will operate in
Italy.     That is right.           We are; however pressing the Italians
to make a substantial contribution too.
        iCES INSPECTORATE/FEU             04,03,1530   WiS

 *
RESTRICTION ORDER


Part II of the Football Spectators Act 1989 (restriction
orders) comes fully into force on 24 April ancl we are
finalising guidance to the courts, the police, and the central
'Restriction Orders Authority' now.     These powers will be of
great value in the future in preventing hooligans from
attending key matches abroad.


Negotiations with Scotland and the Italians are well advanced
to enable us to impose restriction orders following conviction
in those countries for offence:?; corresponding to our football
related offences.


The FA are concerned that thei.r views should be taken into
account when the Restriction Orders Authority decides the
criteria for requiring offenders to report on the occasion of
each particular designated match.     The Home Secretary may
reassure the FA (and if relevant the League) that they will be
listened to - their views are valued.    We are looking at a
suitable reference to that in the written guidance the Home
Secretary will give to the Reiistriction Orders Authority.
