                                                                   "V

K H .6.7/MEETRFU.DM

NOTE OF MEETING 23 MAY 1990: RUGBY FOOTBALL UNION/HOME OFFICE

Introduction
1.   Mr Bolton and Mr Mould met Mr Wood, Secretary of the
Rugby Football Union (RFU) and Roger Godfrey the Senior
Administrator for the Twickenham Stadium on 23 May.   The
meeting was to explore the RFU's response to the Final Report
by Lord Justice Taylor and in particular the possible
application of recommendations 1-4 of the Report on seated
accommodation to RFU grounds, including Twickenham Stadium
itself.

2.   Home Office (HO) opened by explaining that the present
legislation (the Football Spectators Act 1989) did not extend
to RFU grounds. The Government had indicated that before
considering extending the scope of that legislation
discussions would be held with the representative bodies of
the sports concerned.  It would clearly wish to make its
decision in the light of progress being made on the
implementation of other recommendations by Lord Justice Taylor
and in particular the RFU's policy on seated accommodation at
Twickenham.  HO recognised that the starting point for
achieving safety at such grounds was probably different from
soccer in that the crowd disorder of the kind experienced at
football matches was not a feature of Rugby Union.  The RFU
recognised that many of the Final Report recommendations
applied to RFU grounds and supported their implementation.

Twickenham
3.   The RFU confirmed that it already envisaged Twickenham
becoming an all seater stadium.  This decision had been taken
long before the Final Report, the findings of which led the
RFU to advance plans to provide seated accommodation for the
lower tier of the North stand currently under construction.
This stand was expected to be open by about November 1990
(cost £17 million) and would be all seater.  The RFU planned
to convert the terracing of the South stand during this
summer.  The East stand was already all seater (bench type
seating) which left only the lower level of terracing along
the West stand.

4.   RFU plans were, in effect, to extend the North stand in
phases.  The next phase would be to convert the East side of
the ground and then the West side.   The aim was to achieve a
75 thousand all seater stadium by approximately 1995.    In the
meantime, other recommendations by Lord Justice Taylor had
been implemented at Twickenham even to the extent of providing
exits onto the pitch even though access to it was obstructed
only by 2 foot fence in some places.   They enjoyed good
working relationships with the police and local authority.
The police control room was to be improved during the summer
so as to include a sound proofed planning room.   Police
presence was not on the scale required at soccer matches.    The
local authority had given dispensation for turnstile flow
rates which, on testing, had shown that the through put
consistently exceeded the figure of 660 rate recommended by
the Final Report.  Stewards were all RFU officials, enjoying
good relationships with the crowd and therefore able to
provide effective crowd management.  The RFU felt that the
upper age limit of 55 was unnecessary.

All seated accommodation
5.   The RFU were not opposed to more seating and more
comfortable accommodation for spectators but they were opposed
to imposed requirements. The plans for Twickenham obviated
the need for statutory requirements. All seated accommodation
was not necessary at other RFU club grounds. The sport was
essentially amateur which did not experience crowd trouble,
did not have "pens", in some cases did not have terraces on
anything like the scale of football grounds and spectators
were less prone to tight packing as experienced at football
grounds.  In general there tended to be free movement of the
crowd around the whole of the playing area during the course
of a rugby match (Twickenham excepted although even here
circulation of the crowd round the outside of the spectators
accommodation was possible.)  The RFU also pointed to
Government assistance to football clubs which was not
available to rugby.  The RFU emphasised that it was a net
contributor to the exchequer to the tune of about £1 million
in different taxes.  They obtained no grant of any
significance (£18,500 from the sports council).  The sport had
also been adversely affected by the change in business rates.

6.   Clubs had expressed concern about requirements that they
should go to all seated accommodation and in particular that
ground capacities should be systematically reduced each year.
HO advised that local authorities ought not to be making such
requirements in safety certificates.  The RFU wished to
reassure clubs if possible.  It was agreed that the RFU would
clear a "holding" letter for such clubs with the Home Office
as a way of setting their minds at rest.

Other safety recommendations
7.   The RFU accepted that the maximum standing capacities
would need to be recalculated at the rate of 47/10 square
metres.  They confirmed that the sport accepted the need to
ensure proper safety at all grounds irrespective of the nature
of the sport.  The RFU had received no feedback to the effect
that unreasonable demands had been made on clubs on such
matters as policing levels, communications and television
equipment.  The RFU acknowledged the need to have proper first
aid facilities, proper stewarding and that grounds needed to
be structurally safe for the numbers of people they
accommodated.  Their understanding was that clubs enjoyed good
relationships with the safety authorities.

National inspectorate
8.   The RFU were not enthusiastic about an inspectorate body
overseeing safety certificates issued by local authorities.
       They could see there might be some advantages and therefore
       had no objections to the concept.   They felt that
       personalities within the local authority safety team were
       important but which would probably not fall within the ambit
       of any national body.  They pointed to the difficulty which
       (they considered) they had experienced with the London fire
       authority whose demands (they felt) were sometimes
       unreasonable but questioned whether a national body would be
       able to alter such a situation.   HO noted these points for
       consideration.

       Conclusion

       9.   HO welcomed the positive response from the RFU,
       especially on the question of all seated accommodation for
       Twickenham.  HO would probably consult further with local
       authority associations about these issues and hoped to be able
       to come back to the RFU in the not too distant future after
       Ministers had made decisions on sports other than soccer.




                                               D J MOULD

                                               7 June 1990




    e.c -   ^
V
