                     THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION & SCIENCE
                     ELIZABETH HOUSE YORK ROAD LONDON SEI 7PH
                 SWITCHBOARD 071-934 9000 FAX 071-934 9082 GTN No. 3914




John Sherman Esq
Department of the Environment                                /£     October 1991
Inner Cities Directorate
Room P2/109
2 Marsham Street
London
SW1P 3EB




             NATIONAL FEDERATION OF STADIUM COMMUNITIES
Thank you for your letter of 3 October about the application under the
Special Grants Programme by the National Federation of Stadium
Communities (NFSC).
As I explained when we spoke the NFSC is not known to us. We have also
spoken to our contacts in the Home Office who have the main
responsibility for the implementation of the recommendations in Lord
Justice Taylor's Report on the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster and the
Federation is not known to them either. This means, I am afraid, that
we are unable to offer any comment on the specific activities of the
NFSC or its Secretary Mr Paul Weston.
Paragraph 2.4 of the NFSC's application states that the Taylor Report
identified the need for major improvements to be made to the inner
areas that surround football stadia. This statement is not correct;
the Taylor Report dealt only with the development of football stadia
themselves either by improvement of existing grounds or by relocation.

However, the Taylor Report recommendations will mean that many clubs
in the Football League particularly those in the First and Second
Divisions will be carrying out major redevelopments of their grounds
some of which could have significant effects on those who live in the
surrounding areas. Some clubs may also re-locate to new sites. The
interests and views of affected residents will, of course, need to be
taken into account and there will be opportunities for this to be done
as part of the normal planning process. If properly organised and
administered I would have thought that the NFSC could provide a useful
service to local communities affected by stadia developments and the
activities that take place at and around them. However as the
objectives of the NFSC are not directly related to sport or sports
provision, rather they are a pressure group seeking to protect the
interests of communities affected by development proposals there is
                                                                                    1


                                                                                   DK
not a strong case for support from a sports point of view. We have no
funds available in DES to assist such a proposal.
Since the proposal is not directly relevant to this Department's
objectives and given our lack of knowledge of the organisation I am
unable to complete your appraisal form. I would be happy to find out
from the FA, League, the Football Trust, the RFU and the Sports
Council whether they are intending to fund the project if that is
relevant to your consideration.




A R BADEN




                                                                    2
