                    THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION & SCIENCE
                   ELIZABETH HOUSE YORK ROAD L O N D O N SEI 7PH
               SWITCHBOARD 071-934 9000 FAX 071-934 9082 G TN No. 3914



David Webb Esq
Home Office                                                     26 March 1992
G2 Division
Queen Anne's Gate
London SW1




 U j
Thank   you  for   faxing me the other day a copy of the
correspondence with Mr Barry Devonside of the Hillsborough Family
Support Group. You also sent me a copy of your letter of 19 March
to John Aldworth in the DOE about Mr Atkins' views on all
seating.
The position on the press report mentioned by Mr Devonside is
that our Minister has denied making any such statements to the
press on all-seating. I suggest therefore that you use the
following line in the draft reply to Mr Devonside:-

       'We have consulted the Minister for Sport's      office and
       understand that the report in the       Sunday Times   of 1 March
       you mention, and other newspapers published on the same day,
       was not based on any press interview given by the Minister.'

You will have seen the exchange of correspondence between our
Secretary of State and the Home Secretary on the possibility of a
review of the all seating requirement, particularly for 3rd and
4th Division clubs. The Minister for Sport shares fully the views
expressed in our Secretary of State's letter of 16 March ie that
DES Ministers will continue to support the Government's line in
public.

So far as Mr McKeag, the President of the Football League is
concerned the Minister mentioned to him privately at a meeting on
12    February that both he and our Secretary of State had
considerable sympathy with the concerns of 3rd and 4th Division
clubs about the cost and necessity of going all seater. However
the Minister stressed to Mr McKeag that there should not be
public acknowledgement of these concerns       lest it increase
pressure from clubs in the 1st and 2nd Divisions to relax the all
seating requirement for them. I fully accept that such private
expressions of opinion can be damaging and this has been pointed
out to both the Minister and the Secretary of State.



                                                                                1
On  David   Peter's   concerns about the transfer of      'treat
officially' letters between our two Departments I would be
grateful if you would tell him that in future we will send an
acknowledgement which will inform the writer of the transfer in
respect of all letters we send to you. I would be interested to
know whether there are other examples of our alleged laxness
which he wishes to draw to our attention.

I am copying this letter to John Aldworth and I would be grateful
if he could let me know the outcome of the meeting between Mr Yeo
and Mr Aldworth.

Yours sincerely




A R BADEN
Sport and Recreation Division
