                                                                                       1 2 ..

                FOOTBALL MEMBERSHIP AUTHORITY SUB-COMMITTEE

MINUTES OF A MEETING HELD ON MONDAY 13TH MARCH 1989 AT THE OFFICES
OF TH^FbOTBALL ASSOCIATION, LANCASTER GATE.

Present:       I.H. Stott (Management Committee) - in the Chair
               W.G. McKeag, B.A. (Cantab.) (Management Committee)
               T.R. Phillips (Commercial Director)
               R.H.G. Kelly, F.C.I.S. (Football Association)
               G. Kirton (Football Association)
               J.A. Crawford (Football League)
               C.J. Whalley (Football League)


The meeting commenced at 1.15 pm.
APOLOGIES FOR ABSENCE
Apologies for absence were received from Mr. K.P. Stein (Arthur Young).
MINUTES OF LAST MEETING
The Minutes of the last meeting held on 24th January 1989 were taken as read
and signed by the Chairman as a correct record, subject to the following amendment:-
Page 3 - 'Exemptions for Membership' - line 2
   the Working Party had already granted exemptions ...’ should read '... the
Working Party had already proposed exemptions...1
MATTERS ARISING FROM THE MINUTES
It was confirmed that this committee's view was that applications for membership
should not require photographs.
           1

REGIONAL MEETINGS
The meeting received reports of the regional meetings held between 30th January
and 9th February 1989. It was noted that some clubs had expressed a view
that any scheme should provide for temporary match-day membership and for
the admission of members Vguests.
MEETINGS WITH THE MINISTER FOR SPORT
The meeting received reports of meetings attended by the Minister for Sport
on 26th January (all clubs) and on 30th January (Group Four clubs).
Mr. McKeag noted the Minister’s remark to the meeting of Group Four clubs
suggesting that clubs should hold members1 draws a t matches, presumably as
a way of attracting membership. Mr. McKeag felt that this indicated that the
Government appeared to be ready to widen the law on lotteries and thought
that an approach should be made a t an appropriate stage to the Government
for football to be allowed to have a lottery run by the FMA.


                                                         Continued/2
■*   •»

 w bontinued/2

     The meeting aiso received a report of a meeting held on 10th February 1989
     between the Minister for Sport and the Chairman of The Football Association
     and the President of The Football League. Correspondence consequent to that
     meeting was also noted. Mr. McKeag felt that we should write to the Minister
     to ask him to let us know of anyone else who makes application to become the
     FMA.
     FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL
     The meeting received the list of amendments to the Bill moved in committee
     in the House of Lords. Mr. Crawford reported that just one amendment had
     been voted through, concerning the phasing-in of a scheme, but the Government
     had undertaken to bring forward some amendments of its own concerning phasing
     and exemptions a t the Report Stage in the House of Lords, which would be after
     Easter.
     DRAFTING OF SCHEME
     The Chairman reported that Arthur Young and Mr. Phillips were handling the
     process for the selection of suppliers. He felt that this committee should
     concentrate on the scheme itself. This was agreed by the meeting.
     As regards the composition      ofthe FMA, it was felt that it would makesense
     for the FMA to be a small group, not unlike this committee, with individual
     members having experience in specific areas such as commercial/marketing, police
     procedures, law, Football League administration, Football Association administration
     etc.

     The meeting received an initial discussion paper prepared by the League office
     on the drafting of a scheme, together with some thoughts on this by Arthur
     Young. There was a detailed discussion and the following points were made;-
     i)   Objectives - The objectives of the scheme should be a) to exclude from
     attending designated matches on licensed grounds persons who might reasonably
     be expected to cause disorder within the ground and b) to promote the interests
     of football for the benefit of members and the participating clubs.
     ii) Membership - It was agreed that membership should be open to any person
     who is not, at the commencement of the scheme, subject of an Exclusion Order
     under Section 30 of the Public Order Act 1986, or who has not been convicted
     of a ’relevant offence1 since the commencement of the scheme.
                       - It was further agreed that the FMA should have discretionary
     powers to exclude people from membership of the scheme. Mr. McKeag felt
     that the ground rules for banning by the FMA needed to be set out: for instance,
     that the FMA is obliged to take note of convictions that are reported to it.
                        - It was suggested that membership be valid for a period
     of ten years, accepting that membership would need to be renewed maybe two
     or three times during those ten years. It was felt that membership renewal
     was far more ’user friendly1 then re-application. The principle of charging a
     handling fee for renewal was accepted.
     iii) Application for Membership - It was felt that we should ask the Minister
     when legislation could be enacted to enable the Post Office to act as a collection
     agency. The Chairman wondered what handling charges the Post Office would
     require. It was agreed that Mr. Phillips should approach- the High Street banks
     and building societies to explore whether they would act as collection agencies.
                                                             Continued/3......
                                            - 2 -
* V '^^on tinu ed/3


                                       -                                    It was confirmed that photog
     not form part of the application requirements.
     iv)   Application Form - It was agreed that the application form should be
     as user-friendly as possible and should contain the following questions:
            a)    Full Name
            b)    Title (Mr/Mrs/Miss/Ms)
            c)    Home Address
            d)    Date of Birth
            e)    Nominated Club
            f)    Second-choice Club
            g)    National Allegiance
                             -                            There would also need to be some provision to
     the applicant to opt out of the mailing list.
     v)    Membership Card - It was felt that the membership card should only
     show the member's name and membership number. It was considered that there
     was no need for the card to show the nominated club, unless it is felt that
     people will want to have this on their card. The meeting was concerned about
     the personal security of members. It was considered that information such as
     nominated club and/or national allegiance could be contained within the card’s
     technology and need not necessarily be shown on the card.
     yi)   Appeals - Mr. McKeag said that he was concerned about the requirements
     laid down in the Bill regarding the setting up of tribunals to hear appeals.
     In discussion, it was agreed that there were serious reservations regarding the
     extent of this task and, therefore, this section of the Bill needed close examination.
     It was considered essential that this section of the Bill be amended so as to relieve
     the F.M.A. of this responsibility.
     ANY OTHER BUSINESS
     The Chairman directed that a letter be sent to Mr. David McDonald inviting
     him to attend the next meeting of the Sub-Committee, as agreed, and to include
     those issues that had been raised for clarification.
     Time, Date and Place of Next Meeting
     1.00 pm, Tuesday, 4th April, 1989, a t The Football Association, 16 Lancaster
     Gate, London.




                                                             Chairman
                                                             Date .....




                                             - 3 -
