5fa' *Kr R l ; S E R U I C E S   INSPECTORATE/FEU                                        02.23.1990         11 : 1 3 .         NO.   1   P.   2 . ‘V ;‘f"

                                    2 2 F£B1330\^>^                         2lT tB l990                                  ^ L . ^ . lUCA*

                                                                     L IM IT E D                                         C-C
                                           Q   J                      Founded 1863
                                                    Patron: H e r M a j e s t y T h e Q u e e n
                                                                                                                                fU/. '     ''    ^ "
                                                   Pm/ffe/iJ. H .R . H . T i tE D u k e o f K e n t
                                                         Chairman: F . A . M n .u c n i P                                        1W
                                                                                                              Phone: 01-4027151/262 4542
                Chief Executive:                                                                                     Telex: 261110
           R . H. G. K e l l y f c i s                                                                          Facsimile: 01-402 0486
                                                                                                                               Iw.
                                         16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW                                                                £
              Our Ref:             FAM/RHGK/RB/90                  YourRef:                          19th February 1990




                 The Rt Hon David Waddington, MP
                 Home Office                                                                                         n ir& i& l »:£,H
                 50 Queen A n n e ’s Gate
                 London SW1H 9AT



                 Dear Home Secretary,


                                               TAYLOR INQUIRY;                         FINAL REPORT

                       Now that we have had some time to scrutinise the Taylor
                 Report fully, I thought I should write formally t o _set out The
                 Football Association's response to its recommendations.
D' ■
                        At the outset, whilst we welcome the Report's
                  recommendations, we must make it clear to you.that we consider
                  some of Lord Justice T a y l o r 's strictures most unfounded.

                        The Football Association has limited powers it can
                  exercise ,in relation to crowd control and safety which were
                  set out in our submission to Sir P e t e r . The respective
                  responsibilities of police, club, and local authority under
                  the supervision of your Department were fully set out in the
                  Popplewell Reports, and have been accepted by Lord Justice
                  Taylor.
I
I'                         We support Sir Peter Taylor's suggested strategy against
                 hooliganism: stronger detection measures, new criminal                                •
                 o ff e n c e s , greater use of- attendance orders and the
                 introduction of electronic tagging, together with the crowd
                 control and f a c i l i t y i m p r o v e m e n t s he re c om m e n d s . We believe
                "that-if this strategy is to Sfe effective iifimust be treated a s ?
                 an integral-whole., -s*e are therefore anxious’ that the.; proposed
                 criminal/ off ences; wit hi n                       grounds are indeed created
                 and

 Hi ' •                '$?« accept Lord Just a<:               's-'View that "in the end
               • the bulk of the finances for guai.ci improvement must ..be ralbed                                                               |
                 by the clubs t h e m s e l w s * ^ / 'We have always recognised this.



l* s


                                                     Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Gate, London W2 3 LW
                                                   ■ Incorporated in London Registration Number 777V7
    IRE   5ERUICES   INSPECTORATE/FEU               0 2 . 2 3 . 199S   1 1 i 14   NO.   1

t    -     s




          The Rt Hon David Waddington                       2                       16.2.90



          But in view of the considerable capital sums which will be
          involved in meeting the targets Taylor sets, we are pleased
          that he did not rule out consideration of a reduction in pools
          betting tax or the extension of capital allowances to ground
          improvements.  We would be grateful if the Government would
          indeed give urgent consideration to these proposals. I am
          writing to the Chancellor of the Exchequer about them.

                Increasingly over the past few years, we have be'Bn
          working in a partnership with the Government and police in
          tackling hooliganism.  The successful introduction of CCTV,
          ground improvements and closer crowd control are all the
          fruits of this co-operation.  Clearly there is much more to be
          done, and the Taylor Report gives us the opportunity to renew
          our commitment to fight hooliganism and improve crowd safety
          and conditions.   We are considering areas in which The
          Football Association can provide new ideas, resources and
          assistance to promote safety with the game. We are ready to
          work with the Government to implement Taylor's strategies.

                As many of the Report's recommendations bear on Home
          Office responsibilities, I would be very grateful if it would
          be possible for us to meet you with our collegues from The
          Football League to discuss the Report and its implications.
          My earnest hope is that we will be able to agree a common
          approach to promote, in Lord Justice Taylor's words, "better
          and safer conditions at sports grounds in the future".



                                        Yours sincerely




                                         F.A. Millichip
                                            Chairman
Mrs Weinberg




FOOTBALL: RESPONSES TO THE ITT                                 ^

1.   Thank you for your minute of 20 February advising    against
the issue of a letter from the Department to Stadium Ltd, one of
the companies who responded to the ITT issued by the consultants
Ernst and Young on behalf of the football authorities, confirming
that we would like to see a copy of their response.        I have
discussed it with Mr McDonald and Mr Kinghan.

2.   I explained to you that since the football authorities were
not prepared to let us see copies of the submissions (at least
not now and not in full) from the five companies who responded to
the ITT, it was decided, after a reference to Mr Moynihan, that
we should approach the companies     direct.   Idid soin a low
profile way by telephone.    They were interested in why I was
making the request.      I explained that the Government had
confirmed that the national membership scheme was now on the back
burner and that, provided of course that they had no objection,
we would simply like to see the companies' responses to the
detailed ITT.   Bull, GEC/Summit and ADT Check-In were happy to
oblige and we have now received submissions from the first two.

3.   I did not have to approach McDonnell Douglas since they had
independently already sent a copy of their submission to the
Minister. Which leaves Stadium Ltd who alone asked that I should
put my request in writing.   In the light of your advice we will
not write to the company nor approach them further in any other
way.

4.   I should also record here that Mr Metcalfe of Ernst and
Young telephoned me on 19 February. One or some of the companies
had informed him of our approach.   The football authorities had
been considering initiating an exchange of correspondence with
the Department which could have resulted, subject to conditions
and he mentioned confidentiality, in their giving us copies of
the companies' responses.    He thought it unlikely that their
letter would issue following our direct approach.




P A LEE

22 February 1990


cc   Mr McDonald
     Mr Kinghan
