  1 U,'
¥■'*■' . 3
 *

        V)
                          THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND SCIENCE
                           ELIZABETH HOUSE YORK ROAD LONDON SEI 7PH
                                      TELEPHONE 071-934 9000
                                       ROBERT ATKINS    mp
                                        Minister for Sport




             Gary Titley Esq MEP                                      RA/4122/1010
             16 Spring Lane
             Radcliffe
             M2 6 9TQ

                                                                                3 0 JAM 1991
                                          *
             Thank you for your letter of 17 December about the cost to
             football clubs of complying with Lord Justice Taylor's
             recommendations on the improvement of facilities and grounds.
             I know that there are concerns within football, particularly
             amongst many of the smaller clubs, about the requirements to up
             grade their grounds, particularly by the installation of all
             seating. It was partly in recognition of these concerns that
             John Major, when he was Chancellor, reduced the rate of Pool
             Betting Duty from 42V% to 40%. The money saved, estimated to be
             £100m over the next five years, will be administered by the
             Football Trust 1990 for use on capital works in accordance with
             Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations for improving comfort and
             safety at grounds. John Major also made clear that an early
             decision on whether to extend the concession for a further five
             years would be made provided there was clear evidence of the
             necessary financial commitment from football to enable the Taylor
             timetable on all seating to be met.
             This money is of course additional to the £75m that the Football
             Trust 1990 has said will be available over the next 10 years from
             funding provided by the Pools Promoters Association from the
             proceeds of the 'Spotting-the-Ball' competition. As you may know
             the Football Trust guidelines provide for grant aid up to
             £500,000 for Third Division clubs like Bury who undertake major
             ground improvements to implement Taylor.
             The Government has however always made it clear that it is for
             football to find the bulk of the finance^necessary to improve
             facilities at the grounds. More money is now flowing into the
             game than ever before through television fees, sponsorship,
             commercial activities of clubs and rising attendances. A
             significant proportion of this extra income must now be used to
             finance ground modernisation. I am therefore pleased that the
             Football League Management Committee has endorsed the principle
             of a levy on television and transfer fees to assist in the
             funding of improvements.
?




    I should also explain that the costs of implementing Taylor have
    been exaggerated where the assumption has been that all existing
    accommodation needs to be made all-seated. Lord Justice Taylor
    pointed out that very few grounds regularly hold capacity crowds.
    For many clubs it will be sufficient for them to close those
    parts of their grounds which can only accommodate standing
    spectators to comply with the all-seating requirement.




    ROBERT ATKINS




                                                                    2
                                                                                                 SO   •—>>   ^Arr   V cXjuU3^Aj£vA a -

\

    JSP ☆☆
    Be ☆
                                          Gary Titley ?0
                                           Member of the European Parliament
                                                                                                                    SOCIALIST GROUP
                                             for Greater Manchester West                                               EUROPEAN
                                                                                                                      PARLIAMENT

                                            Your Voice in Europe

    GT/RF/CT
    Robert Atkins, MP,
    Minister of Sport
                                                                                        RA           U -I2.Z.       jp i p
    Department of Education and Science
    Elizabeth House
    York Road
    London SE1 7PH


                                                                17th December, 1990

    I am writing to express my concern about the uncertain future smaller soccer
    clubs face because of the costs of complying with the recommendations in the
    Taylor Report.
    You will no doubt be aware that one of the clubs in my constituency, Bury
    F.C., has recently put its entire first team squad up for sale because of
    financial difficulties. In particular, the club say that it will be the cost
    of ground improvements, necessitated by the Taylor Report, which will
    ultimately be the final blow.
    I warmly welcome the Taylor Report. Anything which can help to avert another
    tragedy like Hillsborough, should be applauded by any sane minded person,
    whether a football supporter or not.
    However, I fear that the small, lower division clubs like Bury, could become
    an extinct species unless urgent financial support is made available, so that
    they are able to comply with the Taylor recommendations. I feel sure you
    would agree that Clubs like Bury have an important role to play in local life.
    Their loss would be a serious blow to the vitality and diversity of local
    communities.
    I therefore, urge you to reconsider the financial support the government makes
    available to smaller football clubs, for ground improvements, with a view to
    boosting the level substantially. By so doing, you will not only be making
    a vital contribution to our national game, but also helping to safeguard
    important amenities and centres of interest for local people.
    I look forward to hearing from you.

    Yours sincerely




       Euro Office: 16 Spring Lane, Radcliffe. M26 9TQ Tel: 061-724 4008
       Fax: 061-724 4009 Gold: 83:SQC007
       Political Organiser: Roger Fellows
       Greater Manchester West consists of the Boroughs of Bury, Bolton, Salford & the Wigan Wards
       of Tyldesley East & Bedford-Astley.
