M H Ellis Esq
DOE/SERO
Room 532
Charles House
375 Kensington High Street




        REPLY TO COUNCILLOR DUDLEY A KEEP: HS/YE/PSO/4086/92

For the background note I suggest you add the following:

     "Implementation of Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations in his
     final report into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster, is a matter
     in which the Home Office has lead responsibility. Lord Ferrers
     has recently reaffirmed the Government's commitment to Taylor
     implementation. The deadlines for achieving all-seating are
     August 1994 for First and Second Division clubs of the Football
     League and August 1999 for Third and Fourth Division clubs. The
     Football Licensing Authority, set up following the Taylor report
     and with the responsibility inter alia of enforcing this all­
     seating requirement through its licensing powers, has made clear
     in private that there will be flexibility in relation to the
     timetable provided it is convinced that the clubs concerned have
     the necessary plans and financial packages in place but will for
     planning or other reasons narrowly miss the August 1994 and 1999
     deadlines. It would be damaging at this stage, however, to make
     such flexibility publicly known. Although, therefore, the point
     which Councillor Keep suggests Mr Hattersley will raise is likely
     to be accepted, Home Office advice is that this should not be
     revealed in any Ministerial correspondence at this stage."

In the second paragraph of your background note we would suggest that
the Government's position should be safeguarded by making clear that:
"In the club's view the proposal ..."

We suggest that in the letter you add a final paragraph as follows:

    "We have not yet heard from Mr Hattersley but I would emphasise
    that the Government remains convinced that all-seating will do
    more than any other single measure to improve safety and problems
    of behaviour and crowd control at football matches. Whether there
    should be any relaxation of the timetable in exceptional



                                                                      1
•     .
     circumstances is a matter for the Home Office to consider taking
     into account advice from the Football Licensing Authority. I am
     therefore copying your letter and this reply to Lord Ferrers at
     the Home Office."




A R BADEN
F R OM   S .E.R .O   CHARLES   HSE     < T U E ) 0 2 . 1 8 . ’ 92   1      071 6059249   page




                                                                        HS/YE/PSO/4086/92

         M r . Baden
         SARD C
         DES

         1.  As agreed I attach a copy of a Ministers case from Dudley
         Keep, Chairman of Hamphire County Council's Planning and
         Transportation Committee who asks the Department to call in the
         planning application for the Southampton Football Club proposals.
         Cllr Keep also mentions a possible approach by Roy Hattersley
         about delaying the      implementation of the Taylor Report
         recommendations. We appear not to have yet received that
         approach.

         2. However can ask you for a short contribution to respond to
         Cllr. Keep on the second issue please?   I have dealt with the
         first issue in the attached draft and background note.




         M H ELLIS
         DOE/SERO
         Room 532 Charles House
         375 Kensington High Street

         Tel: (GTN) 3570 9124

         FAX. (GTN) 3570 9249
F ROM   S.E.R.O   CHARLES   HSE                 < T U E ) 0 2 . 1 8 . ’ 92   1         071 6059249   Pf i GE   3




 ^ D R A F T REPLY TO COUNCILLOR DUDLEY A KEEP
     Chairman, Planning and Transportation Committee,
     Hampshire County Council, The Castle, Winchester, SO23 8UJ


                                                                       My ref HS/YE/PSO/4086/92



        Thank you for your letter of 6 February to the Secretary of State
        about     Southampton       Football    Club's             proposed          new   stadium     at
        Stoneham.


        I note that the County Council have objected to the proposal and
        that you ask the Secretary of State to call                                  in the planning
        application         for   his   own   determination.                     I   understand      that
        Southampton City Council and Eastleigh Borough Councils who are
        presently considering the matter have asked for more information
        from the      applicants,       particularly            in respect of traffic                 and
        transportation impact studies,                and therefore may not be in a
        position to determine the application for some while.


        It would be premature at this stage to give consideration to
        whether the Secretary of State should intervene in the way you
        ask but I will bear your request in mind.
FROM   S.E.R.O   CHARLES   HSE       < T U E >0 2 . 1 8 . ’ 9 2   1      071 6059249   page   4




       'BACKGROUND NOTE                                               HS/YE/PSO/4086/92



       1. Southampton City Council and Eastleigh Borough Council are
       dealing with a planning application to relocate the Southampton
       Football Club ground to a site at Stoneham, just south of
       junction 5 of the M27. The site lies partly in Southampton and
       partly in Eastleigh and is in a strategic gap.

       2. The proposal to build a new stadium is essential in order to
       meet the Taylor Report recommendations. The proposal has aroused
       much opposition but also some support.

       3. Both Councils are seeking more information from the applicants
       including traffic and transportation impact studies. The impact
       studies are proving difficult to produce because they have to
       take account of other current proposals affecting the motorway
       junction and information on these has been difficult to obtain,
       (eg Eastleigh Airport redevelopment which has only recently
       received clearance to proceed). The local planning authorities
       will therefore not be in a position to determine the applications
       for some months.

       4. Hampshire County Council, who own most of the site, are
       thought to be opposed to the application since they are anxious
       to defend strategic gaps and have taken a stance of opposing
       greenfield developments.
HAMPSHIRE                           R£CBSfBJ m
COUNTY                               10 FEB 1992
COUNCIL
                                  PRIVATE OFFICE
From the office of the
Vice-Chairman of Hampshire County Council

The Castle
W inchester S 023 8UJ
Telephone (0962) 847750



DAK/lmb/c



6 February 1992




Secretary of State for the Environment
Department of the Environment
2 Marsham Street
London
SW1P 3EB




                       television hascarried news    items about
a recent visit to Southampton by Roy Hattersley.      Included in
his visit was a meeting with Southampton Football Club to discuss
its proposals for satisfying the requirements of the Taylor
Report for all-seater stadia for 1st and 2nd division clubs.

The football    club has a proposal for a new stadium at Stoneham
in an area      defined asa 'strategic   gap' between Southampton
and Eastleigh.    This is a particularly sensitive and important
open gap which should be retained.        The County Council has
objected on planning grounds to the proposal.        The planning
application has yet to be determined by Southampton and Eastleigh
Borough Councils (the site falls in both areas).     In the event
that either of them is minded to grant permission I urge you
to call it in for your determination since it raises an important
issue of principle about the future of strategic gaps; your
predecessors   have   strongly  defended  the   gaps  in Southern
Hampshire.
FROM   S.E.R.O   CHARLES   HSE      CTUE )02. 18. ’ 9 2 1   071 6059249   PAGE   6




       I understand from the press that Roy Hattersley will be writing
       to you about the plight of the football club.   I think it very
       important that the strategic planning view should prevail in
       connection with the current proposals and I would hope that
       you would agree.   An alternative derelict inner city site does
       exist and this would square with your own philosophy and vision
       of good land use planning.

       One matter which Hattersley may raise is to ask the Government
       to delay the implementation of the Taylor Report recommendations
       about all seater stadia in cases where clubs are still trying
       to find a solution.     I would agree with this, especially in
       the local case, since it would give breathing space to allow
       a more acceptable solution to be found.




        Dudley A Keep    I    <\
        Chairman          \     ^
        Planning and Transportation Committee
