                                                                                               '3
                        FOOTBALL MEMBERSHIP AUTHORITY SUB-COMMITTEE


    /   MINUTES OF A MEETING HELD ON TUESDAY, 4TH APRIL, 1989 AT THE OFFICES
/       OF THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION, LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2.
|
|       Present:      I.H. S to tt (Management Committee) - in the Chair

                      W.G. McKeag, B.A. (Cantab.) (Management Committee)
                      T.R. Phillips (Commercial Director)
                      R.H.G. Kelly, F.C.I.S. (Football Association)
i                    G. Kirton (Football Association)
|                    J.A. Crawford (Football League)
i                    N. Kinghan (Department of the Environment)

                      C. Metcalfe (Arthur Young)
                      C.J. Whalley (Football League)




        The meeting commenced at 1.15 pm.

         APOLOGIES FOR ABSENCE

         Apologies for absence were received from Mr. D. McDonald (Department of the
         Environment) and from Mr. K.P. Stein (Arthur Young). The Chairman welcomed
         Mr. Kinghan and Mr. Metcalfe to the meeting.

         MINUTES OF LAST MEETING

         The Minutes of the last meeting held on 13th March, 1989 were taken as read
         and signed by the Chairman as a correct record.

         MATTERS ARISING FROM THE MINUTES

         (i)       Lotteries

                   'Mr. Kinghan reported that this m atter came under the responsibility
                    of the Home Office. His view was that we should not assume that the
                    law on lotteries would stay as it is at present.

         (ii)      Football Membership Authority

                    Mr. Kinghan reported that to date there had been no applications to
                    form the FMA other than from the League/FA. He saw no reason why
                    the football authorities could not be notified if anyone else did apply.

          FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL

          Mr. Kinghan outlined the amendments to the Bill which the Government would
          be moving at Report Stage in the House of Lords. These included:

          i)       a provision for temporary membership of the scheme.
          ii)      specific exemptions for disabled persons in designated disabled areas
                    and for accompanied children under the age of 10 years in the charge
                    of an authorised spectator. Mr. Kinghan confirmed that it remained
                    open for the FMA to bring forward other exemptions.


                                                                    Continued/2
 'y / Continued/2.......
/■

      iii)     the removal of the ability for the FMA to charge for appeals against
               discretionary disqualification from membership. The Chairman felt that
               the Government should be aware of this committee's horror a t the suggestion
               that appeals tribunals should come under the umbrella of the FMA.

      Mr. Kinghan reported the possibility th at another amendment might go down
      on the m atter of phasing-in the scheme.

      Mr. McKeag had some queries on the Bill for Mr. Kinghan :

      i)      clause 13(2) (new draft) - what criteria is the court to adopt on restriction
               orders, as these criteria may a ffec t the FMA?
               Mr. Kinghan undertook to look into this and report back.
      ii)     clause 7 (new draft) - referring to the provisions for mandatory
               disqualifications, Mr. McKeag felt th at the Court should make an order
               of disqualification as part of its judgement. He felt it would be helpful
               if the offender was disqualified from the moment he le ft court, rather
               than from when the FMA notifies him. Mr. Kinghan undertook to look
     )        into this and report back.
      iii)    Appeals - should an offender be disqualified whilst his appeal is pending?
               Mr. McKeag felt th at the mechanics and timing of disqualification and
               appeals needed to be examined.
               Mr. Kinghan undertook to look into this and report back.

      In response to a question, Mr. Kinghan reported th at it was the Government's
      intention th at the Bill would still get Royal Assent by the end of July 1989 and
      the target-date for implementation remained unchanged. The Chairman warned
      of the possibility th at the drafting of the scheme might be delayed if the Bill
      does not receive Royal Assent in July.

      SELECTION OF SUPPLIERS

      Mr. Metcalfe gave an update on the selection of suppliers.     He reported that
      Arthur Young had divided the process into two stages:

      i)      pre-qualification
      ii)     invitation to tender/statem ent of requirements

      Letters had been sent out on 10th March 1989 to theJ^O companies whohad
      expressed an interest, inviting them to pre-qualify. The letters had asked the
      companies for details of their financial viability, management expertise, experience
      in information technology and their support and maintenance capabilities. The
      deadline for replies had been 31st March 1989 and 69 replies had been received.
      Mr. Metcalfe felt th at 33 of these 69 replies were 'interesting' and approximately
      20 merited an in-depth evaluation. He was hoping to produce a shortlist by
      the middle of next week. He reported th at the replies were mainly from consortia,
      all highly commercial companies. There was a dearth of companies who were
      looking to put in a scheme for free.

      Mr. Metcalfe felt that the shortlist was likely to comprise 11 or 12 suppliers
      and these would be whittled down to 2 o r 3 by the end of July. To achieve
      this he would be looking for a skeieton of a scheme to be produced by the end
      of May so th at he could finalise the statem ent of requirements and issue the
      invitation to tender. The U or 12 suppliers would then tender by the end of
      June their solutions. There would then- follow a detailed evaluation of their
      proposals, which should produce a small shortlist of 2 or 3 by the end of July. He
      would then have to agree a project plan and a legal contract with the 2 or 3
      suppliers and this would take us into August.
                                                                Continued/3
                                              - 2 -
    /'
/
" Jontinued/3


 Mr. Metcalfe expressed the view th a t the proposed membership scheme would
 present a high risk and a high profile. It was very important for the equipment
 to be tried and tested and he felt th at the testing programme needed further
 consideration. Mr. Kinghan informed the meeting th a t Luton Town had expressed
 their desire for their ground to be considered as p art of the testing programme.
 Mr. Phillips reported th a t all 92 clubs would be given the chance to be considered
 for testing.

 Mr.     Metcalfe submitted a copy of the pre-qualification le tte r together with a
 list    of actions needed in order to produce the statem ent of requirements and
 the     invitation to tender. It was agreed th a t these items be circulated with
 the     minutes of this meeting.

 DRAFTING OF SCHEME

 i)         Membership

            Mr. McKeag referred to the minutes of the last.m eeting and pointed
            out that, if membership was to be open to anyone who was not subject
            of an Exclusion Order or who had not been convicted of a football-related
            offence, then the FMA would require notification of offences. Mr. Kinghan
            reported th a t the Government would probably be looking for the police
            to keep a record of offences with e ffe c t from a certain date. Mr. Metcalfe
            reported there was a problem on this. Under the Data Protection Act
            it would not be possible for the FMA to hold information on people who
            were not members of the scheme. The Courts and the police can hold
            this information, but they cannot pass it on.
 ii)       Temporary Membership

            Mr. Kinghan reported th a t it was the Government's view that all people
            entering the ground without using card-reading devices should have a
            temporary membership card, but this would be up to the FMA and the
            clubs. Mr. Phillips felt th a t this could have a significant e ffe c t on the
            cost of the scheme. Mr. Metcalfe wondered what level of security would
            b^ needed for temporary membership cards, to prevent replication of
            same. Mr. Kinghan accepted th at a balance would have to be struck
            but he would like it not to be able to be abused.

 iii)      Application for Membership

            Mr. Kinghan reported th a t primary legislation would not be required
            to enable the Post Office to a c t as a collection agency, if Post Office
            Counters were to perform the task. Ministerial consent would, however,
            be required - The S ecretary of S tate for the Environment would have
            to write to the S ecretary of S ta te for Trade and Industry, who would
            have to give his consent. The Post Office would have to persuade the
            Secretary of S ta te for Trade and Industry th at it was not a financial
            burden. Mr. Phillips reported th a t Barclays Bank and Midland Bank had
            expressed an interest in acting as collection agencies, but the building
            societies had not.


                                                              Continued/4..
'7ontinued/4


        Mr. Kinghan agreed with the com m ittee’s view th at, in the event of
        an application failing to pass the validation process, the police should
        carry out the follow-up investigation where the FMA believes th a t a
        criminal offence has been committed. Mr. Kinghan undertook to check
        this with the police.

iv)     Photographs

        Mr. Kinghan reported th a t the Government's view on the necessity for
        photographs remained the same for the reasons th a t were discussed in
        the Working Party. Mr. Phillips sta te d that, from a marketing point
        of view, photographs presented a major inhibiting factor. He felt that
        there was a need to turn a stigma into a privilege, there was a need
        to get away from an ID card and on to a membership card. Photographs
        smacked of an ID card. He could not sell something in a positive way
        if photographs were to be included. Mr. McKeag added th at the practical
        problem of getting photographs presented more inconvenience to the potential
        member. Mr. Metcalfe pointed out the implications on the cost of the
        exercise and on the turnaround time for applications. The space on
        the card would also be reduced. He said th a t this would have a large
        e ffe c t on the suppliers' requirements.

V)      Memb_er_ship_ Card

        Mr. Kinghan reported th a t the Government had no     jwgSv’ on   the information
        th a t should be shown on the membership card.

vi)     Invalid Cards

        It was Mr. Kinghan’s view that, when a card is shown to be invalid
        a t the turnstile, the club should deal with the m atter first, but if it
        suspects th at a criminal offence has been committed then the police
        would have to be involved. He would, however, check this with the
        police.

vii)    Licensing Authority & Inspectorate

        Mr. Kinghan reported th at he was expecting the S ecretary of S tate
        to be the licensing authority. He envisaged a small team of part-time
        inspectors whose job it would be to visit grounds before the scheme
        comes in and to make recommendations for licensing. If, however, the
        FMA wants to be the licensing authority and take full responsibility for
        the licensing, then this is something th at might be considered by the
        Government.

viii)   Model for a scheme

        Mr. Kinghan referred to the meeting the Minister for Sport had held
        with the football authorities on 10th February 1989, when it had been
        suggested th a t it would be helpful for this committee to see a print
        of a similar scheme th at the Government had already approved.
        Mr. Kinghan reported th a t he was not aware of a similar scheme and
        the Departm ent’s lawyers view was th a t there was not a relevant scheme.
        He would, however, ask them to look into this further and would see
        if the Government could provide this committee with a framework. He
        also stated th a t he would explore the possibility of bringing in, if this
        committee required it, a retired Government lawyer, a t the Government's
        expense, to assist with the drafting.
                                                          Continued/5
                                         - 4 -
' Continued/S


 NEXT MEETING

 It was agreed to hold the next meeting on Thursday, 20th April 1989 a t Manchester
 United Football Club a t 2,00 pm, to be preceded by lunch.

 There being no further business, the Chairman closed the meeting a t 4.15 pm.




                                                   Chairman

                                                   Date ......
