                              From:    Miss G Houldsworth
                                       SARD C
                              Date:    19 February 1992

                              Copy:     Mr Wiggins
                                        Mr Horne

1. MR BADEN
2. MISS STEWART
3. PARLIAMENTARY SECTION

PQ FROM DR CHARLES GOODSON-WICKES: THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE
TAYLOR REPORT AT LONDON FIRST DIVISION FOOTBALL CLUBS

1.   Mr Goodson-Wickes* constituency team, Wimbledon FC, have had
to move out of their own stadium because of the problems involved
in bringing it up to the standards required by Taylor and are
having some difficulty in their attempts to relocate to a new
ground inside the London Borough of Merton.

2.   I attach a draft answer along with possible supplementaries
and a background note on the Government's position on the Taylor
deadlines with a report on the progress of each of the London
First Division clubs towards all-seating.




Gillian Houldsworth
Rm 3Q3 X 6358
-   •                                                QUESTION NO: 30


        TUESDAY 25 FEBRUARY 1992


        Dr Charles Goodson-Wickes (Wimbledon): To ask the Secretary of
        State for Education and Science, what consultations he has had on
        the effect of the implementation of the Taylor Report on first
        division football clubs in London.




        MR ATKINS


        I have had no discussions specifically about the effect of the
        Taylor Report on first division football clubs in London.




                                                                        1
SITPPT.KMENTARIES


Q.   Why have you not had such discussions?


A.   The    implementation           of    the     Taylor        report    is    primarily        a
     matter for my Rt. Hon. Friend the Home Secretary. My concern
     has    been    to    encourage            football     to    provide       the    safe     and
     comfortable         stadia which           its supporters deserve by taking
     full    advantage        of    the        commercial        opportunities         that     lie
     before the game. This is why I have had discussions with the
     football authorities about the implications of the proposed
     FA    Premier    League       for     implementing           Lord    Justice Taylor's
     recommendations. I am concerned that any new money generated
     by the proposed League is used to maximum effect to assist
     in Taylor implementation.


Q.   Why    does     not      the     Government            provide        more        financial
     assistance to Division 1 clubs to enable them to install all
     seating?


A.   The reduction        in Pool         Betting Duty           in the 1990 Budget is
     making available around £20m per year over 5 years to assist
      football in the improvement of grounds. A large proportion
     of this money will be paid to Division 1 clubs. The Football
     Trust which          administers the payment of the money has set a
     ceiling         of £2m    for             each   Division      One    club comparedwith
      £500,000      for      clubs        in     Divisions        Three    and        Four.   The
     Government believes that football should be responsible for
      finding       the bulk of                the resources necessary to bring their
     grounds         up to    the standards            of   comfort       and    safety       that
      spectators are entitled to expect. Clubs in the current 1st
     Division are likely to benefit substantially from additional
     money generated by the Premier League once established even
      allowing for possible optimism in the projections set out in
     the    Football       Association's              'Blueprint     for    the        Future    of
      Football'.



                                                                                                    1
Q.   When will the Government make a decision                    on whether Premier
     League       clubs will have         access    to    the    reduction           in    Pool
     Betting Duty monies?


A.   We    have    told   the    Football      Trust     that       in    our   view       Pool
     Betting Duty monies should be made available to potential
     Premier League clubs for works to be completed or underway
     during the current close season. We are not in a position to
     offer support for such clubs to have access to Pool Betting
     Duty monies once the Premier League is established until we
     have obtained satisfactory clarification from the FA of the
     funds likely to be available to Premier League and Football
     League       clubs   for Taylor         implementation           from      FA    driven
     initiatives.


Q.   Will the Government extend the period of the concession on
     Pool Betting Duty beyond the initial 5 year period?


A.   This    is a matter for my Rt. Hon. Friend the Chancellor of
     the Exchequer.


Q.   What    estimates     has    the     Government      of    the      cost to      London
      clubs of going all seater?


A.   The Government does not collect information of this kind.
     However        information         available        from   a        Football         League
      questionnaire sent to all clubs last November suggests that
      at    four London        Division      1 clubs which have been                 able to
     provide such information the cost is likely to be in excess
      of £43m. However these costs vary greatly between clubs. In
      some cases they include major works which clubs consider to
     be     desirable     as    part    of    the   process     of       installing         all­
      seating.     In other cases costs are lower because clubs have
      previously carried out substantial ground improvements.


Q.   Isn't much of the cost of going all seater going to fall on
      the ordinary football spectator?

                                                                                               2
It is a commercial decision for clubs to decide how best to
raise the finance to improve their grounds. I hope however
they are able to do this without a disproportionate share
falling upon spectators.


In view of the doubts now being expressed on the necessity
for    all     seating       why    does       the    Government      not       review    its
position?

The Government keeps its policy on all seating continuously
under review. However it remains convinced that all seating
will do more than any other single measure to improve safety
and    problems      of      behaviour         and    crowd      control    at    football
matches.       The   commitment           to    all    seating      is shared by the
Football       Licensing           Authority         and   has    recently        been    re­
affirmed by Lord Justice Taylor.


Many     clubs       are      experiencing            difficulties         in     obtaining
planning        permission          for        proposed     new     grounds       and     re­
developments            at     their       existing        grounds.        What     is    the
Government doing to assist?


In     September        last       year    the       DOE   issued     Planning         Policy
Guidance note 17 on Sport and Recreation. The note included
specific advice to local planning authorities on all seater
Football       League        stadia.       Local      planning      authorities          were
asked     to     give        sympathetic         consideration        to        development
proposals designed to achieve all seated accommodation.                                    It
also stressed the need for early consultation on development
proposals between clubs and their planning authorities.


Wimbledon FC wish to build a new ground at Beddington but
have been refused planning permission by the LB of Merton.
What can the Government do to assist?


Applications         for      planning         permission        are matters       for the
appropriate           local         planning          authorities      in        the     first
instance.       There        is a right of appeal to the Secretary of
                                                                    3
•   State for the Environment against an unfavourable decision.
    It   would     be        wrong   for    me   to     comment    on    individual
    applications        in    view   of    the   possibility      of    them   coming
    before   the    Secretary        of    State      for   the   Environment     for
    decision.




                                                                                        4
BACKGROUND
Wimbledon1s difficulty in finding a new site
Mr Goodson-Wickes' interest may be centred on Wimbledon FC's
experience with Taylor Implementation. They are currently
ground-sharing with Crystal Palace Football Club at the latter's
home ground, Selhurst Park.   The club moved from its traditional
base at Plough Lane because of the difficulties of bringing the
ground up to the standards required by the Taylor Report.    It has
a seven year agreement with Crystal Palace but hopes to return to
the London Borough of Merton and a new stadium.    The Club has,
however, so far failed to obtain planning permission from the
local authority for their preferred site.      They had hoped to
build the new stadium at Beddington Lane, however the site is
partially on Metropolitan Open Land and sports stadia are not
considered appropriate use for such land.   The local planning
authority turned down the application.   According to the FLA they
are now exploring the possibility of sharing Wimbledon Greyhound
Stadium.

Pampaian to overturn the all-seating requirement
Press coverage of the difficulties of implementing the Taylor
Report has hotted up considerably in recent weeks, partly
 fuelled by vocal opposition by supporters to the schemes proposed
by clubs to help fund necessary redevelopment, particularly the
West Ham and Arsenal bond schemes.   The Evening Standard carried
 a recent series of articles about all—seating and its effect on
 London clubs reporting that its survey had revealed that it would
 cost some £150m to implement Taylor in London clubs and that some
 of the biggest clubs did not know where the money would come
 from.

 One of the major issues has been whether clubs can actually
 afford the redevelopment necessary for Taylor.    Since clubs can
 obtain only a maximum of £2m from the Football Trust this still
 leaves many with large bills and the methods adopted by clubs to
 raise the remaining funds have not proved popular with the fans,
 particularly the bond schemes chosen by Arsenal and West Ham.
Most interest has centred on wether it is actually necessary for
the lower division clubs to go to all-seating.


The other major problem facing clubs has been obtaining planning
permission for relocation or redevelopment.     The Department of
Environment's policy planning guidance note on sport and
recreation asked local planning authorities to give sympathetic
consideration to proposals aimed at achieving all-seating.     It
also stressed the benefit of early consultation between clubs and
planning authorities.   Additionally, authorities have been asked
to make every effort to ensure that planning applications are
decided within the 8 week period.


As the Minister is aware the Independent on Sunday suggested that
Lord Justice Taylor had changed his mind on the necessity of
all-seating at 3rd and 4th division clubs, a fact he
subsequently repudiated in a letter to the Editor, which was
copied to the Minister.   UEFA have also stated that for the
1993/94 season all "high risk" matches must be all-seating.


government's position on Taylor implementation
The public position recently reaffirmed by Earl Ferrers is that
the Government is as committed to Taylor implementation as ever,
 although in private both the Minister for Sport and the Secretary
 of State have considerable sympathy with the concerns of the
 Third and Fourth Division clubs.   Any public indication that the
 Government was not committed to all—seating implementation in all
 clubs in accordance with the Taylor timetable would be likely to
 lead to in-action by those clubs who are minded to do the bare
 minimum that is required of them anyway.     For First Division
 clubs if there is to be any flexibility in relation to the
 timetable it will be dependent on the FLA being convinced that
 the clubs concerned have the necessary plans and financial
 package in place but will narrowly miss the August 1994 deadline.
 The FLA is advising clubs wishing to relocate that they should
 have contingency plans against the possibility of not being able
 to relocate by August 1994.   Again it would be wrong for the

                                                                     2
•   «   Minister for Sport to spell out this possible future flexibility
        in responding to any question.


        Tavlor implementation in London Clubs
        The Football League have attempted to monitor clubs' progress
        towards all-seating by issuing a bi-annual questionnaire which
        provides information on work completed and proposed.   We have
        been given copies of the replies for all the 1st Division London
        clubs, excepting Tottenham Hotspur who have yet to respond.      A
        short note on each club is provided   below.




                                                                             3
ARSENAL:
Arsenal spent £368,100 on safety and ground improvements in the
first 9 months of 1991.     They have produced detailed plans for
the implementation of all-seating which they estimate will cost
almost £19m.     They hope to be completed by August 1993 a year
inside the Taylor deadline.     Starting in May this year they
intend to convert the North Terrace into a two-tier all-seater
stand, for which they have recently received planning permission.
In May 1993 work will begin on converting the remaining
terracing, which will include enlarging the area available for
people with disabilities.     The final seated capacity of the
ground will be 36587 some 8000 less than present capacity.


FINANCE:     The improvements are to be financed by a debenture
scheme with bonds costing either £1100 or £1500.     In all they
hope to raise £16m by this means.     Take up of the bonds has been
slow.   While redevelopment is in progress the club may ban away
supporters in order to house the existing North Terrace
supporters.     The club has recently been making effort to reassure
current North Bank season ticket holders that they will,have a
place at the ground next season.

 PROBLEMS:     The main problem for Arsenal is finance they need the
bond scheme to work in order to raise the necessary funding, but
 there has been widespread opposition to the debenture scheme.
 Fans are complaining that they simply cannot afford to pay
 £1000+ and the cost of a season ticket.     There was also some
 initial set back with planning permission when local residents
 complained about the proposed height of the new stand.     The
 London Borough of Islington asked the club to revise their plans.
 The revised proposal has now been approved.


 CHELSEA:
 The club spent £1451,000 on safety and general ground improvement
 in 1991.    They have, however, not provided detailed information
 on how they intend to conform to Taylor, other than to state that
 they intend to work on the South stand in 1992-93 and the North
 and West Stands the following year.     They have given no estimated
                                                                    4
costs in their response to the league questionnaire, although
according to the FLA the cost is variously estimated at £20-25m.
They estimate the final seated capacity of the ground will be
44,000, compared to existing capacity of 36,000.     Also according
to the FLA planning permission for a stadium of 41,000 has been
approved subject to no ground-sharing.


FINANCE:
No information provided.

PROBLEMS:    Chelsea do have problems concerning their ground.
There has been something of a long-running and convoluted dispute
between the Club and Cabra Estates who presently own the ground
concerning Chelsea's right to buy the ground.      Club must find
£22.85m to buy the stadium frtstw Cabra Estates.    It is possible
that the issue will end up in Court.



CRYSTAL PALACE
The club spent £1,607,877 in 1991 on general ground improvements
and safety work.      They are presently ground sharing with
Wimbledon FC at Selhurst Park under a 7 year agreement.        They
plan over the next two close seasons to cover and seat their
terracing.    The eventual capacity of the ground will be 27,000
3000 less than the present figure.


FINANCE
The estimated cost of all-seating is £7,050,000 of which they
 hope to gain £2m from the Football Trust and up to a possible £2m
 from their tenants, Wimbledon FC.     They hope to find the
 remaining sum themselves possibly by a bank loan, although they
 have expressed some concern about finding their contribution on
 the questionnaire.


 PROBLEMS:
 Obtaining the necessary finance for their own contribution to
 redevelopment.    They also point to the lengthy planning process
 which causes delays in progress, but do not go into details.
QUEEN'S PARK RANGERS
The club spent £205,116 on ground and safety improvement in the
first 9 months of 1991.   They club has considered ground-sharing
but decide such a move would not be available.   They have a three
stage project for converting their existing terraces to all
seating and extending the roofs on the stands to be completed by
August 1994.   The eventual capacity will be 20,187, approximately
2500 down on existing capacity.


FINANCE:    The estimated cost of the project is £1,636,000 plus
an extra £300,000 allowed for contingencies and fees.      The club
intends to pay for the improvement through its own resources and
aid form the Football Trust.


PROBLEMS:    The scheme is the least expensive of any of the London
clubs. An application for grant has been deferred by the Football
Trust while they await extra-information from the club.


TOTTENHAM HOTSPUR
The club have not as yet provided the Football League with their
completed questionnaire. They did have a grant for all-seating
work approved by the Trust last year, but the club subsequently
postponed the work and no further plans have been announced for
conversion to all-seating.


Tottenham had well-publicized financial difficulties last year
resulting in the take-over of the club by Alan Sugar and former
manager Terry Venables.    The club's finances have been
transformed after a substantial debt write off following Mr
Sugar's take over, but they would still have great difficulty in
 financing all-seating and they remain opposed to it.


WEST HAM
Between 1.1.91 and 1.9.91 the club spent £915,783.69 on general
 safety and ground improvements.   They have produced a plan to
 implement Taylor for the beginning of the 1994/95 season.     Stage
 one will involve building a new South Stand and purchasing some
 extra land, Stage Two will provide a new North Stand and the
final stage will convert the East terrace to seating.    Final
capacity will be 25,361 about 4,000 less than at present.


FINANCE:
The estimated cost of the improvements are some £15,540,624.     The
club is hoping for £2m of aid from the Football Trust and to
fund the rest through the "Hammers Bond" scheme.    The scheme was
launched in November 1991 with prices for bonds ranging from
£500-950, which will give fans the right to purchase a season
ticket for the next 50 years.


PROBLEMS:
The bond scheme has been highly unpopular leading to sit-down
demonstrations after matches in protest. Very few of the bonds
have been sold.    In an effort to placate fans the Club has said
that those buying bonds will get a reduction on season tickets,
but prices will be increasing anyway and the fans do not appear
to be impressed by the offer.


WIMBLEDON:
At present ground-sharing with Crystal Palace on a 7 year lease
and, therefore, involved with that club's redevelopment
proposals.    They are hoping to relocate to a new ground in
Merton.


FINANCE:
While they stay at Selhurst Park the Club can be expected to find
up to a maximum of £2m to fund the redevelopment of that ground.
The cost of a new multi-purpose stadium in Wimbledon would be
considerably more, possibly up to £30m.    This might be financed
partly by redevelopment of the old Plough Lane site.


PROBLEMS:    The major problem for Wimbledon at the moment is that
they have been unable to obtain planning permission for a new
ground in Merton.    There preferred site at Beddington has been
 turned down (it was partially sited on Metropolitan Open Land)
 and they may have to stay at Crystal Palace for some time to
 come.    If they were to obtain planning permission then financing
the stadium might also be a problem.   Wimbledon's following is
not the biggest and, therefore, there would be a limit to how
much they could hope to get from the supporters.




                                                                  8
