E.R.   h s .8.4/hillsb4.peb


       HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY


       Supplementary Briefing

       Notes on Particular Persons Mentioned in the Report



       SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE

       Chief Superintendent Mole

            Commander of F Division until 27 March.
            Responsible for policing at the 1988 semi-final.
            Not involved on 15 April.  (See report paragraph 47.)

       Chief Superintendent Duckenfield

            Commander of F Division from 27 March.
            In overall command of the policing arrangements on
            15 April. (47)
            Told Superintendent Murray that the kick off would not be
            delayed simply because fans arrived late. (62)
            Gave the order to open the gates. (67)
            Not criticised for ordering the gate to be opened but for
            failing to foresee or make arrangements to deal with the
            consequences. (228/229)
            Told Mr Kelly (Football Association) that a gate had been
            forced. (98)
            Gave various accounts to the inquiry of why he did not
            postpone the kick off. (226)

             (See also paragraphs 280-284.)

       Superintendent Marshall

             Section Commander in F Division.
             In charge of the area outside the Leppings Lane entrance
             and the approaches to it.    (In 1988 he had been in command
             inside the ground.) (47)
             Requested the exit gates to be opened. (67)
             But not criticised on that account. (228)

       Superintendent Greenwood

             Section Commander in F Division.
             In command inside the ground.     (In 1988 he had been in
             command outside the Leppings Lane entrance.) (47)
             Tried to signal fans to move back. (79)
             Radioed unsuccessfully to have the match stopped. (80)
             Ran onto the pitch and stopped it himself. (80)
Superintendent Murray

     In control of the control box. (47)
     Told Chief Inspector Creaser that the West Terrace pens
     should not be filled successively but that "fans should find
     their own level." (58)

     Criticised   for misjudging,    with Chief Superintendent
     Duckenfield, the build up at the turnstiles and doing little
     about it. (281)


Sergeant Goddard

     Assistant to Superintendent Murray and in charge           of   the
     radios in the control box. (Not criticised.)

Constable Rvan

     In the control      box operating the    telephone   and   public
     address systems.     (Not criticised.)

Constable Bichard

     In the control box operating the closed circuit television
     system.
     Radioed police headquarters to call the fire service with
     cutting equipment.  (Not criticised.)

Chief Superintendent Nesbitt

     Traffic Division.
     Arrived and took charge of casualty extraction at Gate 3.

Assistant Chief Constable (Operations) Mr Jackson

     At the match as a spectator.
     Attended the control box.
     Was not told by Chief Superintendent Duckenfield what had
     happened.

SHEFFIELD WEDNESDAY FOOTBALL CLUB

Dr Eastwood

     Principal of Eastwood and Partners Consulting Engineers.
     Instructed by Sheffield Wednesday to act on their behalf.
     Adviser to other clubs. (120)
     Supported a police request for removal of safety barriers.
     (133)

SHEFFIELD CITY COUNCIL

Mr Bownes

     Employed as Chief      Licensing   Officer   by   Sheffield     City
     Council. (150)
E.R.
       Approved the removal of safety barriers   (133) but was not
       qualified to do so. (153)
