     HOME OFFICE
     Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H9AT
                               Direct line 071-273
                              Switchboard 071-273 3000



                                                         Your reference


                                                         O   u   r r e   f ^   / g   i   3   5   / 4   3   / 3   7



Liverpool                                                Date       „                    .       „ „ „ „
L25 [ZZ]                                                            8 August 1991

Dear Mr

Thank you for your letter of 19 July to the Minister for Sport
which has been passed to this Department in view of our
responsibilities for safety at sports grounds.
Lord Justice Taylor recognised, in his Final report on the
Hillsborough Stadium disaster, that there is no single solution
to achieve crowd safety and cure all the problems of crowd
control.   However, he was satisfied that seating does more to
achieve these objectives than any other single measure. This is
a view with which the Government is in agreement. Lord Justice
Taylor also considered that moving to all seated accomodation was
consistent with the policies of both FIFA and UEFA.

Under the Football Spectators Act 1989 the Football licensing
Authority (FLA) has recently been established.      This will be
responsible for issuing licenses to all grounds designated under
the Act, namely grounds where matches between members of the
Football ^League will be played. Such a match will not be allowed
to take place if a license has not been issued to that ground.
One of the conditions of a license will be that the ground is
complying with the timetable recommended by Lord Justice Taylor
for converting a ground into an all seated one.         Clubs in
Divisions 1 and 2 of the Football League will be required to have
seated accomodation only by August 1994 and those in Divisions
3 and 4 will have to have seated accomodation only by August
1999. Failure to meet these deadlines may result in a license
being refused.


                                                         Yours sincerely

                                                             Steve Bilbe
                                                             (Fire and Emergency
                                                               Planning Department)
                                             Liverpool
Robert Atkins i A . P ,                        L25
Minister for Sport
House of Commons
Westminster
London                                  19th July 1991
SW1A OAA


       Dear Minister ,

                     I am a football supporter and have
supported my team from the terraces for over twenty
years . I am becoming increasingly concerned about the
impending introduction of all-seater stadia for the top
teams in the country . Can you clarify for me the legal
'weight' carried by the recommendations made by Lord
Justice Taylor in his report on the Hilsborough disaster .
Are they just suggestions or will the clubs that fail
to seat thier grounds by 1992 be in breach of any safety
regulations , or any existing or impending laws ? I
fully understand that safety is paramount in this
situation , and I would not be Luddite enough to suggest
that all-seated ground (e.g. Wembley) revert to
terracing , but properly maintained standing areas can
be as safe - and in some instances safer - than seats .
If a sound case can be made for the inclusion of safe
terrace areas at all grounds for those fans that choose
to stand , then I hope that we (fans) can persuade the
football authorities and the clubs to change their
thinking .

                          Yours sincerely
