                                   From:        r    t   page
                                                    APS/MR ATKINS
                                   Date:        12    March 1992

                                   C°p y :      ps/Permanent Secretary
                                                 Mr Wiggins            Y
                                                 Mr Horne
                                                 Miss Stewart
                                                 Mr Baden
                                                Mr Goodwin
PS/SECRETARY OP STATE

JJgwgMtos M i-sm m s ratoomnarr in ran® ak> roasxe Division

c o n c e S L fttfa to v e ?   *   H° r n e' S Sub"i s s l °" <* t o d a y ', date
2,   He lias decided that we should be iof+• 4-w +.1.       ..
FLA considering on safety grounds the J S S        ??e opt!on of the
case by case basis for g L S     ,1 , L nee?.f?r *11“soating on a
therefore prefer that the Secretary of “L a S ^ r i S 't o t h T ! } 1*
Secretary in terms of the draft at Flag r                   the Hoine




RICHARD PAGE
Robert Atkins' Private Office
File   C                                FROM:   R D HORNE
                                                TPG Branch
                                                Rm 6.55 Ext 6134

                                        DATE:   12 March 1992

                                        Copy:   PS/Perm Secretary
                                                Mr Wiggins
                                                Miss Stewart
                                                Mr Baden
                                                Mr Goodwin
1.     PS/Mr Atkins
2.     PS/Secretary of State

FOOTBALL: ALL-SEATING REQUIREMENT IN THIRD AND FOURTH DIVISION
CLUBS
Issue

How the Secretary of State should respond to the Home
Secretary's letter of 10 March (Flag A) which argues that it
would be premature to review the requirement for Third and Fourth
Division clubs now.

Recommendat ion

2. That given the lengthy delay which would be involved before
any review could be undertaken if the Home Secretary's position
is maintained and since both the Minister for Sport and the
Secretary of State consider review to be necessary, the
Secretary of State may wish to respond in terms of the draft at
Flag B. If not he may wish to write in terms of the draft at Flag
C.

Timing

3.  If the Secretary of State wishes to press for an early review
then he will wish to write before the dissolution of Parliament
on Monday.

Presentation

4. Until Ministers have considered the outcome of any review it
may be best simply to reassert the Government's commitment,
given to the Home Affairs Select Committee only a year ago, to
all-seating throughout the Premier League and Football League.
Hints that this commitment is less than firm are being seized in
football as a pretext for inaction.

Background and argument

5. At the meeting on 4 March with the Minister for Sport at
which officials from the Treasury and Home Office were present,
it was agreed that the Minister for Sport should write to Earl
Ferrers setting out the case for review of the all-seating
requirement and suggesting that officials should prepare a joint
paper. Pre-empting that letter, however, the Home Secretary has
now written that he would prefer to wait until all the First and
Second Division clubs are converted to all-seating or at least
fully committed, before considering any review of the requirement
for Third and Fourth Division clubs.

6. Although the deadline for achieving all-seating in the First
and Second Divisions is August 1994, a number of clubs are a long
way off from achieving that target. In the First Division
Wimbledon and Southampton have so far been unable to find
suitable sites for new grounds which stand a realistic chance of
achieving planning permission and then construction by the target
date. Everton have yet to make an application to the Football
Trust and Tottenham Hotspur are strongly opposed to all-seating.
The position in the Second Division is even less satisfactory. In
these circumstances it will probably not be until early next year
at the earliest that a review can be contemplated if the Home
Secretary's line is maintained - and in practice probably
significantly later.

7. At the meeting last week between the Secretary of State and
Mr Atkins to discuss this issue, the anomalies of some clubs in
the First and Second Divisions having smaller attendances than
some clubs in the Third and Fourth Divisions was mentioned. It
must be questionable whether it makes sense for a review to be
confined to the Third and Fourth Divisions. Ministers may wish to
leave themselves the option of the FLA considering on safety
grounds the need for all-seating on a case by case basis for
clubs in all four divisions. If the Secretary of State takes
this view then he may wish to write to the Home Secretary along
the lines of the draft at Flag B.

8.  If not, the Secretary of State may wish to accept the Home
Secretary's argument that there is no point undertaking the
review of the position in the Third and Fourth Division clubs now
since no announcement could be made until further progress had
been made in the First and Second Divisions. If the Secretary of
State agrees with this then he may wish the Minister for Sport to
make clear publicly that both he and the Secretary of State stand
full square behind the Government's position that all-seating
should be implemented throughout the Football League. If the
Secretary of State is prepared to accept the Home Secretary's
position then he may wish to write in terms of the attached draft
at Flag C.


 c«t\


R D HORNE
                                         ^Q T•EGN-A  N N E ’S GATE L O N D O N SW1H 9AT
                                              O E N AN
                                   DCS
                             hff                 J            10
                                                              /£? March 1992




                            !       > * !
                            ! VS&hfGforQ :

                               *vu<.
I understand that you held a meeting with Robert Atkins on
4 March to consider whether Premier League clubs should continue
to have access to Reduction in Pools Betting Duty money. One of
my officials attended the meeting as an observer.

The meeting also discussed the application of the Taylor
recommendation on all-seated stadia to clubs in the Third and
Fourth divisions. As I think you know, we in the Home Office
consider that we should hold the Government policy line that all
clubs should convert their grounds by the deadlines recommended
in the Taylor Report.  This will maintain pressure on clubs and
ensure that they all act to improve the safety of their grounds.
The recent disturbances at Birmingham show that the old problems
are still very much alive.

While there may be a case for revising the requirement for Third
and Fourth division clubs in the future we think it may be too
early to do so now.   I would much prefer to wait until all the
First and Second division clubs are converted or at least fully
committed before considering revision of the requirement.    Any
slight opening of the door now would surely encourage the larger
clubs to try to take advantage.   We would wish to avoid that.

I am not convinced therefore that it would be wise for officials
of our departments     to prepare   a joint paper     containing
recommendations.




The Rt Hon Kenneth Clarke, QC, MP
Department of Education and Science
Sanctuary Building
Great Smith Street
London SW1P 3BT
                                                                8
#




                   SANCTUARY BUILDINGS GREAT SMITH STREET
                       WESTMINSTER LONDON SWIP 3BT
                           TELEPHONE 071-925 5000

                      The Rt Hon KENNETH CLARKE q c   mp


    The Rt Hon Kenneth Baker, MP
    Secretary of State for the
     Home Department
    Queen Anne's Gate
    London
    SW1H 9AT




    Thank you for your letter of 10 March on the question of the
    application of the Taylor recommendation on all-seated stadia to
    clubs in the Third and Fourth Divisions.

    I am pleased that you agree that there may be a case for revising
    the requirement for Third and Fourth Division clubs. I think
    there   is general   consensus that there has been a marked
    improvement in spectator behaviour in recent years. We must of
    course continue to be vigilant but I do not accept       that the
    recent disturbances at the Birmingham City ground signal that
    the old problems are on the return. This improvement in spectator
    behaviour has of course happened in advance of the implementation
    of the Taylor all-seating requirement. Given this improvement,
    together with the sophistication of current policing techniques
    and the prospect of better stewarding at football grounds, it
    seems to me that there is a good case for reviewing the case for
    all-seating at clubs which have only small attendances. Standing
    areas at these grounds are often sparsely populated and rarely if
    ever filled to anywhere near capacity. In these circumstances
    there seems little justification for insisting that clubs either
    incur the considerable expense of converting these areas to
    covered seating, or close them to spectators.

    I think it would be anomalous to review the position for Third
    and Fourth Division clubs and not apply these same considerations
    to those clubs in the First and Second Divisions which also have
    small attendances. I do not see how a review of only the Third
    and Fourth Division could be justified, not least because of
    promotion to and relegation from the Second Division. I would
    therefore ask you to reconsider the case for officials of our
    Departments to prepare a paper of what the review options might
    be and their implications; there would be no need for any
contribution to this exercise to go beyond the FLA. In the
meantime you have my assurance that both the Minister for Sport
and I will maintain the Government's commitment to all-seating
throughout the Football League.




                                                KENNETH CLARKE
               SANCTUARY BUILDINGS GREAT SMITH STREET
                   WESTMINSTER LONDON SWIP 3BT
                       TELEPHONE 071-925 5000

                 The Rt Hon KENNETH CLARKE q c   mp


The Rt Hon Kenneth Baker, MP
Secretary of State for the
 Home Department
Queen Anne's Gate
London
SW1H 9AT




Thank you for your letter of 10 March on the question of the
application of the Taylor recommendation on all-seated stadia to
clubs in the Third and Fourth Divisions.

I am pleased that you accept that there may be a case for
revising the requirement for Third and Fourth Division clubs and
I am happy to accept your advice that it would be premature to
u n d e r ta k e a review now because of the  possibly  damaging
implications for implementation of all-seating in the First and
Second Divisions.

I am sure that the Minister for Sport will continue to keep a
close eye on implementation of all-seating and when appropriate
will wish to write suggesting when a joint paper on the review
options and their implications might be prepared by officials of
our Departments.




                                                        KENNETH CLARKE
