K H .6.8/TWICSTAN.DM



                               cc   Mr Greenwood
                                    Mr Stickley (+ enclosures)
                                    Mr Brown


Mr Bolton


TWICKENHAM NORTH STAND: EMERGENCY EVACUATION TIME

We spoke about the particular problem of the evacuation time
for the North Stand at Twickenham.  I have also spoken to Mr
Greenwood. Alan Brown has been in touch with Richmond Borough
Council.

I think we are all agreed that there seems to be a degree of
inflexibility in the LFCDA's approach. The Green Guide allows
a maximum notional egress time^whether normal or emergency, of
8 minutes.  It envisages a minimum time of 2 % minutes but does
not specifically say (in the context of emergency evacuation)
that up to 8 minutes is allowed (para 185 of the Guide). The
earlier Guide said

     "Evacuation time, which will depend upon the fire hazards
     present in the stand, should be within the following
     limits,

      (a)   8 minutes where the stand is of non-combustible fire
            resisting construction, the interior use and
            contents present a low fire risk and the exit
            staircases are not vulnerable to a fire occurring
            within the stand; and

      (b)     minutes for stands of a lower standard.

     The conditions at a particular ground may call for an
     interpolation of these times."

The argument over the "8 minute maximum" was never
satisfactorily resolved. The Popplewell Working Group were
divided - broadly between engineers and fire prevention
specialists (FRS and FSI) who felt 8 minutes was too generous.
Eventually, when draftingthe present Guide we reflected the
view that we should not rule out, but should not encourage, an
8 minute evacuation time which, at the time was the only
workable compromise solution. Neither I nor Brian Stickley
have been content with this.

A notional evacuation time of 5 minutes for the new Twickenham
stands seems, on the face of it, unnecessary and unreasonable.
It suggests that theLFCDA would not accept an 8 minute
calculation under any circumstances. I had thought the
problem had been resolved.  It has not. The LFCDA are looking
to a 5 minute evacuation time for the 2nd and 3rd tiers. The
architects are apparently studying the plans with this in
mind. Richmond Borough are, so to speak, sandwiched by the
competing views.

Subject to FSl's views and those of Mr Stickley I propose to
restore to the new Guide a reference to "upto 8 minutes" in
Chapter 10. The problem, of course, is the term "upto" and
"advice of the fire authority should be sought" (current
paragraph 185). If FSI will support such an approach within
the Working Group which we are setting up to examine and
re-draft the LFCDA might be persuaded - especially following
their visit to USA stadiums.  (Richmond Borough Council will
also be on the Group.)




                                        D J MOULD

                                        8 June 1990
