          lJr                                                                2
                                                                             _.Sr |2 0 | l|_
                                     /2 o o r n       l / 6 g
                                     Department of Education and Science
                                     Elizabeth House York Road London SE1 7PH

                                     Direct Line 01 -934 - ^       ^ 3 2 .
                                     Switchboard 01 -934 9 0 0 0
                                     GTN Number 2914

                                     Telex 23171
                Esq
                                               January 1991
                                     Your reference
Walsall
West Midlands                        Our reference
                                         6/91




Dear Mr
I have been asked to reply to your letter of                       17 December to the
Minister for Sport about football hooliganism.

I am sorry it is not possible for an official to answer all of the
questions you have posed. However, the Government's views on some of
them are as follows:
The Government has been concerned for some time now about
football hooliganism and has worked closely with the football
authorities and the police in implementing a package of measures
to deal with the problem.       For example there are now strict
controls on the availability of alcohol at football grounds, the
police have been given stronger powers under the Public Order
Acts to take action against troublemakers, there is wider and
more effective use of close circuit television and better
segregation arrangements at the grounds.

An important new measure has also been introduced to prevent
convicted football hooligans from going to matches abroad.    The
Football Spectators Act 1989 give courts in England and Wales the
power to impose restriction orders on those convicted of football
related offences. These orders require those in respect of whom
they are made to attend at police stations when specified
football matches are being played abroad.

In his report on the Hillsborough Stadium disaster Lord
Justice Taylor said that all seater stadia would do more than any
other single measure to improve the safety, behaviour and control
of spectators at football matches. The Government agrees with
his view and intends that all grounds in the Football League
should be all seater by 1999. The Government is also introducing
other anti-hooligan measures recommended by Lord Justice Taylor
in the form of specific offences related to football. Under new
legislation to be introduced shortly it will be an offence
to throw missiles, run onto the pitch or indulge in racialist
or obscene chanting.



                                                                                         1
                  \   •1




c   )



The Government realises that conversion to all seater stadia
and the implementation of the other improvements recommended by Lord
Justice Taylor will be expensive.         In   recognition   of   the
importance attached to this work the Chancellor of the Exchequer has
reduced the rate of Pool Betting Duty from 42-s to 40% with effect
from 5 April 1990.    This follows an understanding with the Football
League, the Football Trust 1990 and the pools companies that      the
money saved, estimated to be £100m over the next 5 years, will e
administered by the Football Trust 1990 for use on capital works in
accordance   with Lord Justice Taylor's recommendation for improving
comfort and safety at Football league grounds. The Chancellor has
said that he will make an early decision on whether to extend the
concession for a further five years provided there is firm evidence
that the football authorities and clubs have plans in place for the
Taylor timetable on all seating to be achieved.

    This money is in addition to the £75m that the Football
    Trust 1990 has said will be available over the next 10 years
    funding provided by the Pools Promoters Association from the
    proceeds of the 'Spotting-the-Ball' competition.
    You may also be interested to read the attached extracts from the
    Diqest of Football Statistics 1989 published by the Football Trust and
    the House of Commons Hansard for the 4 July 1990, which give the
    number of arrests and ejections at football matches.
    This department does not have any published information on what causes
    f o o t b a l l hooliganism. However you can write to the following, who may
    be able to help you more:

    Centre for Football Research
    Attenborough Building
    University of Leicester
    University Road
    Leicester
    LEI 7RH.

    Yours sincerely




    MISS P BERGONZI
    Sport and Recreation Division




                                                                               2
f




    rf'
    M




                                               WALSALL V
                                            West Midlands



                                         Tel:'




          17 December 1990
                                                            B S M B OF "I s b m S       ]
                                                               RECEIVED IN          '   1
                                                                    O f f S9?I


                                                                    IE OFHCE
          Dear Sir

          I am presently in my 5th year at The Royal Wolverhampton School, and working
          towards my GCSEs. For my Politics and Government examination, I have to
          submit a piece of coursework and through interest have chosen "What causes
          football hooliganism, and how can it be prevented?"

          Therefore, I would be appreciate any views which you have and any facts or
          figures as well as any information relating'? to this topic as this would be
          of great help to me. Enclosed is a sample jiQuesjtionnaire which I intend to
          use and so any comments would be most welcjqi

          May I take this opportunity to thank you fflji •your co-operation in reading this
          letter and hopefully await your reply.      ||j   !

          If you personally cannot help, perhaps y o u ;Wo jld be good enough to pass
          this letter on to an appropriate person. :

          Yours faithfully




          Enc
                               FOOTBALL HOOLIGANISM COURSEWORK

                                      Questionnaire 2




1)     Would you be happy going to a football match by yourself?
                                                                 with your family?
                                        '4   *


2)     Do you consider football hooliganism a big problem?

3)     Is football hooliganism a football or society               problem?

et )   How much does football hooliganism affect theclub involved?

5)     What do you think of the measures taken to               prevent it?

6)     How much is money a key factor?

7)     What is the relationship between player misbehaviour and football
       hooliganism?

8)     How much does success on the pitch decrease or increase the probleinZ

9)     How do you think society can help?

10)    W h a t % of hooliganism is contained within the            ground?
                                              i■
                                               '  JM                               :\
11)    How much does alcohol play a role? '
                          '''                '   ijPv'
12)    How does the problem in England compare to the International problem?
                           1                         ;   i'h                           If
13)    Why do you think other sports do not have the same               problem?   :

14)    What measures do you think can be taken to               prevent the.problem?

15)    To what extent does it depend on whether the club is inner-city?
                                                 i
                                                 '       :'!"
16)    What sort of people do you consider responsible?                            :
