REVMPCOR.SUB
                                     FROM:   MISS A J STEWART
                                             SARD
                                             925 6370

                                     DATE:   2 June 1992

                                     cc:     PS/Permanent Secretary
                                             Mr Gunn
                                             Mr L P Wright
                                             Miss Maclean^
                                             Mr Baden
                                             Mr Peters
                                             Mr Elling^zfrd
                                             Mr Webb
                                             Mr Hopley, HO
                                             Mr Cooper, WO
                                             Mr McPherson, SHHD
                                             Mr Hopson


1.   PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY

2.      SECRETARY OF STATE


RE-EXAMINATION OF ALL-SEATING: OUTSTANDING MP CORRESPONDENCE

Issue
1.      Following your decision to announce this Thursday your re­
examination of the Government’s policy of requiring all-seater
accommodation for Football League grounds we can clear the
backlog of correspondence from MPs, including those inherited
from the Home Office, which put forward objections to the
Government's current stated policy on the all-seater issue.


Action
2.      This submission invites you to agree the text of a standard
draft reply, to be amended as necessary. A draft is at Flag A .


Background
3.   Now that responsibility for safety of sports grounds matters
has transferred from the Home Office, it makes sense for replies
to all outstanding letters from MPs to be sent from DNH
Ministers. We have inherited 31 MP letters about objections to
the all-seater policy.

                                                                      1
4.   The backlog is due in part to the Election and the
uncertainty that emerged during the election campaign about the
future of the all-seater policy. The delay was compounded by
negotiations on the transfer of responsibility to the DNH. As a
consequence, replies now need to be sent as a matter of some
urgency.




MISS A J STEWART
REVMPCOR•ANN
                                                               A


DRAFT REPLY TO OUTSTANDING MINISTER'S CASES HELD BY THE HOME
OFFICE

I am sorry that you have had to wait so long for a reply to your
letter of [date] to [Minister] enclosing this one from
[constituent] about the implementation of the recommendations
contained in Lord Justice Taylor's Final Report on the
Hillsborough Stadium Disaster. I am replying because
responsibility for safety at sports grounds matters has recently
been transferred from the Home Office to this Department.


As you know, among 76 recommendations covering all aspects of
safety, Lord Justice Taylor recommended the elimination of
standing accommodation at Football League matches, by 1994 in the
case of 1st and 2nd Division clubs, and by 1999 for those in the
3rd and 4th Divisions. This has been accepted as Government
policy.


However, in the light of the numerous representations received
from the world of football in favour of retaining some standing
accommodation,   [I] announced on 4 June that the Government was
prepared to look again at the all-seater requirement for certain
categories of ground.


We have decided that it would be wrong to review either the
principle or the timetable for all-seating at First Division
grounds in the Football League (the new Premier League) or at
Premier Division grounds in the Scottish Football League. It is
essential that our top clubs meet the standards necessary to
compete in Europe and make full use of the resources available to
them to provide grounds of which we can all be proud of as we
enter the 21st Century.


In addition, the Government continues to support the principle of
all-seating for the great majority of Second Division clubs.


                                                                   1
'   •   Nevertheless, representations have been invited from a number of
        interested organisation as to whether there are any circumstances
        in which standing accommodation can be retained at any Third and
        Fourth Division clubs in the Football League. In doing so we
        shall ensure that as few anomalies as possible are created.
        Particular attention will be given to Second Division clubs with
        very low average attendances.


        It would be wrong to attempt to predict the outcome of this
        exercise the result of which will, in any case, be announced
        shortly. I can say, however, that we remain firmly committed to
        ensuring that those who wish to watch football matches should do
        so in conditions of reasonable safety, and we continue to support
        the principles of spectator safety set out in Lord Justice
        Taylor's Final Report.




                                                                           2
