                               DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL HERITAGE
                                  Horse Guards Road, London SW1P 3AL
                                        Telephone 071-270 5791
                                         Facsimile 071-270 6026
From the Under Secretary of State
    ROBERT KEY MP

      Paul Weston Esq
      The Federation of Stadium Communities
      Anfield House
      1-13 Holme Lane
      Sheffield
      S6 4JP




      Thank you for your letter of 22 June. Before arranging a meeting
      as you suggest it would be helpful to know what are the specific
      concerns to the Federation that you feel I can address in the
      light of my letter of 2 June which set out fully this
      Department's position on the issues you raised.

      Your letter also invited the Secretary of State to address the
      Federation's AGM in the autumn. I have discussed this with David
      Mel lor and we have agreed that       in view of his limited
      responsibilities for many of the issues of concern to the
      Federation that it would not be appropriate for him to address
      your AGM.




                                                                       ROBERT KEY
                                         fo-sso/d odtfaok>j) Id fy f'

                               From:      T A Ellingford
                                          SARD C

                               Ext:       3060-6371

                               Date:      23 July 1992

                               Copy:      PS/Secretary of State
                                          Mr Wright
                                          Ms MacLean

1.   Mr B^den
2.   Parliamentary Secretary

            THE FEDERATION OF STADIUM COMMUNITIES (FSC)

1. The FSC is a pressure group set up to protect the interests
of those who live in the vicinity of major sports stadia. The
Secretary, Mr Paul Weston, wrote to the Secretary of State in
April setting out their concerns and asking for a meeting. You
sent a full reply on 2 June (Flag A) which made clear your
limited responsibilities in respect of the issues they have
raised. It suggested that a meeting might not be useful but left
it open to the FSC to let you know if they still wanted to meet
you.

2.   Mr Weston has replied saying that he would still like to
explain the F S C s concerns to you and the Secretary of State. He
has also invited the Secretary of State to address their AGM in
the Autumn on a date and at a location to suit him. Before a
meeting is arranged we suggest that the FSC should be asked what
specific concerns they have which they feel we can address given
your full reply of 2 June. Also in view of our limited
responsibilities for the issues of concern to the FSC we do not
think that the Secretary of State should agree to address their
AGM.

3.   If you agree a reply is attached.




T A ELLINGFORD




                                                                        1
                              DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL HERITAGE
                                  Horse Guards Road, London SW1P 3AL
                                         Telephone 071-270 5791
                                         Facsimile 071-270 6026
From the Under Secretary of State
    ROBERT KEY MP

     P Weston Esq                                                      S i June 1992
     Secretary
     The Federation of Stadium Communities
     Anfield House
     1-13 Holme Lane
     SHEFFIELD
     S6 4JP




     Thank you for your letter of 30 April to David Mellor about
     the work of the Federation of Stadium Communities.

     Before dealing with the specific issues you raise, it may be
     helpful if I explain the role of the Department of National
     Heritage with regard to sports stadia.

     David Mellor and I are committed to the improvement of safety
     and of the facilities available for spectators.  We have also
     taken over responsibility for safety of sports grounds
     matters, including the Government's policy on all-seating at
     football grounds, which formerly fell to the Home Secretary.
     However, responsibility for the planning of individual stadia
     and of their neighbouring areas lies with the local planning
     authorities, and so some of the concerns expressed in your
     letter might be best taken up with the relevant District or
     Borough Councils.

     I do not accept that the Government has acted too hastily in
     requiring football clubs to implement the recommendations in
     the Taylor Report.   The recent tragic events in Corsica have
     highlighted the importance of providing safe facilities.

     Neither do I accept that the Taylor deadlines for the
     implementation of all-seated accommodation are preventing
     clubs from considering the option of relocating. Lord Justice
     Taylor recognised in his Final Report (which was published in
     January 1990) that some clubs presently occupying inner city
     sites might prefer to relocate rather than attempt to
     redevelop their existing accommodation.

     The Football Licensing Authority (FLA), is keen to ensure that
     clubs wishing to do so may relocate to new grounds in more
     suitable areas as easily as possible.       The Authority has
always advised clubs to consult them at the earliest possible
®ta,ge in the event of difficulties.

The FLA has also made it clear that any requests for an
extension of the deadline will be considered on a case by case
basis.  For a club seeking to relocate this is likely to mean
in practice that it has the necessary planning permission, a
suitable design, the money to proceed and a firm timetable for
relocation.    A club which has neither made detailed plans to
relocate nor redeveloped its existing ground may well be
refused a licence by the FLA.

It is of course the responsibility of football, not the
Government,   tomeet safety standards and to comply with the
timetable laid down for their implementation.     I  therefore
welcome the efforts of the Federation of Stadium Communities
to improve the dialogue between local communities and clubs in
the interests of all.

Nevertheless, I am mindful of the impact that redevelopment
proposals may have on local communities.   As you know, the
Department    of the Environment issued guidance  to local
planning authorities last September, asking them to take
account when     considering proposals for football stadia
redevelopment or relocation of:

      " all normal planning considerations, such as
        traffic, parking, access to public transport,
        and possible conflicts with neighbouring uses
              Local planning authorities should also
        have regard to the extent to which proposals
        incorporating multiple use and non-football
        leisure facilities will be of benefit to the
        community as a whole. "

It will be up to each local planning authority to apply this
general advice to their local circumstances.

Because of the likely scale of the development involved, clubs
are encouraged to enter into early consultation with local
planning authorities, particularly where a new ground is
proposed.

Finally, while we are concerned to ensure that sports stadia
meet the required safety standards it is not for the
Government to intervene directly in individual proposals for
new stadia.

In view of what I have said above I am not sure how useful a
meeting between us would be. However, if you would still like
to discuss your concerns no doubt you will let me know.
                                    From      T A Ellingford
                                              SARD C
                                              Room 3Q2 SB

                         J H        * t       3060-6359

                                    D ste j   / j May 1992

                                    Copy:     PS/Parliamentary
                                               Secretary
                                              Mr Phillips
                                              Mr Fries
                                              Ms MacLean
1.   Mr Bafiien »
2.   Secretary          State

                 THE FEDERATION OF STADIUM COMMUNITIES (FSC)

1. The FSC is a pressure group that has been set up to protect
the interests of those who live in the vicinity of major sports
stadia. One of their main concerns is what they consider to be
the unsuitable redevelopment of some grounds eg Arsenal in order
to implement Taylor requirements. They claim that the haste to
implement Taylor is a direct cause of such developments. However
many of their concerns relate to pre-Taylor issues such as access
to grounds and general nuisance caused to local residents by
football crowds.

2.   The FSC have previously written to Mr Atkins and a copy of
the correspondence is at Flag A. The reply now provided for your
signature reiterates and expands on the points made by Mr Atkins.
The FSC have also asked for a meeting with you but in view of
your limited responsibilities in respect of the areas surrounding
stadia this might not be appropriate. However the letter leaves
it open to the FSC to make a further approach to you if they
think that a meeting would be useful in the light of what is said
in the letter.


 /// ( ' o - - j '■ <

T A ELLINGFORD




                                                                 1
 JiL


________         THEFEDERATIONOFSTADIUM COMMUNITIES
wessm             Airfield House 1-13 Holme Lane Sheffield S6 4JP Tel: 0742 322474
 Hiss Steujau^r
  kdx/\u^...pioc&j^ t                                          ■4
                                                               5
                                                               i
                                                                    *r.OP, -T :~ :" C j Z p ; >.'• a
                                                                    :          -A!.i-ip;;
                                                                                                       W' ;V”f
                                                                                                            |
                                                                                                             *
                                                                                                             t


                                                                               M             1992
       2 2 June 19 9 2
                                                                r ut No:
                                                                     * ’        1I«

       Robert Key MP
       Under Secretary of State
       Department of National Heritage
       Horse Guards Road
       LONDON
       SW1P 3AL

       Dear Mr Key

       Thank you for your letter of the 2nd July which co­
       incidentally arrived the day after a national meeting of the
       Federation took place.  At the meeting a whole catalogue of
       problems were raised from all over the country as a result of
       football clubs undertaking ground improvements and
       redevelopment.  It does seem that, despite your, apparent
       confidence in the existing legislative and administrative
       system, much heartache and stress is being inflicted on local
       residents.

       I do feel it important that a small delegation should meet
       with the Secretary of State and yourself to discuss our
       concerns and ensure you appreciate fully why we are anxious to
       see some improvements to current practices.  I would be
       obliged if you could offer us a date for a meeting.

       At the Federation's recent meeting I was asked to invite the
       Secretary of State to address our Annual General Meeting.
       This will take place in the autumn. We would be happy for the
       AGM to take place on a date and in a general location to suit
       the Secretary of State.  I would be grateful therefore if my
       invitation could be put before the Secretary.  I look forward
       to a positive response.             ^

       Yours sincerely




       Paul Weston
       Acting Director
       Secretary
       Fedaration Stadium Communities




                  Steering Group: Iris Broadbent, Birmingham 021 328 4362
                                  Edna Lawson, Middlesbrough 0642 816395
                                  Joy Leach, London 071 226 3553
                                  Paul Weston, Sheffield 0742 322474
