C92/3215

NOTE OF AN OFF—THE—RECORD MEETING WITH SPORTS EDITORS
 AT THE DORSET SQUARE HOTEL ON 4 JUNE 1992


Those present:   Secretary of State
                 Mr Phillips
                 Miss MacLean
                 Ms Stewart
                 Mr Holgate
                 Mr Coombs
                 Sports Editors and Others


SPORT
The Secretary of State said that he was pleased to meet the
Editors.   Sport mattered a lot to the British: many would be
more concerned about John Barnes' injury than the drama oyer
Maastricht.    He was anxious to make a go of his sporting
brief.      The Department was a serious attempt by the
Prime Minister to ensure that those activities people liked
were attended to as well as unavoidable necessities.     This
involved assistance in the pursuit of excellence, from which
many would derive pride as spectators; and opportunities for
the rest to participate.    This was why the National Lottery
mattered:    it had to be all singing, all dancing and should
provide a really substantial chunk of money for sports.
2.    The Secretary of State said that Wembley Stadium was now
marvellous but there should be more such stadia.           Good
prospects were sometimes deterred from developing their talent
by the lack of facilities.       There would always be higher
priorities for Government spending, but the Lottery could form
a break with the past.     Equally there were now many genuine
sports fans, such as the Prime Minister and Mr Clarke in senior
Government posts.   The contrast between support for Manchester
and support for Birmingham's bid for the Olympics was clear,
although he couldn't comment on whether selection by the
International Olympic Committee would be fair.
’   •

    3.     The Secretary of State said that the Department was a
    serious attempt to move items from the periphery to the
    centre.   It was central to the Prime Minister's vision.   And
    the quality of officials attracted to the Department testified
    to the opportunity.
    4.    The Secretary of State said that to coincide with the
    lunch, he had made an announcement on all-seater stadia. There
    was no question over the Premier League. But all-seater stadia
    were difficult to extend to all of Divisions Three and Four.
    The cut-off point was also difficult:       such stadia should
    either be mandatory for all Second Division Clubs, with time
    for the newly promoted to comply; or it should be based on the
    capacity of the ground.    He wanted to take one last shot at
    consensus on this. There were also other matters such as, how
    to deal with big clubs drawn to play at the small ones.
    5.    The Secretary of State said that as a fan, he had resented
    interference in the game justified on the basis of a few fans'
    bad behaviour.    But there would be critics on the other side
    who would point to any trouble. His announcement was intended
    to set a framework and disclose what he thought should be done
    in general terms.      There were four weeks' opportunity for
    comment and he would then make a further announcement straight
    away.    As the issue was not going to go away, he thought it
    better to seize the initiative, demonstrate how to do business
    and win a battle in Whitehall for sport.
    6.   In response to a question on the BSkyB deal, the Secretary
    of State said that he had to be very careful. He had his views
    as a fan but he should not pretend to have power that he did
    not have.   The Premier League was entitled to take a decision
    about its product. But it was a very important opportunity to
    put its house in order and improve facilities for fans.      It
    would be awful if the proceeds went into transfer fees and
    salaries. As Broadcasting Minister, he had amicably agreed to
    a list of events to be protected. There was now more sport on
    television and BSkyB had an audience amongst all social
    classes. With the return of 'Match of the Day' and Jimmy Hill,
    he was helping to protect the heritage1




                                      2
7.    On the prices of tickets to fans, the Secretary of State
said that Chelsea, in particular, had a business to run and a
team to buy.    Football had to offer its fans facilities that
all could be proud of.       Family sections were worthwhile.
Again, the increases would be all the more defensible if the
proceeds were used properly.
8.   Asked again about football safety, the Secretary of State
said that he saw little point in requiring clubs with
attendances of 2,000 or so to erect all-seater stadia.
Sticking rigidly to Lord Taylor's recommendations would also
have incurred criticism.   A consensus was developing around
alternatives.
9.    Asked about safety requirements at rugby league grounds,
the Secretary of State said that he would look into the
particular issues raised.
10.   Asked about the National Lottery, the Secretary of State
replied that the consultation period had just ended, and he
would be drawing up plans.      Art, sport, the heritage and
charities would benefit.    Sport would receive a substantial
proportion yet to be determined. The real test was to pursuade
Parliament and the public that the Lottery was a good idea. It
had to be introduced in a wholehearted manner and it had to be
protected from the risk of spreading proceeds too thinly. All
those interested in sport should support it.            On the
distribution of proceeds, the Government would set the
framework and some sort of board would be responsible. But the
Government would be responsible for the overall distribution.
11.   Asked again about the Lottery, the Secretary of State
replied that sport, arts and heritage had equal claims.
12.     Asked about confusion in the representation and
administration of sport, the Secretary of State said that he
understood the frustration.    He could not intervene but if
asked his opinion he would express it.




                                 3
13.  The Secretary of State said that he would host a second
lunch for Sports Editors in about six months' time.




NIB
Private Secretary
Distribution:   PS/Mr Key
                Visount Astor
                Mr Phillips
                Mr Wright
                Ms MacLean
                Ms Stewart
                Mr Baden
                Mr Hopson

5 June 1992




                                4
