                                                                    5
THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION



1.     The FA is the governing body.      Its objectives are to
promote and control the playing of association football at all
levels - the FA enforces the laws of the game; controls
competitions, such as the FA Cup and the Challenge Trophy, and
has responsibility for the England national team.   The rules of
any association football competition,      including the League
Championship have to be approved by the FA. The Football League
is required to seek the FA's approval of any tournament it
organises.                                ^


MEMBERSHIP

2.      The FA consists of clubs and affiliated associations
playing or administrating association football within the laws of
the game and the rules established by the FA.     There are also
life members (these tend to come from the County Associations).
Club membership is available in two forms - "Full" and
"Associate" dependent on the status and playing strength of the
club concerned.     All members of the Football League are
automatically Full members of the FA (except the three Welsh
clubs).    There are in all 250 full member clubs.      Associate
membership is available to the smaller non-League clubs which
have been members of County Football Associations for at least 5
years. Voting rights are available only to Full members.

3.     All the county football associations are members.   So too
are the armed services, Oxford and Cambridge Universities,
Universities Athletic Union, the English Schools Association, the
Women's FA and the British Commonwealth Associations.


COUNCIL AND COMMITTEES

4.     Bert Millichip is Chairman of the Council and thus of the
FA.  The 250 clubs have 10 representatives on the Council, 8 of
whom come from Football League clubs.    The Associations take up
some 60 places, the Football League is represented on the Council
by its 8-strong Management Committee.   The council has in all 91
members and meets 6 times a year.
                                                       ' *



5.    The FA has over 20 Committees responsible for such areas
as competitions, finance, international, disciplinary, rules,
referees and liaison with the FA. Each Committee has a Chairman
elected annually by ballot of Committee members. Committees meet
as and when necessary.

6.    The Executive Committee is made up of 7 elected members,
the Chairman and Vice Chairman of the FA and the President of the
Football League.  The Executive Committee has power to take such
steps as are necessary to give effect to the decisions of the
Council and to make decisions on all matters of policing and
procedure.
OFFICERS

7.     The FA restructured its management structure following the
arrival of Graham Kelly as Chief Executive from the League. There
are five heads of division below Mr Kelly:

       Charles Hughes   -   Assistant National Coach
                            dealing with technical matters

       Mark Day         -   Financial Manager

       Pat Smith        -   Administration Manager
                            (and ticket arrangements)

       Adrian Titcombe -    Crowd Control Officer

       Glen Kirton      -   External affairs, including
                            the England team


REGULATIONS AND DISCIPLINARY PROCEDURES

8.     Like the Football League, the FA has regulations which
clubs must apply.    It has a disciplinary role in the case of
breaches of its regulations. There is a certain amount of overlap
and duplication between the FA and the League - inevitable since
in many respects they are two bodies trying to do one job - and
this is particularly true in connection with disciplinary
responsibilities and sanctions against clubs.     The FA and the
League have an agreement under which each informs the other of an
alleged breach in its regulations. Where examination shows it is
the FA's regulations which have been breached, an FA Commission
is appointed to deal with it. If it is the League's regulations
which have been breached, then they are responsible for dealing
with it. In this latter case clubs have a right of appeal to the
FA.   Where both sets of regulations have been breached both
organisations set up their own inquiries.
9.     The FA is responsible for disciplinary action against
players at all levels for any misbehaviour on the field of play.
Clubs of course may take their own disciplinary action in such
cases.
