hs.10.17/hillsbl6.dm

MEETING THE INQUIRY 17 OCTOBER 143 0 HOURS
DEFENSIVE BRIEFING POINTS

 Safety Certification - Mandatory Contents

Under the 1975 Act before amendment by the 1987 Act section 2
provided for certain terms and conditions to be included in
safety certificates. This provision was removed by Part II of
the 1987 Act. This was because the distinction between a sports
ground and sports stadium was removed. The earlier provisions
for the contents of safety certificates therefore had to be
deleted from the face of the legislation in case they were
inapplicable or inappropriate to all sports grounds.

 2.   Provision was made for an order to be made under S.15A
 (negative resolution procedure) requiring mandatory terms and
 conditions to be included in safety certificates for given
 classes of sports ground.    This would have enabled us to have
 restored the old conditions of section 2 to sports stadiums used,
 say, for football.

   3.    The reason this was not done was because the wholesale
   designation of football grounds had already taken place in 1985
   and 1986 following popplewell. Since then only 2 or 3 grounds
   have been designated. Up to 1.1.88 (when the 1987 Act provisions
 .came into effect) all safety certificates would have been issued €
(C    0-                V
   under the provisions \of the 1975 Act as it then stood.

 4.   It was therefore felt unnecessary to provide an order
 relating to football grounds covering terms and conditions which,
 by            should already have been included in safety
 certificates already issued or, at least, were being considered
 under the provisions of the 1975 Act as it then stood. Advice
 as to the contents of safety certificates was contained in
 paragraph 6 of Annex A to Home Office Circular 71/1987
 accompanying the changes to the 1975 Act.
5.   We made clear in that advice that existing clauses in safety
certificates should not automatically require amendment as a
result of the removal of the obligatory terms of section 2 of the
1975 Act.

6.   Section 2 of the Act as it is now framed provides a wide
discretion to local authorities. Arguably that discretion is,
if anything, less restrictive than it was previously. Our view
at the time was that it should remain as wide a discretion as
possible in order to give local authorities a maximum scope to
secure ’’reasonable” safety at grounds by means of the safety
certificate.

Order under S.15A:   Contents of Safety Certificates
 tv>
7. k Consideration continues to be given to making an order under
S.15A in order to implement the relevant Interim Report
recommendations. ^
          A> \ai_aJV*               Uvfiv V^lajlaa   Cr*
8.   Our survey of local authorities suggests this is not
necessary because there is a general willingness to implement the
recommendation so far as practicable.

9.   Not all the recommendations have been completely welcomed.
Even so they have, wherever possible, been implemented.

10. Recommendation 8: (Open gates on perimeter fences) has been
considered in one or two grounds as illogical.   In one or two
cases it has been either impossible to implement (eg Millwall)
or considered wrong (eg Crystal Palace).

11. Recommendation 18;    (turnstile flow) has proved difficult
in some cases. Crowds at lowly placed clubs are too low to give
rise to any real build up. Turnstile rates vary according to
individual circumstances - eg competence of the operator,
admission price or whether a ’season-ticket turnstile'.
12. Our initial thoughts on an order under S.15A have been to
keep any such conditions general so as to give local authorities
scope to apply them to individual grounds.

13. Broadly, subject to Legal Advisers views we should expect
mandatory terms/conditions to require local authorities to
address:

     (a)   authorised capacity
     (b)   control/monitoring admission
     (c)   exits/entrances
     (d)   fire precautions
     (e)   stewarding
     (f)   communications
     (g)   emergency provision and access to the ground.



National Oversight

14. See also opening remarks. The original Home Office role as
appellate authority restricted our involvement in overseeing
terms and conditions in safety certificates in case they were
subject of an appeal. We could not risk accusations of
pre-j udgement.

15. Since Popplewell we had no reason to believe the safety
certificate system was not working properly. Popplewell judged
it to be "effective in securing safety” at designated stadia
(chapter 3 paragraph 4) to have been operating satisfactorily for
a number of years (chapter 3 paragraph 23) and to have been
generally impressed with how well the 197 5 Act had operated
(chapter 3 paragraph 69).

16. Since that time our informalcontact with local authority
safety officers, engineers etc have given no firm indication of
a general level of incompetence     - as was suggested by the
Hillsborough Inquiry to have existed at Sheffield.    1


                                                       VUvJ,
17. If anything,      our indications suggested that local
authorities were over burdensome rather than too lenient. The
section 15A power was, paradoxically, seen as a method of curbing
excesses by local authorities rather than ensuring a prescription
of safety measures by them.
