      HOM E O FFIC E
      Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H9AT
                                  Direct line   071 273 2765
                                 Switchboard    071 273 3000


Mr A McPherson                                   Your reference
Scottish Education Department
43 Jeffrey Street                                Our reference
Edinburgh
                                                 Date
EH1 1DN
                                                27 July 1990


Dear Alan


REVISION OF THE GREEN GUIDE

Following the meetings of our informal Working Group to review
the Green Guide we have now produced the enclosed draft which
we propose, subject to your views and those of other copy
recipients, to circulate for consultation.

We still have to produce diagrams to supplement the text on
which we are still working so we will be quite happy to pick
up any minor points that arise at this stage.  We are
primarily interested in any major issues or concerns which you
may have.  More detailed points can be dealt with during the
wider consultation period.

I would ask that you and recipients of this letter provide any
comment, including nil returns, by close of play on Thursday 2
August.  My apologies for the short deadline, but it is
necessary in order to achieve the projected publication date
of early autumn.

We intend to pursue a wider circulation amongst local
authority organisations, sports bodies, etc immediately after
receiving your views.  A further meeting of the Working Group
will then consider the text revised in the light of comments
received from these bodies.

                                                Yours sincerely




                                                (Fire cind Emergency
                                                Planning Department)

cc   Bill Cooper, Welsh Office
     Tony Baden, DOE, SARD
     Tom Minton, DOE, Building Regs
     Marie Power, HSE
     Peter Ediss, DOH
     Richard Rhodes, Home Office, F8 Division
          IN CONFIDENCE




      DRAFT REVISION (No 2)


GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS


          10 JULY 1990




         IN CONFIDENCE
KH.7.5/GUIDESSG.DM



GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS


1.   INTRODUCTION



Scope and Status of the Guide


1.   This booklet provides guidance to ground
management, local authorities and technical
specialists such as engineers on measures for
improving spectator safety at existing sports
grounds.   The Guide has no statutory force.
Although the Guide is a voluntary code many of its
recommendations may be given statutory force at
individual grounds designated under the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act 1975 by their inclusion in safety
certificates.


2.   Whether or not a ground is the subject of a
safety certificate ground operators who have primary
responsibility for the safety of their spectators
should apply the criteria, enlisting professional
expertise where necessary, in order to help ensure
safe conditions at their ground.


Background to the Guide


3.   Guidelines on measures for improving the safety
of spectators at sports grounds first became
available when the Wheatley Report on Crowd Safety
at Sports Grounds was published in 1972.   The
recommendations in the Appendix to that Report were
extended to include fire precautions and means of
escape from an emergency situation such as a fire,
and then formed the basis of the Guide to Safety at

                          1
 Sports Grounds (which became known as the 'Green
 Guide').


 4.   The application of those guidelines to football
grounds over the following few years revealed a need
for advice to be amended in certain respects.
Furthermore, since the safety of spectators can be
affected when crowds are disturbed by hooligan
elements, the recommendations of the Working Party
on Crowd Behaviour were incorporated in a new
version, published in 1976, which was aimed
specifically at football grounds.


5.    Following the fire at Bradford City FC ground
in 1985 in which 56 people died, a working party,
established under the aegis of Mr Justice
Popplewell's Inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control
at Sports Grounds, reviewed the Guide and produced a
series of recommendations which were taken into
account in consultation with others to produce a
revised and expanded second edition in 1986.


6.    This third edition incorporates further changes
made following re-examination of the guidelines in
the light of recommendations by the Inquiry by Lord
Justice Taylor who reviewed the guide with technical
assistance in the course of his inquiry into the
tragedy at Hillsborough in 1989.


Historical context


7.    Serious accidents at sports grounds involving
injuries on a large scale are fortunately few.     But
as demonstrated by those at Burnden Park in 1946,
Ibrox Stadium in 1971, Valley Parade in 1985 and
Hillsborough in 1989, the potential for disaster at
a crowded sporting event is such that it is


                          2
 essential for ground management to take such steps
 as are necessary to ensure reasonable safety at
 their grounds.    This applies to all grounds
 irrespective of the sport being played and whether
 or not they are the subject of a safety certificate.


 General principles of the Guide


 8.   The problem of crowd safety at sports grounds
 is complex and cannot be solved simply by ensuring
that each component of a ground, such as stairways,
passages or sections of terracing, is satisfactory
in itself.   The inter-relation of these and other
components is essential: none of them can be
considered in isolation without consideration of its
effect on the others, and they should all be
compatible and combine to form a balanced unit.


9.    The guide is intended to cover grounds where
sporting events of all kinds are held and where the
gathering of large crowds is likely to present a
safety problem.     Football has particular problems
such as overcrowding and misbehaviour, which are not
normally experienced to the same extent elsewhere.
Accordingly much of the guidance has particular
application to football grounds.     It should also be
recognised that crowd problems are [often directly]
related to the nature of the event and the numbers
attending it.     Indications are given throughout to
those sections of the Guide which are particularly
relevant to football grounds or stadia and to those
where close compliance with the guidelines is
desirable irrespective of the sport concerned.]


10.   The variety of type, function and layout of
sports grounds and the inter-relationship of the
different components means that a flexible approach


                            3
 should be maintained to take account of the
 individual nature of grounds.    The Guide does not
 attempt to provide a universal minimum standard but
 sets achievable standards.    Whilst it may therefore
 be possible to deviate from individual guidelines
 without detracting from the overall safety of the
 ground any decision to do so should be recorded
 together with the deviation(s) with supporting
documentation.    Unless alternative measures which
can be demonstrated to achieve an equal or greater
degree of safety are taken to those laid down in the
Guide,   a reduction of the numbers of spectators who
can be safely accommodated compared to the number
who would otherwise be accommodated will be
required.   That reduction may be severe.


11.   The Guide is aimed primarily at safety in
existing sports grounds and therefore attempts to
take account of the constraints and difficulties
which are present in these grounds.    Although it is
not in itself a design brief for new construction
work or reconstruction work at sports grounds, the
standards of such work should not be lower than
those set out in the Guide.    New work should conform
to the appropriate Building Regulations.    The scope
of new design work should lead to improved standards
on those that can be achieved at grounds already
built.


12.   When using the Guide to assess whether existing
circumstances provide adequately for the safety of
spectators, the criterion to be aimed for is that of
a reasonable degree of safety.    It would be
unreasonable,   if not impractical, to seek standards
for absolute safety of everyone attending a ground.




                           4
 13.    The Guide is not specifically aimed at risks to
 spectators from the sport itself, but clearly
 management have a duty to take all necessary
 precautions to safeguard spectators against the
 effects of accidents in, or originating from, the
 activity on the playing area.    Particular care is
 needed when the sport entails the use and storage of
 flammable fuels.


 14.    The advice given in this Guide is without
 prejudice to the operation of the Building
 Regulations, the Health and Safety at Work etc Act
 1974 and any other relevant legislation.


Using the Guide


15.     The principles referred to in paragraphs 7-13
above should be kept in mind by both ground
management and, where applicable, by the local
authority when applying the Guide to an individual
ground.     The Guide is an aid to professional
judgement and common sense, not a substitute.


16.     Although some of the safety standards are
likely to apply to all sports grounds however many
spectators are present, it is nevertheless important
to relate the Guide to the needs of each individual
grounds.    The required safety standard to be
attained should relate to the maximum number of
spectators who are to be admitted to the ground or
parts of it.    For example, a large football ground
with a maximum spectator capacity of tens of
thousands is likely to pose significant crowd
pressure risks particularly if it is full or nearly
full.    To accommodate such a cfowd safely may entail
substantial remedial work if it is proposed to
maximise the potential of the accommodation;


                            5
 alternatively, consideration might be given to
 accepting a much smaller number of spectators who,
 properly dispersed, could be accommodated safely
 without having to incur costly repairs or
 iterations.    Therefore the first step, using the
 Guide's criteria, is to assess how many spectators
 can be accommodated safely given the existing
 condition of the ground.       In other words, determine
 a safe ground capacity based on each viewing area,
 entry and exit route.   This requires properly
detailed plans drawn to scale (1:200) of the ground.
 [Annex A provides an example of the type of plan and
should be read in conjunction with Chapter 19.]


The problems


17.   There are essentially four types of safety
problem to be considered within a ground and its
immediate surroundings, all of which are inter­
related.


18.   Underfoot conditions: The first hazard is
tripping, falling etc by individuals which can not
only have serious consequences for the individual
concerned, but can lead to a serious incident
involving others.   This type of problem can be
remedied by proper care and maintenance; and
attention to the good building practice of the
ground.


19.   Crowd pressures: The second type involves crowd
pressures and is potentially the more serious.       When
large crowds are present and densities are high,
pressures build up within the crowd either through
motion or swaying which make it difficult, or even
impossible, for individuals to control their own
movements.   Under these conditions crowd pressures


                            6
 can escalate to a dangerous level and if a person
 stumbles or falls the crowd cannot adapt to avoid
 him or her or to stop to help.     Since this type of
 danger arises from crowd pressures its remedy lies
 in their removal or restraint within safe limits.
 These dangers arise particularly on terraces and in
 entry/exit routes.     Careful attention must be paid
 to avoid overcrowding, to restrain surges and
similar pressures on the terraces and to ensure free
movement throughout the entry/exit systems.


20.     Emergency evacuation: The third type of safety
problem cannot be divorced from the second and in
some ways is an extreme version of it.      The danger
arises from emergency situations which can develop
following, for example an outbreak of crowd disorder
      fire.   The orderly evacuation of large crowds may
under emergency conditions become a very serious
problem.


21.    Fire: the fourth is the risk from fire itself,
particularly where there is a large crowd in a
confined area of an elevated covered stand where
spectators are in the upper tiers of a building, the
materials and construction of which might in
themselves constitute a fire risk (see Chapter 13).


Overcoming the problems


22.    Good ground management:   The importance of good
ground management cannot be emphasised too strongly
(see Chapter 2).     Much of this Guide contains advice
which should form part of the general upkeep and
maintenance of a sports ground.     If followed it will
reduce or eliminate risks to spectators and in the
long term should prove cost effective by preventing
serious defects.     A well-maintained and well-run


                             7
 venue makes commercial sense and may attract more
 events and a greater number of spectators.


 23.    Improving safety by new design:     As mentioned
 in paragraph 10 above, new design work can provide
 an opportunity to enhance spectator safety and
 should be given the highest priority when deciding
 upon the design, layout, materials and loading of
 new buildings, or alterations in a ground.       Close
 attention should be paid to new and existing exits
 and exit routes, slip-resistant surfaces, lighting
 and ease of maintenance.       All parts of the viewing
areas should always have a clear unobstructed view
of the playing area and designs should take account
®f the need to facilitate effective stewarding,
which can plays an important role in controlling
crowd movement (see Chapter 16).


24.    New design work also offers the chance to
improve amenities and standards of comfort for
spectators.    Attention to decor and careful planning
of catering or other refreshment areas can encourage
spectators to arrive in good time, influence the use
of different ingress and egress routes and may
contribute towards improving crowd behaviour.       Where
segregation of spectators is a feature, special
attention is needed in order to ensure a good
standard of amenity is available in each segregated
part of the ground.


25.    Care and maintenance:     Although controlling
crowd numbers may serve to reduce some risks to an
acceptable level, remedial work is likely to be
necessary to overcome others.       Obvious defects such
as trip hazards (particularly at the head of stairs
or steps), loose or weak handrails on stairs, and
obstructed exits or exit routes, should be rectified


                            8
 as part of a continuous programme of remedial care
 and maintenance of a ground.      Structures should be
 sound (see Chapter 4) and inspected by suitably
qualified persons (see Chapter 5).       Design, layout
and signposting of entrances, exits, entry and exit
routes require particular attention so as to ensure
that they can safely cope with the number of
spectators who will use them either in normal
circumstances or in an emergency (see Chapter 7).
Similarly, the condition of terraces or viewing
slopes (see Chapter 9) and condition of correctly
sited crush barriers (see Chapter 10) are important
factors.     Broken, uneven terraces causes stumbling.
Barriers not only serve to break up crowd pressures
but also assist in controlling movement from the
terraces by regulating the rate of arrival at exits
to suit their capacity, and encouraging the
formation of queues so that spectators arrive at
exits in an orderly fashion.


26.     Fire precautions:    Proper precautions against
the risk of fire are vital (see Chapter 13).       Good
ground management is crucial in reducing or
eliminating the risk.       Accumulation of litter is a
prime potential source of fire but can be eliminated
by regular and frequent inspections, good
housekeeping, ground maintenance and safe provision
over the care and storage of flammable materials.
The nature and type of materials used in the
construction of covered areas and stands will
strongly influence the safety measures required in
them.    For example, in some circumstances
consideration may have to be given to restricting
the number of spectators and/or to the provision of
additional exits from the building if it is to
continue in use.




                              9
 CHAPTER 2


 2. MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITY


Effective ground management is an essential element
in achieving safety.     Management should constantly
look to improve safety standards.


27.   The responsibility for the safety of spectators
inside the ground lies at all times with the ground
operator ie those who stage the event and/or
administer the ground.    Local authority safety
officers, police and fire officers will help
management to discharge this responsibility and in
certain circumstances may require measures to be
taken to achieve reasonable safety standards.      This
does not however exonerate ground management from
its responsibility for the safety of its spectators.


28.   As part of the drive for success of the club,
team or individual event, senior management,
directors and board members must devote time, effort
and resources to safety management at the ground,
both in its day to day use or for any special event.
They should have a written safety policy known to
all staff and voluntary workers who may be involved
in ground operations.    They should require regular,
periodic reports on safety measures taken, progress
or others.   They should ensure that they are made
aware of details of any minor incidents (which might
suggest underlying problems) and the action taken to
rectify them.   Such details should be kept in
written form and be available for inspection.


29.   There should be an appointed safety officer who
should be of sufficient competence, status and


                           10
 authority effectively to take responsibility for
safety at the ground and be able to authorise and
supervise safety measures.       He or an appointed
deputy should be in attendance at a central control
point when an event takes place.      All staff should
know the location of this control point, who is in
charge of safety on the day in question and the line
of communication.


30.   There should be a drawn up programme of checks,
inspections, tests, personal training and remedial
work programmes so as to eliminate or minimise the
potential risks to spectators.      The safety officer
is responsible for ensuring that such inspections
are carried out on all structures, installations and
equipment etc so that they are safe and fit for the
purpose for which they were intended.      The results
of any remedial action, as and when taken, should be
recorded.     He must be given the resources to carry
out these tasks, for which he should be accountable
to the most senior management level or Board of
Directors to whom he should have the right of direct
access.


31.   Where restrictions on crowd numbers to parts of
the ground are required for safety reasons they must
be imposed and enforced.    Similarly, if a part of
the ground is required to be closed, for instance
because it is potentially unsafe for spectators this
must be done, and it must not be opened up as a
result of an "attractive" fixture or event, unless
measures have been taken beforehand to remove the
dangers which led to its closure in the first place
and approval given by the appropriate authority to
re-open it.




                            11
 32.    Management should ensure that structural fire
 protection of buildings is adequate, and that fire
warning systems are correctly installed and properly
maintained in accordance with manufacturers'
 instructions or British Standards.     Similarly,
suitable fire-fighting equipment must be provided
and maintained to the standards specified in this
Guide (see Chapter 13).


33.     Staff training, particularly for stewards, in
carrying out both their normal duties and ensuring
that they are aware of their role in an emergency
situation, should be given high priority.     All staff
should be informed in writing what their duties are,
how to effect them and from whom to seek advice if
in doubt.     The safety officer should also carry out
active supervision and organise emergency drills to
maintain standards (see Chapter 16.)


34.    General repair and maintenance should be
undertaken with spectator safety in mind; litter
should not be allowed to accumulate.     Minor repairs
should be quickly and properly carried out.


35.    A properly equipped and staffed First Aid room
and suitable medical facilities should be provided
(see Annex B) in consultation as necessary with the
local ambulance authority and local medical first
aid services.


36. A summary of management responsibilities is
contained below


       i.    Appoint a safety officer


       ii.   Ensure compliance with the terms and
             conditions of a safety certificate or


                            12
      other notice covering the safety at the
      ground.


iii. Draw up and keep up to date records and
      plans of the ground; to maintain the
      general fabric of the ground, and arrange
      an annual detailed inspection of the
      ground.


iv•   Arrange annual inspection of all crush
      barriers, handrails and ensure testing of
      a representative sample of any barriers
      and protection rails, keeping a record of
      their location and results of the tests.


v.    Maintain and test all electrical
      installations and, in accordance with the
      relevant British Standards, the systems
      for emergency lighting, communications and
      fire warning/detection, and fire-fighting
      equipment.


vi.   Draw up in consultation with the emergency
      services contingency plans, including
      arrangements with police, for stopping or
      delaying an event, for:


      a.   various emergency situations
           including fire;


      b.   possible crowd disturbance;


      c.   coping with the exceptionally large
           numbers of spectators arriving at the
           ground; and




                     13
      d.   the failure of any detection,
           warning, lighting or communications
           system or other equipment.


vii. Devise a clear system of communications
      inside and outside the ground.


viii.Take necessary fire prevention and
      precautions measures.


ix.   Consult the fire authority about emergency
      evacuation time; fire risk in all parts of
      the ground particularly in stands; fire­
      fighting equipment.


x.    Consult the police and emergency services
      on access for emergency vehicles.


xi.   Store safely and away from public areas
      any hazardous and flammable materials,
      combustible items, and any accumulations
      of combustible waste which cannot be
      cleared from the ground before the next
      event.


xii. Provide first aid facilities and first aid
      staff.


xiii.Consult with the police to arrange
      adequate policing and police facilities
      and ensure that, where the police are to
      be present at the ground, there is a
      clear, understanding of the division of
      duties and responsibility as between them
      and the management.




                     14
xiv. Recruit, train and deploy stewards and to
      organise and carry out emergency
      evacuation drills using those staff.


xv.   Staff any secured exit gates at all times
      when the public are in the ground, to
      ensure that they can be opened immediately
      from inside by anyone in an emergency.


x v i . Ensure that all gangways and exit routes
      are unobstructed and capable of being used
      to their full capacity at all times when
      the public are in the ground.


xvii.Provide directional flow, exit and
      emergency exit signs.


xviii.Before each event:


      a.   test exit doors and gates, and their
           locks if they are to be locked;


      b.   test lighting, communications and
           fire warning/detection systems; and


      c.   check the ground for any
           accumulations of combustible litter,
           especially below stands and in exit
           routes; and for any source of
           potential missiles.


      d.   check the operation of the
           turnstiles.


      e.   check that all £ntry/exit routes are
           clear of obstruction.




                     15
             f.    ensure that there are sufficient
                  stewards for the event.


      xix. After each event:


             a.   to carry out a general visual
                  inspection for signs of damage; and


             b.   to liaise with police so as to gain
                  full benefit from any debriefing
                  about crowd control.


      xx.    To keep records of:


             a.   attendance figures; and


             b.   all inspections and tests, any
                  defects noted and the remedial/other
                  action taken.


             c.   any accident or reported incident
                  which might have led to an accident.


37.   Management should ensure that details of all
consultations,    arrangements, plans etc between     them
and the     police and other emergency services are
notified to the relevant local authority if there is
a safety certificate issued in respect of the ground
or stand(s) within the ground.




                             16
 CHAPTER 3


 3.   PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES


Proper provision to accommodate safely people with
disabilities should be made at all grounds.


38.   The safety measure set in the Guide should not
be construed in such a way as to place undue
restrictions on people with disabilities.


People with impaired mobility


39.   Although it is unlikely that anyone whose
mobility is severely impaired will occupy standing
accommodations they will often wish to occupy seated
accommodation, perhaps with friends or relatives, in
stands.   Arrangements should therefore exist to meet
such wishes wherever it is possible to do so, for
example by the provision of wheelchair spaces within
the seated area, preferably in different parts so
that there is a choice of seating position.    Such
provision should take account of the sightlines
available from the allocated areas to ensure that
occupants have an unrestricted view.


40.   Wherever possible there should be more than one
ingress/egress for those with impaired mobility.
Although movement to and from accommodation at
ground level is easier for users of wheelchairs,
consideration should be given to the means by which
they can be accommodated on other levels without
prejudicing their safety or the safety of others.
                                 «



41.   Where a person leaves their wheelchair in order
to occupy a seat, provision should be made for the


                          17
 wheelchair to be readily accessible without it
 causing an obstruction in a gangway or exit route.
Those who remain in their wheelchair should not
obstruct the movement of others.


42.   Support services and facilities for disabled
people should also be available within the stand.
Toilet facilities should be provided.    Consideration
should be given to how refreshments might be made
available to those unable to leave their seats
unaided.


43.   New design work for stands should incorporate
guidance in BS 5588 Part 8 Code of Practice for
means of escape for disabled people.    Where, because
of constraints posed by existing buildings, it is
not possible or practicable to apply the Code fully,
alternative ways of meeting its objectives should be
sought.


44.   The arrangements described above should be in
addition to any special provision made for the
admission (often at pitch level) of vehicles used by
people with impaired mobility.   The location of such
vehicles should be agreed with the relevant safety
authority in order to ensure that access to the
ground by emergency vehicles and means of escape are
not compromised.


45.   Ramps which are to be used by wheelchair users
should conform to BS 5810.


Use of lifts in an emergency


46.   A lift should be used as -a means of escape from
a stand only [in the case of fire] if it is an
evacuation lift or firefighting lift operated under


                           18
the direction and control of an appointed steward
designated with specific responsibility for its use
in an evacuation using an agreed evacuation
procedure.   BS 5588 Part 8 recommendations should be
followed.


People with impaired vision


47.   Signposting (see paragraph 84) especially fire
or other safety signs, should be sited so that as
far as possible they can be easily seen and readily
distinguishable by those with impaired vision or
colour perception.   Advice is available from the
Royal National Institute for the Blind or the
National Federation of the Blind of the UK.


People with impaired hearing


48.   Although people with impaired hearing may
experience difficulty in hearing messages broadcast
on a system designed for those with normal hearing
(see Chapter 14) a hearing impairment does not mean
that in all cases a person is insensitive to sound
and that they do not have a sufficiently clear
perception of all conventional alarm signals.     Where
this is not the case it is reasonable to expect
spectators who have been alerted to prepare for
evacuation to warn those with impaired hearing.




                          19
 CHAPTER 4


 4.   GENERAL FABRIC AND STRUCTURAL MATTERS


 To meet safety requirements, all components,
 installations and structures, eg terraces, stands,
stairs, barriers and pylons, should have the
strength and durability, and be maintained in such
condition and arranged in such a manner as to
perform properly their required functions.


49.   The design and construction of buildings and
installations should be in accordance with good
engineering and building practice, as set out in the
relevant British Standard specifications and codes
of practice.     They should be properly maintained and
repaired by suitable qualified persons.     Specialist
advice from appropriately qualified engineers
belonging to recognised Institution should be sought
to assess the safety and strength of load-bearing
elements in buildings and installations such as
crush barriers,    (see Chapter 10) brick/block walls
etc (see Chapter 9, paragraph 137).


50.   When walls, including perimeter walls, and
fences are to withstand crowd pressures, they should
be designed and maintained to withstand such
pressures safely and allowance should be made for
forces simultaneously and independently induced by
other factors eg wind forces or attached
installations.


51.   All parts of the ground used by the general
public, and especially the exit routes, should have
minimum headroom of not less than 2 metres.     Exit




                           20
 routes should wherever possible have a headroom of
2.4 metres.


52.   Precautions should be taken to prevent people
from climbing on to roofs, pylons, hoardings and
other structures.     Where possible such structures
should be fitted with unclimbable devices eg stout
barriers or close-boarded enclosures.     Spikes,
barbed wire etc should only be installed above the
minimum headroom specified in paragraph 49 above and
preferably at a minimum height of 2.4 metres from
the base.     Spikes, or other similar devices should
not be installed on pitch perimeter fences.     Neither
should such fences have sections overhanging or
returning inwards towards spectators,     (see Chapter
18).


Electrical installation/wiring


53.   All electrical installations should comply with
the current edition of the Regulations of the
Institution of Electrical Engineers, or have been
awarded a certificate of satisfaction from a
chartered electrical engineer.


54.   [For new installations a diagram of the main
electrical circuit should be fixed in a position
easily accessible to the technical staff.     All main
switches or circuit locaters should be clearly
labelled to indicate the circuits which they
control.    Fuse-ways of such circuits of distribution
boards should also be clearly labelled.


55.   All cables and conductors of wiring systems
used for low voltage circuits tof permanent
electrical installations should be enclosed
throughout in a protective covering of material


                           21
which has sufficient strength to resist mechanical
damage - for example armoured cables, mineral
insulated sheathed cables protected by screwed metal
conduit or trunking complying with BS 4678 Part 1 or
Part 4, or rigid PVC conduit complying with relevant
British Standards.


56.   The base of any floodlighting tower should be
earthed in accordance with BS 6651 which also
contains advice on bonding and earthing for
lightening protection.]


57.   Where the natural lighting in any section of
the ground accessible to the public is deficient,
adequate artificial lighting should be provided.      If
the ground is to be used after dark, all parts
accessible to the public should be provided with
means for lighting adequate to enable them to see
their way into, within and out of the ground.      These
provisions are particularly important in relation to
entry and exit routes and stairways used by the
public.   Advice on emergency lighting equipment
should conform to BS 5266: Part 1 (see Chapter 15).




                          22
 CHAPTER 5


 5.   INSPECTIONS AND TESTS


 Inspections and tests should be carried out by
 suitably qualified persons on behalf of management
to ensure that the safety standards of the Guide are
maintained.


58.   A detailed inspection of the ground, including
all components and installations, should be arranged
annually by the management.     It should be carried
out by a person with a relevant and recognised
professional qualification, and experience of
inspecting existing structures.


59.   Engineers commissioned to assess structural
safety of buildings may find the appraisal
techniques recommended by the Institution of
Structural Engineers (ISE) in the "Appraisal of
Existing Structures", published in 1980, of
assistance.   Hard and fast rules on the extent to
which a structural appraisal is necessary for
individual buildings are difficult to lay down: much
will depend upon the type of installation, its size,
condition, materials used in construction and
standard of maintenance.   A full appraisal is
however unlikely to be necessary unless defects are
identified or in evidence from the analysis of
information on the structure and visual inspection.


60.   Inspection and testing of crush barriers (see
also Chapter 10) should be carried out in accordance
with Annex C of this Guide.     When the guidelines are
first applied to a particular ground, a
representative sample of barriers of all types from


                           23
                                                    /
 all areas of the ground should be selected for
 testing.   Thereafter testing of barriers should take
 place every 4 years unless from visual inspection
doubts are raised as to their strength/integrity, in
which case they should be retested.   Testing should
be carried out by or under the supervision of a
suitably qualified engineer, ie a structural or
civil engineer.


61.   Warning, detection, lighting and public address
systems are vulnerable to vandalism, and this should
be borne in mind when installing them.   All
automatic fire detection and fire warning, emergency
lighting and public address systems should be tested
24 hours before an event, in accordance with the
methods laid down in BS 5839: Part 1 and BS 5266:
Part 1 respectively.   Turnstiles should be tested to
make sure they are in proper working order.     In case
any of these systems is not operating properly and
cannot be fixed before the event, contingency plans
should be formulated, in consultation with the
emergency services, for the use of acceptable
substitute measures or (if necessary) the closure of
any areas of spectator accommodation until the fault
is remedied.


62.   Before an event, and a major soccer grounds in
particular, steps should be taken to ensure that the
ground does not contain any accessible items which
could be used as missiles (eg piles of bricks,
stones etc).


63.   The ground should be inspected before and after
each event to ensure that there are no accumulations
of combustible waste and that 'any hazardous
materials (if essential to be stored) are safely
stored well away from public areas.


                          24
64.   Following each event, a general visual
inspection of the ground should be made for signs of
damage which might create a potential danger to the
public.     Particular attention should be paid to the
condition of terraces, viewing slopes and stairways.
Crush barriers and balustrades should be examined
for deformation of any other overt signs of
weakness.    The fire precautions measures should also
be inspected for damage, and alarm and other
electrical installations should be checked to ensure
compliance with the relevant British Standards.
Turnstiles should be checked for damage which might
impair their efficiency.


65.   Records should be kept and maintained of all
inspections and tests together with a record of
remedial actions taken.     The required level of
competence of those carrying out the test should be
specified and the record of the results certified by
those carrying out the work together with their
qualification and status.


66.   Annex D provides a tabulation of tests and
inspections and their frequency of operation.




                            25
CHAPTER 6


6. INGRESS


The admission of spectators should be accurately
monitored and controlled in order to ensure that
overcrowding does not occur.    Spectators should be
admitted at a rate which is compatible with the
dispersal arrangements for them inside the ground.


67.   Where entry to a ground or parts of it is
controlled by turnstiles, these, by their number and
location, control not only the rate of admission
but, to a large extent, the dispersal of spectators
within a ground to the particular sections.
Turnstiles should be of such numbers as to admit
spectators at a rate whereby no unduly large crowds
are kept waiting for admission and yet at no faster
rate than the arrangements for distributing
spectators within the ground permit.


68.   Each section should be served by its own
metered turnstiles which keep a tally of the number
of spectators admitted to that section.    Where a
section is served by a bank or banks of turnstiles,
arrangements must ensure that the metering system is
capable of recording the total of all the turnstiles
or that the total can be quickly available at any
given time and conveyed without delay to the central
control so that appropriate action can be taken
once a pre-determined figure (ie a figure which is
less than the capacity for the section) has been
reached.    This is especially important if a capacity
or near capacity crowd is expected or if a
particular section of a ground is known to be




                           26
popular or likely to accommodate an unusually high
number of spectators for a particular event.


69.   Intercommunication systems and centralised
computer monitoring should be installed [in the 1st
and 2nd Division of the English Football League,
Premier Division of the Scottish Football League and
grounds used for international or other major
sporting events],


70.   The correlation between each viewing area in
the ground and the turnstiles serving it should be
as such to ensure that all spectators intended to be
admitted to that viewing area can pass through the
turnstiles within one hour.      If that cannot be
achieved, the capacity of that viewing area should
be reduced accordingly or the number of turnstiles
for that part of the ground increased (see also
Chapter 19).


71.   The maximum rate at which spectators can pass
through turnstiles will depend on a variety of
factors such as the design and age of the equipment,
the ability of the operator and the ticketing
arrangements.    The rate of admission at each
turnstile will therefore depend greatly upon local
circumstances.   The through-put or flow-rate through
turnstiles should therefore be measured at least
once a year and recorded.     Where a recorded flow-
rate is less than 660 persons per turnstile per hour
the actual figure should be used for calculation
pruposes of paragraph 68 above.     The maximum upper
figure for calculation purposes should not exceed
660 persons per hour.


72.   Entrances to viewing areas should, where
practicable, be designed in such a way and so


                            27
 located as to allow for the even distribution of
 spectators and to prevent local pressure building
up.   Attention should also be given to the siting of
 turnstiles so that the flow of people from them to
 the viewing area(s) is, so far as possible, evenly
distributed to the entrances to the viewing
accommodation.   Where this distribution is uneven
and gives rise to congestion at an entrance
consideration will have to be given to changing the
turnstile arrangements or siting in order to
encourage better use of under-used entrances.
Additional or alternative measures should also be
taken: for example improved sign-posting and
increased stewarding.


73.   Entrances and entry routes should not be
obstructed.   Entry and exit routes are often common
to each other and in such cases the considerations
which apply to exit routes therefore apply also to
entry routes (see paragraphs 85-89 of Chapter 7).
Amenities such as refreshment kiosks or toilets
should be located away from the area of the
turnstiles, entrances and entry/exit routes.


74.   Clear, comprehensive signposting must be
provided in order to show the routes to different
parts of the ground.    Tickets (where issued) should
clearly identify the location of the accommodation
for which it has been issued.       Information on the
ticket should correlate with the information
provided both inside and outside the ground.
Retained ticket stubs should [as far as possible]
contain information which will help guide spectators
once they are inside the ground.
                                M




75.   Where possible, programmes should include a
plan of the ground indicating the entry/exit routes


                           28
 to or from different parts of the ground and their
destination.   Dangerous overcrowding can be caused
if spectators are able to force their way into a
ground already full or near to full capacity by
scaling or breaking through boundary walls or fences
or the gates in them.     To avoid this danger such
walls, fences and gates should be of appropriate
height and strength and should not provide the
opportunity for hand or foot holds which might
assist climbing.     They should be regularly inspected
[not less than twice-yearly].


76.   Installation of closed circuit television
should be considered in order to assist in the
monitoring of crowd densities outside the ground and
throughout the ingress/egress routes (see also
Chapter    ).


77.   Contingency plans should be made to deal with
situations where the available entrances at a ground
have proved insufficient to stop unduly large crowds
from gathering outside.    Local knowledge of the
ground, crowd patterns and advice from the police
should be taken into account in drawing up
contingency plans.    Opening additional or under­
used entrances may have to be considered.    However,
under no circumstances should there be uncontrolled
admission into the ground.




                           29
C HAPTER 7


7.    EGRESS


There should be a smooth, unimpeded passage through
an exit route and a free flow of people from one
element to the next until they reach the boundary of
the ground.


78.   It is generally recognised that a period of
great risk to crowd safety is at the time of
leaving.     Pressures can be set up within a departing
crowd; such pressures can and must be contained and
controlled by careful attention to the detailed
design of barriers (Chapter 10), stairways (Chapter
8), gangways (Chapter 9) and exits.


79.   Additional consideration which must be given to
egress from covered stands and seated accommodation
is given in paragraphs      of Chapter 11.
[Calculation of the exit systems is contained in
Chapter 19 and paragraphs 85-89 below.]


80.   A smooth free flow through an exit route to the
outside is best achieved by controlling the crowd
flow at the beginning of the exit route, so that
departing spectators are held back in a relatively
safe place eg on the terrace, enabling access to the
exit route at a calculated rate.    That is to say the
width of the first part of the exit route leading
from the terrace or other enclosure should have the
same or lower capacity than any subsequent element.
The exit route will then be able to discharge people
at a rate compatible with that at which they enter
into the route.




                            30
 81.   Where deviations in design or construction from
 the recommended guidelines are such as to create a
manifest danger, that section of the exit system
 should be closed until remedial action has been
 taken, and a reduction made accordingly in the
spectator capacity of the section of the ground it
serves ie the exit route is excluded from the
capacity calculations [see paragraph          below.]   Any
exit route which contains an element less than 1
metre wide should be excluded from the calculation.


82.    Exit systems should ensure that in the event of
an emergency which blocks the usual exit route
spectators will be able to use an alternative exit
route including forward evacuation on to the pitch
which will normally be regarded as a place of safety
or form part of the emergency evacuation route, see
Chapter 13 paragraph     ].


83.    There should be no "funnelling" effect causing
people to converge on a narrower means of access or
egress.   This will slow down the rate at which
people can pass through the entire exit system and
pack more closely together.        However a narrowing in
the exit route may be acceptable when it is preceded
by an open space or "reservoir area" where the
holding capacity is sufficient to contain the
spectators held up because of the difference in the
flow rate into and out of the reservoir area (but
see also paragraph 82 below).       The capacity of the
reservoir areas should be calculated using the
appropriate flow rate given in Chapter 20 and the
recommended exit time given in paragraph 83 below.
A packing density of 40 persons per 10 square metres
of the area available for standing within the
reservoir area is the maximum for safety.




                              31
 Arrangements should be such as to prevent this being
 exceeded.


 84.     Reservoir areas should be avoided wherever
 possible and should not be permitted within 45
 metres of any combustible building within the ground
       ® timber stand, or within 15 metres of any non-
 combustible building within the ground.


 Egress time


 85.     Some research has indicated that when it takes
more than about 7 minutes to vacate an area of
terraced spectator accommodation, the crowd flow
tends to become turbulent.       In these conditions the
rate of flow may be reduced and individuals can lose
control over their own movements which may; thereby
increase the potential for accidents.      Although
spectators normally leave seated accommodation in a
more leisurely fashion exits from each area of
spectator accommodation whether seated or standing
should be designed and constructed so that all
spectators can leave that area and pass into a free
flowing exit route system within a notional time of
8 minutes or less.     See Chapter ........


86.     Egress time will, in some circumstances, be no
different to the emergency evacuation time (see
Chapter 13).     This is because the exit routes
available for use by spectators in an emergency will
be identified to those used by them in normal
circumstances — for example the upper tiers of a
stand.     In such circumstances if the capacity of the
exit routes is considered insufficient for
evacuation purposes the numbed'of spectators
occupying the accommodation will have to reflect
that exit route capacity.


                            32
 87.    Only where additional exits or exit routes, not
 normally used by spectators, can be made available
 to them (usually where the playing area is
accessible and used as a place of safety) is it
possible for the egress time to govern the capacity
of the accommodation.


Signposting


88.    A comprehensive system of signposting which
clearly indicates routes to the various parts of the
ground, and to exits from the ground, should be
provided.     Signs relating to fire safety should be
in accordance with BS 5499: Part 1: 1984, and other
safety signs (eg first aid facilities) should be in
accordance with BS 5378: Part 1: 1980.       Exit gates
themselves should be clearly signposted, preferably
using illuminated signs in accordance with BS 2560
or BS 4218.     Directional signs should be provided to
encourage crowds in any particular section to flow
in one direction when leaving the ground and should
provide information on the destination of the exit
route (eg north side car-park, High Street) so as to
provide confidence to people using them, specially
if they are evacuating the premises.


Exit routes


89.    Exit routes should be kept clear of
obstructions.    In particular, no catering, sales or
toilet facility should be situated in such a way
that it, or any queue it attracts, obstructs an exit
route.


90.    The minimum width for any section of an exit
routes should be 1.1 metres.     However, the required


                            33
width for any particular section is dependent on the
crowd flow it will be required to carry.     (For
capacities of exit routes, see Chapter 19,
paragraphs        ).


91.   Where there is a simple exit route, ie a direct
passage from the accommodation area to the exit gate
from the ground, every part of that route should be
able to accommodate the flow from the terrace or
stand exit.


92.   For a more complex exit system which combines a
number of exit routes and/or offers a choice of
alternative routes to exits, the system should be
analysed in the form of a network in order to check
that the capacity of the exit from the terrace or
the stand is sufficient to ensure a free flow of
spectators to the various exits from the ground.
Where branching of routes gives spectators a choice
of paths, the proportion of the crowd likely to use
each path should be derived from local knowledge, eg
the exit closest to a railway or bus station may be
likely to attract a higher proportion of spectators.


93.   Grounds which have complex exit systems
described in paragraph 88 should have illustrative
plans of the network system which serve each
section, identifying the capacity of the routes
within the system and clearly showing them on the
plans.   These plans should be kept with the drawings
of the section of the ground to which they relate.
Any changes to the ground which affect the
entry/exit routes should be identified on the
network plan.   Examples of [fictitious] network
plan[s] for normal egress is/are at Annex D.




                          34
                                                    t
Exit doors


94.     All exit doors on an exit route should always
be capable of opening outwards     so that crowds can
escape in an emergency.     This is particularly
important for doors within covered stands and at the
foot of stairways.


95.All doors on an exit route should     be secured   in
the    fully open position before the end of play.
When open, no door should obstruct any gangway
passage, stairway or landing.


96.   All exit gates from the ground should open
outwards.     Where this is impracticable for existing
doors, eg because it would cause an obstruction on a
public highway, the gates should be resited (ie put
further back) within the exit route they serve, or
provision made for two-way opening.    Where
practicable exit gates should be sited adjacent to
entrances.    There should be no obstructions eg no
changes in level etc at exit doors.


97.   Sliding or roller-shutter gates should not be
used because they are incapable of being opened when
pressure is exerted in the direction of crowd flow
and have mechanisms or runways which are vulnerable
to jamming.


98.   Where exit gates have to be secured against
outside intruders they should be fitted with panic-
type bolts, but all exit gates, unless secured in an
open position, should be staffed at all times while
the ground is used by the public and be capable of
being opened immediately from inside by anyone in an
emergency.




                            35
99.   Facilities should be provided in order to eject
anyone whose presence is unwanted and to enable
people to leave the ground at any time.   For this
purpose a number of reversible turnstiles or,
preferably, pass doors, so operated as to limit the
opening to the passage to one person at a time,
should be provided.   Reversible turnstiles are not
acceptable as a means of escape from a ground and
should not form any part of, or be installed into,
the normal or emergency exit system of the ground.




                         36
 CHAPTER 8


 8.   STAIRWAYS AND RAMPS


 The disposition and construction of stairways and
 ramps should be such as to help provide a smooth and
 unimpeded ingress and egress for spectators under
all conditions set out in Chapters 5 and 6.


 TOO. For the purpose of this section the term
 "stairway" has the meaning given to it in the
Glossary (Annex E) and is distinct from a radial
gangway on a terrace or in a stand.       Guidelines on
terrace gangways is given in Chapter 9, paragraphs
126-133 and for stands in Chapter 11, paragraphs



101. Movement on stairways, especially downwards
poses a considerable potential risk to crowds both
in normal circumstances such as at the end of an
event, or in an emergency.       The effects of
stumbling, pushing and jostling, and congestion are
potentially dangerous if, as a result, the crowd
suddenly surge forward.     Likewise, if sections of
the crowd decide, without warning, to change
direction the resultant turmoil can have disastrous
consequences.   Steep ramps can also cause or
exacerbate uncontrolled forward movement and lead to
an accident.


102. Stairways should therefore minimise hazards by
having uniformity of width, going and risers, secure
footing, not too steep a gradient, and a width
sufficient to allow free movement but narrow enough
to provide everyone with access to a handrail.      The
head of the stairway should be so designed that flow
onto it is uniform across its width and crowd


                            37
 pressures cannot easily be generated.    Flights
 should not provide long, uncontrolled paths down
which crowd pressures and surges can be created.
Adequate separation should be provided between
channels and multi-channel stairway arrangements so
that there is no overspill from one channel to
another.


Disposition of stairways


103. Stairways should be carefully positioned to
take advantage of natural light and ventilation.
Where the natural lighting is deficient the stairway
should be adequately lit by artificial light (see
Chapter 4, paragraph 55 and Chapter 15, paragraphs
   for emergency lighting).


Construction of stairways


104. The width, rise and going of the steps should
be uniform within each stairway, and should ideally
be uniform throughout the entire exit system.


105. Stair treads should be provided with slip-
resistant surfaces and durable edgings.    Adequate
drainage should be provided.


106. Open risers should not be used.


107. On any stairway the preferred going of treads
should be 305 mm but not less than 280 mm; and
preferred height of risers should be 150 mm but not
more than 190 mm.


Stairways should:


     i.   be without winders;


                            38
      ii.   be in flights of not more than 16 or fewer
            than 3 steps; and


      iii. not have more than 2 successive flights
            without a turn, and, if there are more
            than 12 steps in a flight, should not have
            more than one flight without a turn.


108. The going of the landing between flights should
not be less than the width of the section or channel
of the flight.


109. Protection should be provided on both sides of
all stairs and landings.    Where next to open wells,
or spaces, such protection should be enclosed,     in
accordance with Building Regulation requirements,
and should be not less than 1.1 metres in height
(measured vertically from the centre of the step, or
the surface of the landing).    The protection should
have a strength equivalent to that of the crush
barriers of the weaker type, described in Chapter
10.   (ie 3.4 kN/metre width design force, 4.1
kN/metre width test load.)


110. Every person on a stairway should have access
to a handrail.   The minimum width of a stairway
should be 1.1 metres with stairways wider than 1.8
metres being divided as far as possible into
channels having a width of between 1.1 metres and
1.65 metres (see example at Figure ).   The strength
of the handrails (including supports) used to divide
a stairway into channels should be as described in
Chapter 10 i.e. 3.4 kN/metre width design force or
4.3 kN/metre width test load for handrails at right
angles to the direction of the crowd flow; 2.2 kN
metre width design force or 2.7 kN/metre width test


                           39
load for handrails parallel to the direction of the
flow.


Figure


Examples of division of stairways


A       5' staircase (1.525 m)




Notes


No centre rail considered desirable because stairway
width is under 1.65 metres.


Handrails at each side should project at least
300 nun.


Flow rate calculation reflects actual width


1.525 m x 40 = 111
.55




                            40
B       7' staircase (2.135 metres)




Notes


Consideration given here to the option of dividing
the staircase into two sections of 1.0675 m.       This
is less than the recommended minimum of 1.1 but in
certain circumstances may be judged perferable to
having no centre rail at all.     Factors to take into
consideration would include use of staircase (ie
whether or not heavily loaded) its length, number of
risers and landings, number of winders.


Handrails should project at least 300 nun.


Flow rate calculation      1.0675 x 40 x 2 = 155
                            .55




                            41
 C     12' staircase (3.66 m)




A 12' staircase divided into 3 channels of 1.22
metres each.


Handrails should project at least 300 nun at each
end.


Flow rate calculation      1.22 x 40 x 3 = 266
                           .55



111. Handrails should project not more than 100 nun
and should be provided on both sides of all
stairways, steps and landings at a height of not
less than 840 nun (measured vertically form the
centre of the step or the surface of the landing).
All handrails should extend by at least 300 nun
beyond the top and bottom of any stairway or ramp.


Access to stairways


112. Access to the head of the stairways should be
controlled along the following lines to ensure a
free flow of spectators.


113. Where a stairway is divided into channels the
access should be designed to secure a uniform flow
down each channel.


                           42
114. The approach to the head of the stairs should
be level and should be so arranged that the
spectators converge on the stairway from the front
and/or the sides only.     There should be no approach
from behind, involving movement around the ends of
the balustrades or side walls of the stairway,
except where this approach is already controlled by
physical means such as by the gangways in the seated
areas of the stand.


115. The extent of the approach in the direction of
the stairway should not be       less than 1.1 metres and
preferably not more than 3       metres.


Figure       Examples of an approach(s) to the head of
             a staircase


116. Where restrictive elements such as barriers or
gateways are installed in the approach from the
terrace to a stairway in order to meet the foregoing
provisions, the total width of the passage formed by
these elements should not be more than two-thirds
the minimum width of the stairway.         This is to
accommodate the slower flow rate down a staircase as
compared with the flow rate on flat areas and
through portals (see Chapter 20).


117.     For an application of these principles to a
multiple    stairway leading direct from a terrace, see
Figures     and


Figure      Exits attracting spectators from higher up
            the terrace should be protected by
            barriers so that     spectators are forced to
            pass around them and approach from the
            side.


                            43
Discharge from stairways


118. All exit stairways should discharge either:


        i.    at ground level and lead directly to a
              place of safety* in the open air; or


        ii.   on to walkways or concourses of adequate
              dimensions at any level provided these
              also lead directly to a place of safety in
              the open air.


*       In Scotland 'place of safety' is a defined term
        in the Scottish Building Regulations.


Fire Protection


119. This is dealt with in Chapter 13, paragraphs


Ramps


120. The gradient should preferably be constant and
not broken by steps.


121. The maximum gradient acceptable will depend on
the particular ramp's length, purpose and usage but
a ramp subject to heavy crowd flow should not exceed
a gradient of 1 in 10.


122. Ramps installed for wheelchair users should
conform to BS 5810 (see also Chapter 3 on provision
for people with disabilities).




                            44
 CHAPTER 9


 9.   TERRACES AND VIEWING SLOPES


Arrangements should be made to encourage the even
distribution of the crowd on the terraces to provide
ease of ingress and egress; to control and
facilitate movement, particularly if a local
emergency should arise during the event; and to
prevent the build up of pressures from reaching
dangerous proportions.


123. In addition to the incidental dangers of
standing for long periods on steep terraced slopes,
crowds are subject to excessive pressures generated
by spectators straining to see the event, by
excitement, or by surging deliberately induced by a
certain type of spectator.


124. Failure to provide spectators with an
unobstructed view invites them to stretch and
strain, and so generates dangerous pressures within
the crowd.


125. Terraces are recognised as presenting a special
safety problem especially at football grounds.     The
following guidance is therefore aimed mainly at
football stadia but can be applied to any ground
where standing terraces or viewing slopes are used
for accommodating spectators.


Terrace steps


126. A terrace step should not be less than 280 mm
or more than 380 mm wide.    The'preferred dimension
is between 355 mm and 380 mm.




                            45
 127. The height of risers should be between 75 nun
 and 180 nun.    75 mm is related to the minimum width
of 280 mm.      If the riser height is greater than 180
mm, a crush barrier should be provided at the top of
the riser.


128. Excessive variations in the gradient of a
terrace should be avoided.       Gradients steeper than 1
in 2 could be dangerous [and should not form part of
any new design work].


129. The surface of terrace steps should be even and
of a slip-resistant material.      Adequate drainage
should be provided to prevent rainwater causing
deterioration.


Gangways


130. For the purpose of this section the term
'radial gangway' has the meaning given to it in the
Glossary [Annex E ] .   A radial gangway whether or not
stepped should not contain winders and is not
automatically subject to the requirements of
paragraph which relates to stairways.


131. Gangways, both radial and lateral are the means
by which spectators are channelled in an orderly way
to viewing areas or the vomitory exits which begin
the exit route(s) from the terrace or stand.      Siting
of gangways, together with crush barriers (see
Chapter 10) and barriers governing the flow at the
head of stairways (see paragraphs        Chapter 8) and
handrails dividing stairways (see paragraphs 106-
107 Chapter 8) should be designed to provide (as far
as possible) a uniform flow of'spectators to each of
the vomitory exits.




                            46
                                                       *
 132. All gangways should be painted a conspicuous
colour and spectators should be informed by signs
and other means (for example in programmes and by
the public address system) that no standing is
allowed in them (see point xvi Chapter 2).     Where
necessary stewards should be used to enforce the
instruction.


133. Every spectator on the terraces should be
within 12 metres of a gangway or exit, so that they
can move quickly on to exit routes in normal
circumstances or in the event of emergency.    This
may be achieved by a pattern of gangways (not less
than 1.1 metres wide) linked to the exit system.


134. Spectators should be prevented from standing in
lateral gangways because this disrupts free movement
about the ground (or within sections of it).
Spectators on the terrace steps behind the gangway
may also have their view obstructed, which will
cause them to stretch and strain, and so generate
dangerous pressures within the crowd.   Spectators
would be discouraged from standing in these gangways
if they were sunk approximately 150 mm and if crush
barriers were provided behind but not immediately in
front of them.   Gangways should not disrupt viewing
and should not create a trip hazard.


135. Spectators should also be prevent from standing
in radial gangways.   Here again movement on the
gangway is obstructed by the presence of spectators
using it to view the activity on the playing area.
Moreover radial gangways are often relatively long
and uncontrolled downward paths through terraces and
spectators standing in them are not protected by
crush barriers in the event of a sudden movement
forward.   Although difficult to do so it is


                          47
essential that radial gangways are kept clear. It
may be helpful to sink them approximately 150 mm
where possible to interrupt an otherwise
continuously descending gangway by turns along
lateral gangways.


136. Balustrading at the foot of radial gangways
should be as strong as crush barriers of the
stronger type, ie, 5.0 kN/metre width design force,
or 6.0 kN/metre width test load (see also Chapter
10).


137. The going of a radial gangway should be uniform
and surfaces should be slip resistant.     Step
dimensions should be compatible with those for the
terrace which they serve (see paragraph 122 above).



Division of spectator accommodation


138. A ground should be divided into sections to
prevent potentially hazardous migrations by
spectators which might cause dangerous overcrowding.
Each section of a ground must have its own limit of
safe capacity (see Chapter 19) and be served by
turnstiles or other arrangements which keep a tally
of the number of people admitted (see Chapter 6).
Each section of a ground, for example, each end or
side, should be self-contained with its own
entrances, exits and toilet/refreshment facilities.
For grounds used by football league clubs in
particular there should be no access from one such
major section to another except in an emergency.


139. Sporting events such as greyhound racing
spectators may need to move freely between different
parts of the ground and this should be borne in mind


                         48
when considering access to and from the sections of
the ground and when considering the need for
subdivisions of sections in paragraph 137 below.
140. Other sports, including Rugby Union and Rugby
League, also frequently allow the freedom of
movement for spectators.     The advantage of this
arrangements is that it provides spectators with an
opportunity to disperse throughout the ground in a
way which avoids concentrations of the crowd.
Grounds may nevertheless still have their popular
areas.     Considerable care is therefore needed to
ensure that any concentration of spectators does not
exceed the safe capacity for the particular area in
question.    Well trained stewards can be valuable in
checking, monitoring and marshalling of spectators
at such grounds.     In cases where mobility of
spectators is a feature of the event, overall
calculated packing density for standing (see Chapter
 ) should be below the maximum of 47 persons per 10
square metres.


141. Each of the major sections should be subdivided
by such means as gangways and crush barriers,
arranged so as to minimise the sway and surge of
spectators and to discourage movement throughout the
section.    If a section of a terrace or viewing slope
is sub-divided into smaller sections by structural
means such as fences or railings, arrangements at
the ground must be such as to ensure that these sub­
divisions cannot be filled to beyond their safe
limit (see also Chapter          paragraph   ).


142. Railings, fences etc dividing sections of the
ground should be of the strength of the crush
barriers, as should handrails dividing stairways
into channels as appropriate, described in table 2
of Chapter 10.    Brick/block and similar solid


                            49
 structures lacking sufficient mass or tensile
 strength are poorly suited to withstand horizontal
 pressures, and where used to divide spectator
 accommodation, should be subject to regular
 structural appraisal by appropriately qualified
persons (see Chapter 4).


Crush barriers


143. Detailed advice on crush barriers is given in
Chapter 10.


Viewing slopes (ie non-stepped sloping areas
providing standing accommodation for spectators)


144. The surface of this form of terrace should be
covered with a slip-resistant material, eg packed
ash, and should be even and properly drained.


145. The desirable maximum gradient for a viewing
slope is 1 in 6 (ie 9.5 ).      Note: this is different
to the stepped terraced gradient quoted in paragraph
94).   Viewing slopes with any steeper gradient
should have continuous crush barriers between
gangways.


146. The spacing of crush barriers should be the
same as for those on terracing (see Chapter 10).


Terrace to touchline distance


147. To prevent undue crowd pressures generated by
spectators stretching and straining for an
unobstructed view, it is desirable to provide a
minimum distance between the front of the terrace
and the playing area of the pitch.




                           50
148. The minimum recommended distance between the
two is 3 metres where the terrace gradient is 30° or
steeper.   Where the gradient is shallower than this,
it may be advisable to increase this distance so as
to enable spectators to obtain a clear view.




                         51
CHAPTER 10


10.      CRUSH BARRIERS AND HANDRAILS


Many of the hazards arising from crowd pressure on
terraces can be eliminated by provision of well
constructed, correctly positioned and properly
mounted crush barriers which positively control and
contain crowd movement.



Dimensions and Design Features


149. In order to locate the top rail against that
part of the body most able to tolerate pressure the
height of crush barriers should be between 1.02
metres and 1.12 metres above the nosing of the step
immediately behind the barrier, with a preferred
height of 1.1 metres [see Figure          ].


150. Crush barriers should be designed so that there
are no sharp projections or edges.        Although a
barrier with a top rail of 50 mm diameter tube has
been favoured at many sports grounds, research has
shown that there would be advantages in the use of a
flat rail of 100 mm vertical depth.


Spacing of Crush Barriers


151. The maximum spacing of crush barriers will be
dependent on the gradient of the terrace or viewing
slope.     Paragraphs    -        below give
recommendations for the spacing and strength of
crush barriers.




                             52
 152. Ideally, crush barriers should be provided
 along the full width of a terrace, with gaps only at
 the radial gangways.


 153. Where barriers are not continuous between
radial gangways, the alignment of gaps in successive
rows of barriers on a terrace should form an angle
of less than 60° to the barriers.    There must be no
more than 2 consecutive gaps in any line of gaps.
 (See figure       overleaf).




Figure    Arrangement of gaps between crush barriers



154. Where there are gaps in the line of crush
barriers these should be at least 1.1 metres and not
more than 1.4 metres in width.


155. Column A in Table 1 opposite provides the
maximum distances between barriers conforming to the
greater strength requirements of crush barriers as
described above;    column B provides the maximum


                            53
       distances between barriers conforming to the lesser
       strength requirements.      Interpolation may be made
      between these figures.       The distinction previously
      made between 'peak' viewing areas and other areas
      has been removed.


TABLE 1




                                                 Maximum horizontal
                                                 distance between barriers

Terrace Gradient


                    Step riser:    Step width:          A        B



05°            ie         1   in        11.4           5. 0m    3. 3m

10°                       1   in        5.7           4. 3m     2. 9m

15°                       1   in        3.7           3. 8m     2. 6m
o
<N
O




                          1   in        2.7           3. 4m     2. 3m

25°                     1     in        2.1           3.1m      2.1m
u>
  o
o




                        1     in        1.7           2. 9m     1 .9m




      Strength of Crush Barriers and Handrails


      156. The structural integrity pf crush barriers is a
      major factor in ensuring safety and a 25%
      representative sample from each part of the ground


                                   54
should be tested annually (see Chapter      ).   All
barriers should also be visually inspected each year
for signs of wear, distortion, corrosion or other
signs of weakness.   If from such inspections and the
records of earlier inspections and tests, there is
any doubt as to the integrity of a barrier it should
be tested.   This test should be in addition to the
25% representative sample.


157. Existing crush barriers and handrails should be
capable of resisting the forces indicated in the
existing test load columns of Table 2 overleaf when
applied in a test as described in Annex     .    Where
existing crush barriers and handrails fail to meet
these test conditions, they should be replaced or
strengthened in such a way as to do so.   Barriers
and handrails so strengthened should be retested in
accordance with Annex


158. New crush barriers or handrails should be
designed to resist safely a horizontal force as
indicated in the " design force" column in Table 2
applied as a static load acting on the top rail of
the barrier or handrail at right angles to the
longitudinal axis.   The foundations of new barriers
or handrails should be designed to resist the
overturning movements and sliding forces, induced by
the forces described in the "design force" column
overleaf, with a factor of safety of 2.




                             55
                    TABLE 2


                    Table of strengths for crush barriers and handrails




                                                Design Force    Test Load
        —

                                                for New         for Existing
                                                Barriers        Barriers



        —



                    Crush barriers spaced in    5.0 kN/metre width   6.0 kn/metre width
                    accordance with the
                    distances in column A
                    of Table 1

        • -
                    Crush barriers spaced in    3.4 kN/metre width   4.1 kN/metre width
    —           ■
                    accordance with the
              -     distances in column B
    '               of Table 1


                    Handrails at right angles   3.4 kN/metre         4.1 kN/metre
                    to the direction of flow    width                width
            -




                    Handrails parallel to       2.2 kN/metre         2.7 kN/metre
                    the direction of flow       width                width


-




                                                        56
CHAPTER 11


11.     COVERED STANDING AND SEATED ACCOMMODATION



The general safety considerations for stands are
similar to those for other parts of the ground but
with the additional need to safeguard spectators
against the risk of fire (see Chapter 11).


159. Stands may consist of seated accommodation only
or may contain a mixture of both seated and standing
areas.      The following advice can be applied to all
sports grounds where spectators are so accommodated.


160. The opportunity provided by new design work
should be taken to enhance the comfort and amenities
for spectators (see paragraphs , Chapter 1).     This
is particularly relevant to redevelopment of major
football grounds when all-seated stands are
provided.


161. All spectators should have a clear,
unobstructed view of the whole of the playing area.
Designs should ensure that sightlines are such that
spectators are encouraged to remain seated and do
not have to strain or stretch to view the playing
area.    Cantilevered stands should protect as many
spectators as possible from the elements.    Exits and
exit routes (which will also serve as entrances and
entry routes) should be based on the principles set
out in Chapters      and


162. There is generally a less hurried departure
from the seated accommodation -in stands at the end
of an event.    Moreover, spectators are induced by
the layout of the seats to form orderly queues.


                            57
Even so, attention should be paid to the points
below as well as the other structural considerations
in respect of stairways, entrances/exits and where
appropriate, density levels and crush barriers.


163. Fire safety is particularly important and is
dealt with in Chapter 11.        Every stand should be
provided with sufficient exits to allow for the
orderly evacuation of all the spectators to be
accommodated.    Evacuation time will depend to a
large extent on the fire hazard present in the stand
(see Chapter      , paragraphs ).    Egress time from the
seated area (see Chapter 6, paragraph         ), should be
no longer than 8 minutes using the calculations in
Chapter     , but the emergency evacuation time is an
overriding criterion.


164. New work should conform to the relevant
Building Regulations requirements and should
incorporate fire safety engineering for the
protection of the occupants.       Seats and gangways
should be so positioned as to provide ready access
to exits.    No spectator in any part of the seated
area should have to travel more than 30 metres from
their seat to the nearest exit measured along the
line of the seatway and gangway.


Gangways


165. As with gangways on terraces (Chapter        ,
paragraphs    ) all gangways in stands should have a
slip resistant surface.    They should be of
sufficient width for the seats served       and in no
case less than 1.1 metres wide without projections.
[New designs should increase the width by 5 mm for
every seat served over 220 seats (in accordance with




                            58
Approved Document B1 which supports Building
Regulations).]


166. Any stepped side gangway should be provided
with a hand-rail fixed at a height of 840 mm
(measured vertically above the mid-point in the
going of the step) and projecting no more than 75 mm
into the gangway.    The handrail should conform to
the strength requirement of Table


167. Radial gangways should be uniform.     In general
they should conform to Building Regulation
requirements.    The going and height of stepped
gangways should meet the measurements set out in
paragraph      , Chapter 7 above but should not be
regarded as a stairway for the purpose of limiting
the number of steps in any flight.    New design work
should nevertheless avoid, wherever possible, steep
gangways which do not contain a break in their
descent and which may be hazardous.


Balustrading


168. Those sections of balustrading at the foot of
gangways or stairways should be as strong as crush
barriers of the stronger type.    [Other balustrading
which will not be subject to pressure from mass
crowd movement should conform to normal requirements
of Building Regulations and British Standards.


Seating


169. All seats should be securely fixed in position.
The use of tip-up seats allows more circulation
space, the automatic type being preferable.




                           59
170. The minimum area allotted to each seated person
should be as follows:


Benches/seats without arms      460 mm    wide
Seats with arms                 500 mm    wide


[These widths should be increased by 50 mm for
comfort].


Benches/seats without backs     610mm     deep
Seats with backs                760 mm    deep


171. To enable people to move freely between rows of
seats there should be at least 305 mm between
perpendiculars from the foremost projection of one
seat and the back of the seat in front of it - see
figure    .   The minimum 305 mm is included in the
610 mm and 760 mm depth measurement of the seating
area.


172. The number of seats in a row should not
normally exceed:


a.   14 where there is a gangway at one end only; and
b.   28 where there is a gangway at both ends.


[Seating arrangements in new stands should comply
with Approved Document B1 which supports the
Building Regulations].




                           60
 CHAPTER 12


 12.   TEMPORARY STANDS AND OTHER TEMPORARY STRUCTURES


173. The nature of temporary stands and other
temporary structures, whether or not covered, used
to accommodate spectators at a sports ground is
likely to vary considerably as will the materials
used in their construction.      Some may be erected for
a single event only.     Even so there is no
justification for accepting a lower standard of
safety in such structures then elsewhere within the
sports ground, and the design and construction of
temporary structures should be in accordance with
good engineering and building practice, should pay
particular regard to public safety and should
satisfy all relevant British Standards.


174. The principles of this Guide are applicable to
temporary stands and structures and particular
attention is drawn to:


Chapter 3 - General Fabric and Structural Matters
Chapter 6 - Egress
Chapter 4 - Stairways and Ramps
Chapter 11 - Fire Safety
Chapter 17 - Recommended Flow Rates


175. All temporary stands should be capable of
withstanding any load or force to which they may be
subjected and account    should be taken   of any
external factors such    as wind forces.Failure of
any one support member or connection should not
render the structure unstable.     As far as
practicable the area around supporting frames should
be secure to prevent unauthorised access, and frames
should be so designed that they are firmly locked


                            61
 into position and cannot be tampered with by
 unauthorised persons.


 176. Consultation with the local authority and
building authority (if different) should take place
at an early stage prior to the erection of any
temporary stand.


177. Siting.   Choice of location may be limited but
factors which need to be considered include: load-
bearing capability of the ground, its slope or
unevenness, drainage, availability of mains
services, access/egress for spectators and for
emergency vehicles, overhead power lines, and the
proximity of surrounding buildings in relation to
the risk of fire.   The condition of the site should
be regularly checked to ensure its load-bearing
capabilities have not deteriorated; settlement of
ground may cause instability and so require
repacking and re-levelling.     The site should be
prepared and maintained so as to provide an even
surface for those parts to which the public have
access.


178. Assembly/dismantling.     The assembly and
dismantling of stands should be carried out by or
under the supervision of persons experienced and
trained in the proper performance of such work and
in accordance with the manufacturers' instructions
whenever available, or in accordance with drawings
and plans made by a competent engineer.


179. Work should be carried out only where lighting
is sufficient to allow it to be safely and properly
performed and checked.   No assembly or dismantling
work should be carried out to the danger of members
of the public in the vicinity.


                          62
 180. The work should be carried out in a proper
manner, using correct parts, and tools of a proper
size and design.   Care should be taken with the
handling of components to avoid damage or
distortion.


181. All components should be closely examined
during assembly and dismantling for signs of wear,
deformation or other damage, and where necessary
replaced by sound components of matching material
properties and dimensions.     Temporary repairs using
makeshift components should be avoided.


182. Care should also be given to ensure all
components are correctly aligned; they should not be
bent, distorted or otherwise altered to force a fit.


183. On completion, assembly work should be checked
with particular attention given to fastenings and
connections.


184. Tents/marquees and other such structures.
These types of structures can present special fire
safety problems and guidance is contained in the
Home Office/Scottish Office publication "Guide to
Fire Precautions in Existing Places of
Entertainment" (ISBN 0 11 340907 0    £8.50).


185. All tents should be capable of withstanding any
forces particularly wind (including uplift so
caused) and those caused by the build up of snow or
heavy rain, to which they may be subjected.
Emergency arrangements should be made for the
dismantling, either partial or'total, of a tent
should conditions arise that could lead to any
collapse or distortion.   Where such work in any way


                          63
affects the stability of the tent or the safety of
members of the public, the work should not commence
until the immediate area has been cleared of all but
essential staff.


186. Supporting poles or structures, guy ropes and
stays should be used as necessary and correctly
formed, and secure anchorages made to the ground to
ensure that the tent is stable and maintains its
correct shape.


187. The stability of the main tent poles and
supporting structure should be independent of the
sheeting fabric, ie any tearing or defect occurring
in the fabric should not result in the collapse of
all or any part of the main structure.


188. Particular attention should be paid to the main
supporting poles or structures and top braces of
large tents where they have to be raised to a
considerable height.   Damage or distortion to these
members could considerably weaken the structure.
Where such damage does occur, the members should be
replaced or repairs or modifications carried out so
as to bring them up to full working strength.


189. Where solid frames or units, eg doors, are
linked to a tent structure they should be rigidly
formed and adequately braced, and care should be
taken that they do not overstress local areas of the
tent.


190. Foundations to poles or frames should be
properly prepared and subjected to regular checks as
should wire bracing or guys, tfie tension of which
should be re-adjusted as necessary.




                          64
CHAPTER 13


 13.   FIRE SAFETY


Safety from fire is achieved by measures which will
restrict initiation, rate of early growth and later
spread of fire; provide and protect escape routes;
segregate higher fire risk areas; provide warning
(and where necessary detection) of fire; and assist
fire-fighting operations.


191. The type of accommodation which represents the
greatest hazard in the event of fire is the covered
stand where spectators sit or stand.      New structures
will conform to Building Regulations requiring them
to have a reasonable degree of structural fire
protection.     Existing structures will vary
considerably in age and materials used in
construction.    The qualities of combustibility and
ability to propagate and spread of fire of the
materials used in construction have an important
effect on the standard of fire precautions required
to ensure reasonable safety.      It may be difficult in
some cases to improve the fire resistance of an
existing structure to any significant extent but it
should be done wherever practicable even though in
some cases substantial alterations may be needed to
provide reasonable protection from fire.


192. With new stands there is much more opportunity
to incorporate from the start comprehensive measures
for fire safety, considering properly the impact of
each measure on the others.      Design features for new
stands should include the following:


       a.   internal finishes which have low
            flammability;


                            65
b.   seating, partitioning and any other fixed
     or removable contents including seat
     cushions which possess low flammability
     characteristics and fire risk potential
     and are limited in amount;


c.   contents which are not capable of being
     easily dismantled;


d.   no inaccessible places where litter can
     collect;


e.   adequate structural resistance to fire;


f.   fire resisting separation from any spaces
     below or communicating with the stand;


g.   as far as possible, no storerooms or other
     spaces communicating with the stand.
     Where this is unavoidable, storerooms or
     other spaces communicating with the stand
     should be provided with fixed fire
     extinguishing systems appropriate to the
     fire risk posed by the materials to be
     stored or contained;


h.   escape routes which are planned to keep
     people well clear of the smoky gases
     produced by a fire (which in general means
     that initial movement of people should be
     downwards);


i.   later stages of escape routes which are
     incapable of being significantly
     threatened by continuing fire;




                    66
     j.      the provision of alternative, widely
             separated escape routes; and


     k.      a roof geometry which should restrict
             smoke and flame travel along the underside
             of the roo f.


Minimising fire risk


193. One potential cause of fire arises from the
accumulation of waste paper, programmes, food and
drink cartons etc dropped by spectators.       Such waste
can be easily set alight by smokers' materials and
the resulting fire may then spread to the structure,
especially the ones that are constructed of more
combustible materials.       Every effort should be made
to reduce this hazard.       Accumulations of litter, for
example near catering facilities, should be cleared
from the ground as quickly as possible or kept in a
safe, fire resistant container or room pending
clearance.


194. All parts of buildings should be inspected
before and after an event (see also Chapter 4,
paragraph 42) and any accumulation of litter cleared
away as described above.      It is particularly
important to ensure that litter does not accumulate
in escape routes or under stands.


195. Smoking should be discouraged in stands
containing combustible or flammable products, either
loose (eg cushions) or fixed (eg seating), or in the
fabric of the building.


196. A common feature in construction of stands
which is a fire risk is the existence of voids under
the seating and under the flooring itself.      These


                              67
voids can become a resting place for paper, cartons
and other combustible materials which can be
ignited, unnoticed, by carelessly discarded
cigarette ends etc.     Seating arrangements should,
wherever possible, be such that floor surfaces are
accessible for the removal of litter.     Where voids
below flooring exist they should if practicable be
excluded; for example, where a stand is built into a
natural slope the underneath area can be filled in
with concrete.     Where this is not practicable they
should be completely sealed off to stop litter
accumulating in them, or be entirely open to allow
easy access for inspection and removal of
combustible waste.


197. Other items, such as cushions filled with
cellular foams or other synthetic materials are a
fire risk because they are combustible, and when set
alight can give off large quantities of smoke and
fumes.    Also, the use of large quantities of
plastics in seating should be reviewed carefully,
particularly where cellular polymers may be
proposed.     The fire authority should be consulted
about the fire risk in stands.


198. Cushions and other flammable materials
represent in bulk a risk of a swiftly developing
fire.    They should be stored in a fire-resistant
container or room well away from spectator
accommodation as should paper items such as
programmes.    Similarly, hazardous materials, for
example fuels (whether in containers or within fuel
tanks and machinery) fertilizers, weed killers and
paints should be kept (if at all) well away from
public areas and stored in a room which has fire
resistance of at least 1 hour.    Other high fire risk
areas, eg enclosed or underground car parks situated


                            68
under stands, should also have fire resistance of at
least 1 hour.


199. Where catering facilities are provided, special
care should be taken to ensure that any fuel or
power supply used for cooking, for example LPG
cylinders, is safely stored and used, in accordance
with the advice of the authority responsible for
enforcement of the Health and Safety at Work etc Act
1974.   Useful guidance is given in Health and Safety
Executive Guidance Notes CS4, "The Keeping of LPG in
Cylinders and Similar Containers" and CS8, "Small
Scale Storage and Display of LPG at Retail
Premises".


Prevention or retardation of fire growth/spread


200. Where, despite all precautions, a fire has
started, it is vital to ensure that the rate of
growth in its early stages is restricted to
proportions which will not overwhelm the
arrangements provided for safe escape.     This is best
achieved by controlling the amount and nature of the
materials (especially the combustibles) in a stand,
both in terms of the contents (loose and fixed) and
in those parts of the fabric of the stand to which a
fire would have access (especially internal
linings).    An important additional line of defence
is prompt action by ground staff using the fire­
fighting equipment available at the ground to tackle
the fire and keep it in check ("first-aid" fire­
fighting) until the fire brigade arrives.     These
measures are crucial because the quicker a fire
develops, the less time there is available to escape
from it.    A fire should not be-able to develop
unnoticed anywhere underneath or adjacent to the
spectator area of the stand, so that its spread


                           69
would be likely to break through into the spectator
accommodation.


201. The spectator area in the stand should be
separated from any other adjacent circulation space
or void by a construction having fire resistance of
not less than half an hour.


202. Walls and ceiling linings within stands and
ceiling linings beneath the stand seats should have
a flame spread classification of not less than Class
1 when tested in accordance with BS 476: Part 7.


203. Restricting the extent and speed of the spread
of fire in its later stages is also important in
order to reduce the possibility of escape time being
further threatened.    Most measures which reduce the
rate of fire growth in early stages will also serve
to restrict the fire spread in the later stages.
The following measures could mainly affect the later
spread.   For some roof configurations venting
systems may offer a means of reducing the spread of
fire (including movement of flames along the roof)
and hot smoky gases.   The science of fire and smoke
venting is however complex and advice from the fire
authority should be sought on whether this would be
advantageous in a particular case.


204. Where the roofs of buildings are so connected
that smoke and flame could travel to two or more
sides of the playing area, a wide break in the roof
should be made of sufficient width to prevent spread
from one side to the other, unless the flame travel
could be eliminated by the prevention measures
mentioned above.




                           70
 205. Use of flammable roof material should be
 avoided.   Where they do exist they should be
 replaced where practicable by non-combustible
materials or should be underdrawn with non­
 combustible board.


Fire warning systems


206. All buildings in the ground (including stands)
to which public or staff have access should be
provided with an electrical fire warning system to
alert staff.     An indication of the warning and its
location should be given to a central control point
(see Chapter 12 paragraph 193).     The system should
conform with BS 5839: Part 1 in terms of its
components,    installation and maintenance.   The
central control point and, where necessary, other
selected positions in the ground should have
facilities to call the fire brigade and other
emergency services.     Stewards and other officials
should be trained in what they should do if they
discover a fire (see paragraphs 176-177).


207. The area underneath the spectator accommodation
should have a system for detecting a developing
fire.   In order to give an early warning in an
unoccupied area an automatic fire detection (AFD)
system should be considered, conforming to BS 5839:
Part 1 in terms of its components, installation and
maintenance.    It should be connected so that any
alarm will be communicated to the central control
point.


208. Any fire detection equipment should be tested
regularly in accordance with the advice given in the
British Standard specification.
 209. Where areas of high fire risk such as large
 storerooms and enclosed or underground car parks are
situated under stands, consideration should be given
to the installation of an automatic fire
extinguishing system, eg sprinklers,     instead of an
AFD system.     Here again any such system should be
connected so that warning of fire is communicated to
the central control point.


Emergency lighting


210. Emergency lighting is dealt with in Chapter
paragraphs


Fire-fighting equipment


211. Advice should be sought from the local fire
authority on the type, the amount and siting of
fire-fighting equipment.     The succeeding paragraphs
give general guidelines.


212. In major grounds it may be necessary to provide
a suitable water supply for fire fighting in the
form of hydrants.


213. For "First aid" fire fighting by members of the
staff, hydraulic hose-reels should be provided to BS
5306: Part 1.    These should be sufficient to provide
adequate protection to the whole floor area, and
should be installed in a suitable position by
entrances, exits and stairways.


214. Where hose-reels are not provided, portable
fire extinguishers should be installed in sufficient
numbers to give adequate cover/.    The number and type
     depend upon the size, layout, fire separation
and risk in each structure.     Fire extinguishers


                           72
 should conform to BS 5423 and be sited and
maintained according to BS 5306: Part 3.


215. Fire blankets and fire extinguishers of a type
appropriate to the cooking facilities used should be
kept in all catering facilities.


216. It should be borne in mind when considering
location of fire-fighting equipment that it may need
to be sited so that it cannot be vandalised but yet
is readily accessible to staff in the event of fire.


Emergency procedures and staff training


217. It is essential that plans should be made for
dealing with emergencies, including fire.     The onus
to do this lies with ground management.     Joint
consultation between management, police, fire,
ambulance and other emergency services should take
place in order to produce agreed plans of action for
all foreseeable types of emergency.   While the
public are in the ground the number of staff on duty
should be sufficient to cover entrances, exits and
other strategic points and to fulfil other essential
duties (see Chapter 13).


218. All such staff should be trained in the use of
the fire-fighting equipment provided, and in the
action they should take in the event of fire.       This
is management's responsibility but the local fire
authority's advice should be sought on whether the
content of the proposed training programme is
adequate.


Means of escape




                           73
219. "Means of escape" is the structural means
whereby a safe route is provided for people to
travel from any point in a structure to a place of
safety without outside assistance.        In a sports
ground, the means of escape in the event of an
emergency will usually be the same as the normal
egress routes plus any additional "route" of forward
escape on to the playing area.        The kind of
emergency most likely to occur at a sports ground is
fire but other types of emergency, such as bomb
threat, may arise which might necessitate the
evacuation of spectators from all or part of the
spectator accommodation.     It is the management's
responsibility to ensure that all exit routes for
use in an emergency are capable of being safely and
effectively used at all times when the ground is
occupied.


220. It is vital that the emergency exit routes are
sited so that people using them will be least
affected by the fire or its products, for example
smoke, toxic gases, heat etc.        Initial travel should
if possible be downwards.        This is because in the
event of fire, its dangerous products will travel
upwards and accumulate densely at the highest
points.   Further stages of the exit routes should be
so arranged as to take people progressively further
away from the fire, along a route where they cannot
be significantly affected by the fire or its
products.   There should be more than one emergency
exit route from a stand or a terrace in case one
becomes blocked.   The emergency exits within any one
structure should be as widely separated as practical
planning considerations will allow, to minimise the
risk of them all being blocked,by the same cause.


Fire protection for stairways and passages


                            74
221 . Where a stairway, passage or any other part of
an emergency exit route passes up, down or through a
stand or other building used by spectators,      it
should be in a fire resistant enclosure separated
from the remainder of the stand by a structure
having fire resistance of not less than one hour.
Such exit routes should discharge to a place of
safety in the open air (which may be inside or
outside the ground).


222. The surface finish of walls and ceilings of all
emergency exit stairways should be of a standard
corresponding to Class 0 (as defined in the guidance
issued in connection with the Building Regulations
1985 for England and Wales and the Building
Standards (Scotland) Regulations 1981-84).


223. Any door forming part of the enclosure to a
stairway should be self closing and have a fire
resistance of not less than half an hour.


Emergency evacuation time


224. The emergency evacuation time is the notional
time it would take spectators to leave their viewing
positions and reach a place of safety in the open
air or a protected stairway or emergency exit route
with fire resistance in accordance with paragraph
180.   It is calculated from the spectator capacity
of the accommodation (see Chapter 16) and the flow
rate (see Chapter 17) through restricting parts of
the exit system used for evacuation purposes.


225. The emergency evacuation time will depend
largely on the fire hazard present in the
accommodation in question.       Spectator accommodation


                            75
which has for any reason the potential for rapid
fire spread (for example because of the type of
construction, interior use and contents and/or the
nature of the internal linings which would be
exposed to fire) should have an emergency evacuation
time of not more than      minutes.     However, an
increase in this time [will] [should]         [may] [is
likely to] be acceptable where the possibility of
rapid fire spread is eliminated [or reduced] and the
emergency exit routes are not vulnerable to a fire
occurring within the building.       For example, an open
terrace of fire resistant construction such as
concrete; or a stand which incorporates the fire
safety design features described in paragraph             ,
where spectators are not totally enclosed and can
move into protected exit routes or exit routes in
the open air would normally merit the maximum
evacuation time [of 8 minutes asallowed         for normal
egress (see Chapter 6 paragraph        )].



226.   [The conditions within a particular ground may
well call for interpolation between these times.            In
all cases, where it is proposed to set an emergency
evacuation time of more than 2£ minutes the advice
of the fire authority should be obtained.         Where the
ground or the building in question is subject to
safety certification, the local authority should
also be consulted.]


227. Where the playing area or perimeter track is
accessible to spectators and is considered suitable
as a place of safety, evacuation       onto it can be
taken into account in calculating the         emergency
evacuation time.   Where there is a pitch perimeter
fence or wall it should have access points in
accordance with Chapter         , paragraph     which can


                           76
serve as exits and which can be taken into account
in the calculation of the emergency evacuation time.


228. Where the playing surface of a pitch is made of
synthetic materials, advice from the fire authority
should be sought to establish if it can be properly
considered a place of safety in a fire.    This is
because it is possible that some forms of artificial
turf might in themselves constitute a hazard in the
event of fire because of flamespread and fumes etc
caused by decomposition of the material as a result
of heat radiation.


229. The playing area may not be a place of safety,
eg if it is wholly surrounded by covered
accommodation with no breaks in the roofing (see
paragraph 160) and the advice of the fire authority
should be sought in such circumstances.


Access for emergency vehicles


230. Adequate roads for emergency vehicles such as
fire appliances and ambulances should be provided so
that speedy and direct access can be obtained to all
buildings within the ground; wherever possible these
access routes should be separate from those used by
spectators entering and leaving the ground.


231. The local fire authority should be consulted
about the width, clearance, height and supporting
strength required of these access roads.   Wherever
possible access roads should provide for the parking
of emergency vehicles so that exit routes used by
crowds are not seriously obstructed.


232. Wherever practicable and where necessary roads
within { of a mile of the ground should be kept


                         77
entirely free of parked vehicles so as not to delay
or obstruct the access of emergency vehicles.




                        78
CHAPTER 14


14.   COMMUNICATIONS


There should be a communications system capable of
clearly relaying essential messages to all parts of
the ground inside and outside in both normal
circumstances and in an emergency.


233. Precise requirements for communications will
depend on the sort of ground and the numbers of
people that attend there.        In general the
communications system should be determined after
consultation with the police and emergency services.
It should be available for use, capable of coping
with all emergencies and should have an override
facility.    It is ground management who should
provide and operate the necessary equipment for this
purpose as well as competant staff, suitably trained
in its use.


Central Control


234. There should be a central control room
commanding a good view of the whole ground from
which the communications system should operate.          It
should contain the facility to communicate quickly
with staff, the public and the emergency services.
Subject to paragraph       below the safety officer and
his staff should be responsible for the operation of
the communications system.


235. There should be inter-communication between the
central control and all turnstiles or banks of
turnstiles and all entry and exit gates used by the
public (see also Chapter     ).    Metering systems to
record all admissions should be installed at


                            79
turnstiles and, to ensure that ground capacities are
not exceeded in any section, arrangements should be
made for central control to be informed immediately
a predetermined number of spectators has been
admitted through each turnstile.


Public Address/System Warning


236. The public address system should be able to
communicate with individual areas outside and inside
the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole
ground.


237. Emergency use of the system as part of the fire
warning system means that it will also need to
comply with BS 5389 Part 1 (Code of practice for
system design, installation and servicing of Fire
Detection and Alarm Systems in Buildings).


238. Important announcements relating to crowd
safety should be preceded by a loud signal to catch
the attention of the crowd despite a high level of
noise in the ground.   This signal, followed by the
voice-over transmission should be different to, and
distinct from, any other signals which may be in
general use on the system.     This arrangement should
be prominently displayed in every programme sold for
every event.


239. The public address equipment should be
installed so that broadcast messages can be heard
under reasonable conditions (including emergencies)
by all persons of normal hearing in any part of the
ground to which the public has access.    Installation
should conform to the relevant- guidance contained in
BS 6259 (Code of Practice for Planning and
Installation of Sound Systems).    The power supply to


                          80
the system should be such as to enable it to
continue to operate in an emergency such as fire or
a failure of the mains supply for upto 3 hours.


240. In the event of an emergency it is essential
that clear, accurate information is given to
spectators at the earliest possible time.     Messages
should be positive leaving those to whom they are
addressed in no doubt as to what is required of
them.   They should be pre-arranged, worded with the
agreement of the police, fire auhtority and, where a
safety certificate is in force for the ground or
stand(s) within the ground, the local authority.


Back-up Provision


241. Loud hailers should be available for the use of
stewards and police in directing or instructing
spectators.


242. Any police radio facilities available for the
maintenance of law and order should augment and not
supersede the ground communications system.


Police Control Room


243. Where there is a special police presence inside
the ground the police should be provided with a
central control room set aside for use by the
officer in charge.    The control may be in addition
to that used by the ground safety officer in which
case an adjoining or a joint control room should be
considered.   There must be a clear, unequivocal
understanding by both police and management as to
the tasks, duties and responsibilities which will be
undertaken by the police and those which will be
undertaken by the ground management (see also


                           81
Chapter ----    paragraphs .... ).   There must be
established lines of communication between them.


244. International grounds, grounds of clubs in the
English Football League and clubs in the Premier
Division [and Division 1] of the Scottish Football
League should provide a police control room which
is:-


      (a)   well placed so as to command a good view
            of the whole pitch and the spectators
            surrounding it;


      (b)   of sufficient size for the officer in
            charge, his deputy, management
            representative and enough officers to
            operate radios, telephones and any other
            equipment.   There should be space for
            others who may need to visit the room for
            example, other senior officers,
            management, representatives of the
            emergency services and local authority;


     (c)    properly equipped with suitable CCTV,
            radio, telephone facilities.


245. Where necessary the control room should be
sound-proofed against excessive noise.


246. There should be sufficient operators in the
police control room to enable      all radio
transmissions to be received,      evaluated and
answered.    The radio system should be such as to
give operators in the control room priority over,
and the capacity to override,      -others using the same
channel.    Additional channels    should be used,where
necessary, to prevent overcrowding of the airwaves.


                              82
To complement radio communications there should be a
completely separate system of land-lines with
telephone links between control room and key points.

Close Circuit Television


247. Consideration should be given to the
installation of CCTV in order to monitor turnstiles
(inside and outside the ground) ingress/egress
routes, concourse areas, terraces and any other area
where there is likely to be a crowd build-up.     CCTV
should normally be installed for this purpose at
grounds used for major events and in particular at
grounds referred to in paragraph .... above.     Before
decisions are reached analysis of each ground is
necessary.   Each part of the spectators
accommodation should be assessed for the nature and
degree of risk in order to determine whether CCTV
will be of use, if so the individual needs and
whether alternative measures can be taken which
achieve equal or better results.


248. Supplementary guidance on procurement and
maintenance of CCTV based on research carried out by
Home Office Scientific Development Branch can be
obtained from




                           83
CHAPTER 15


15.   AUXILIARY POWER


Auxiliary power should be available and be
sufficient to enable emergency lighting, the Public
Address system CCTV and other electrically powered
installations to function for at least 3 hours after
the failure of the normal supply.


General


249. In the event of a power failure consideration
should be given to cancellation of the event.     If
the auxiliary power supply is capable of supplying
the entire load for the ground for at least 3 hours
it may be possible to continue a fixture or event
provided it is scheduled to finish and the ground
cleared within this period and no other emergency
situation exists at the ground.     To supply such a
load a generator rather than a central battery
system is likely to be required.    Ground management
should take into account the needs for the ground in
deciding the type of power provision and make
contingency plans for the failure of the power
supply (see Chapter 2).


250. Auxiliary power equipment should be located in
a secure room to which the public do not have
access.   The room should be of fire-resisting
construction of a standard of not less than 1 hour.


251. All equipment should be installed, maintained
and tested in accordance with the manufacturers
instructions and relevant British Standards.


Emergency lighting


                          84
252. Emergency lighting, for use in the event of a
failure of the general lighting, should be provided
in all parts of the premises accessible to the
public and along all exit routes, with exit signs
clearly illuminated.    Installation should be in
accordance with BS 5266: Part 1.    The system should
be completely separate from the general lighting
system, although a one-circuit system incorporating
staggered sub-circuits would be an acceptable
alternative.   Unless exceptionally two entirely
independent supplies can be obtained from outside
sources, the emergency circuit should be connected
to a source of power located on the premises, for
example storage batteries or a diesel generator,
with a delay of not more than 5 seconds.


253. The system should be capable of maintaining the
necessary level of illumination for a period of 3
hours from the time of failure of the normal supply.


254. The emergency lighting should operate
automatically on the failure of the main lighting.


255. Emergency lighting systems should be tested
regularly in accordance with BS 5266: Part 1.


Public Address System


256. Where the public address system is part of the
fire warning system it should conform to BS 5839
Part 1 (see Chapter 11 paragraphs       and Chapter 12
paragraphs     ).   Auxiliary power will in such
circumstances therefore be needed to ensure the
continued use of the system irv the event of fire or
other emergency.




                           85
CHAPTER 16


16.   STEWARDING


Effective stewarding should prevent overcrowding in
sections of the ground, reduce the likelihood and
incidence of disorder, help disperse spectators in
such a way as to reduce crowd pressure and provide
the means to investigate, report and take early
action in an emergency.     It should be emphasised to
stewards that they are deployed to assist in the
safe operation of the ground, not to view the
activity taking place.


257. Staffing levels and stewarding requirements
will vary depending upon the size and configuration
of the ground, the nature of the event and crowd
levels, but there are six basic duties which
stewards are called upon to carry out.    These are:


      a)   to control or direct spectators who are
           entering or leaving the ground, to help
           achieve an even flow of people to the
           viewing areas;


      b)   ability to recognise crowd densities,
           signs of crowd distress and crowd dynamics
           so as to help ensure safe dispersal of
           spectators on the terraces or viewing
           slopes;


      c)   to patrol the ground to deal with any
           emergencies eg. raising alarms or
           extinguishing fires;


      d)   to staff entrances, exits and other
           strategic points, especially exit doors


                            86
            and exit gates from the ground which are
            not continuously open whilst the ground is
            in use;


     e)     to assist police as appropriate or as
            requested with crowd control; and


     f)     to undertake specific duties in an
            emergency.


258. A more detailed check list of the kind of
duties which stewards are liable to undertake is at
Annex B.    It should be borne in mind that this is
only an example and not necessarily an exhaustive
list of duties.


259. Stewards should be fit, active, preferably
between the age of 18 - 55 and fully capable of
carrying out the duties allocated to them.      Every
steward should be fully appraised in writing of his
duties and responsibilities and should carry on him
a general check list of them.     Where a ground such
as one used by an association football league club
has high police presence, duties and
responsibilities of stewards should be agreed with
the police and form part of any written
understanding or statement of intent agreed with the
police.    Stewards should attend pre-match briefing
and should be made aware as necessary of the
arrangements and any contingency plans to deal with
the arrival of away supporters.


260. Effective training and supervision should be
provided by management so that all stewards, whether
regular or casual, know not only what their duties
are but how to carry them out and why.    This is
especially important in emergencies when it is


                           87
essential that stewards and their supervisors are
fully aware of and practiced in the part they     are to
play in the plans drawn up with the emergency
services.   Exercises should be carried at least at
six-monthly intervalsout so as to ensure that
emergency procedures operate smoothly, and a record
kept of the duration of the exercise, details     of the
instruction given and by whom (see Chapter        f
paragraph       ).   At least 14 days' notice of the
intention to hold such exercises should be given to
the local authority, the police and emergency
services.


261. Management should appoint a chief steward
responsible for co-ordinating responsibilities of
all stewards.    Control of stewards should be from a
central point with an efficient means to communicate
with the them (see also Chapter        ).


262. All stewards should be readily identifiable eg.
by the wearing of distinctive clothing such as
luminous tabards which are numbered and distinctive
from those worn by police and emergency services.




                             88
CHAPTER 1 7


17.   CROWD BEHAVIOUR


Where there is a disorderly element among the crowd
intent on violence, additional safety measures are
needed to contain and minimise the potential
disruption, to isolate quickly, identify and remove
the offenders and to prevent their re-entry on
future occasions.


263. Although the problem of crowd disorder at
sporting events is one which affects primarily
professional association football, other sports are
not immune from it.     Therefore, whilst the following
advice is directed mainly at those grounds where
professional association football is played,
especially grounds used by English Football League
clubs, the general principles should also be borne
in mind by management at other grounds where major
spectator sports are played.


264. The 'European Convention on Spectator Violence
and Misbehaviour at Sporting Events and in
particular at Football Matches'      (HMSO, Cmmd 9649),
which came into force on 1 November 1985, sets out
in general terms the measures to be taken to prevent
and control violence by spectators.       Additionally,
some sports' governing bodies have issued their own
guidance on crowd control.       For example, the
Football Association has issued a 'Memorandum to
Football League Clubs On Crowd Management' which
sets out the measures that must be taken at all
League grounds, and UEFA has issued binding
instructions in their document, 'Order and Security
in the Stadia'   (Third Edition/ 1985) which apply to
matches in their competitions.      The following


                            89
paragraphs cover some of the main areas that require
the attention of ground management.    The advice they
contain is not comprehensive and is intended to
supplement rather than replace existing
instructions, codes of practice etc.


Policing


265. Although the measures described elsewhere in
the Guide will help achieve reasonable safety at a
sports ground, for management to discharge its
responsibility properly, a special police presence
inside the ground may be necessary.    The number and
disposition of the police must be determined by the
Chief Police Officer in whose area the ground is
located.   Where there is such a presence there
should be a clear, written understanding or
'statement of intent' agreed between the police and
the ground management setting out the functions and
responsibilities of each as to crowd safety.      Copy
to safety advisors group/team.   Dealing with
disorder (as distinct from normal ground operations
and crowd management on the premises) as in any
other circumstances will fall to the police.


266. Ground management should give all possible
assistance to the police and provide police control
facilities within the ground (see also Chapter
).


267. Proper advance planning with the police is
essential to counter potential crowd disorder.
There must be an effective liaison between club and
police for this purpose to including not just the
arrangements inside the ground- but also the escort
of visiting supporters, their likely numbers, their
separate entry to the ground and their departure at


                          90
the end of the match.    There should be debriefing
meetings as necessary to evaluate existing
arrangements and provide the flexibility necessary
to deal with different circumstances.


Crowd movement


268. If crowd movement on terraces is to be strictly
controlled by their sub-division by structural
means, such as railings or fences, in order to help
the police contain any disorder, the greatest care
must be taken to ensure that these sub-divisions or
'pens' cannot be filled beyond their specified safe
limit.   Dividing structures should comply with the
strength requirements set out in Chapter 9.     Each
pen must be assessed for its safe limit, the limit
specified, recorded and arrangements made to ensure
it is not exceeded.     Ideally each pen should be
self-contained, serviced by its own entrance/exit,
refreshment facilities and toilets - in keeping with
the principles of Chapter 5 and 8.     Unless it is
known in advance that the total number of spectators
will be less than the capacity of the smallest pen,
if a pen is not self-contained and arrangements
cannot be made to keep a reliable monitor/... people
admitted to it, then either the pen must not be used
or the dividing fences removed and the whole area
controlled as a complete section.


Segregation


269. Home and visiting supporters at professional
association football matches may have to be
segregated but segregation is not advocated for
other sports where crowd disorder is not a problem.
This should be borne in mind when considering the




                            91
division of grounds used for other sports as well as
association football.


270. Where possible a neutral or sterile zone should
be provided within a ground so that home and
visiting supporters are not physically close to each
other.   The arrangements for admitting spectators
into the ground, whether by tickets purchases in
advance or through payment at the turnstiles, should
be drawn up in consultation with the police, and
must be carefully controlled to ensure as far as
possible that segregation is effective and known
troublemakers are excluded.


271. Segregation arrangements may also have to
include measures which deter spectators from
invading the pitch or playing area.     At the same
time the arrangements will need to provide for the
police to have effective access to the terraces in
the event of an outbreak of violence.     Moreover,
since the playing area is, in most instances, a
place of safety it has to be accessible for
evacuation in an emergency (see Chapters
paragraph       ).   Any structural means used to
deter unauthorised encroachment onto the pitch, must
allow for such access (see also Chapter         ).


Detention and removal of trouble makers


272. At larger soccer grounds, particularly where
there has been a record of frequent crowd trouble,
secure detention rooms may be necessary for use by
the police.


273. There should be adequate.vehicular access for
the unobtrusive removal of detainees (see also




                           92
Chapter    , paragraphs        on access for emergency
vehicles).


Refreshments


274. Hard containers such as glasses, bottles or
cans can make dangerous missiles and should not be
used for the sale of refreshments.     All refreshments
should be served in soft containers.


275.   [Alcohol should not be on sale for consumption
on the terraces or in the stands [at football
grounds].



276. Note: The Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol
etc) Act 1985 applies to any ground in England and
Wales used for an international association football
match or a match involving a football league club.
In Scotland the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 1980
applies to grounds used by clubs in the Scottish
Football League, Highland League and to the
international stadia used for association football
and Rugby Union.




                          93
CHAPTER 18


18.   PITCH PERIMETER FENCE/WALL



A pitch perimeter fence/wall may not only delineate
the playing area from the spectator accommodation
but may have to serve as a crush barrier, and in
some situations will serve as a means to discourage
or prevent access to the playing area except in an
emergency.


277. The type, strength and height of a pitch
perimeter fence or wall will vary according to its
location and required function.    At one extreme, at
a certain type of ground or small stadium used by
very few spectators, there may be no need for a
perimeter fence or wall at all;    or if such a wall
or fence exists it may need to consist of little
more than a rail to mark the playing area.    At the
other extreme, some major soccer stadia, may have a
fence which prevents access to the pitch in normal
circumstances (see also Chapter 14, paragraph        )
but allows for access in emergency as part of the
measures taken to prevent or contain any outbreak of
crowd disorder.   Such a fence may be limited to one
part of the ground for example, the "away supporters
end" or it might encompass other sections.


278. Any pitch fence or wall, whatever its height,
which delineates the spectator area from the playing
area restricts or impedes access to the pitch.    The
extent of the restriction depends upon the nature of
the fence or wall.   All pitch fences and walls must
therefore contain gates or openings (if no gates are
fitted) which allow access to 'the playing area or
any perimeter track in an emergency and, if the


                          94
perimeter track is used as part of the normal exit
system, in normal circumstances.     Openings should be
no less than 1.1 metres wide.     They should align
with radial gangways (where provided) and be not
less than of the same width as those gangways.
Openings or gates should be properly stewarded,
should be clearly marked and painted a different
colour from the rest of the fence or wall.    Gates,
where fitted, should open away from the spectators
and should be kept unlocked.


279. If spectators can lean on the perimeter fence
it should be deemed a crush barrier and fulfil the
conditions of height and strength specified in
Chapter 9 although if the fence is of solid
construction its height may be more than 1.12
metres.   This is because the pressures acting on a
person forced against such a fence are distributed
over a large area of the body, unlike the situation
with a normal crush barrier, where the pressures are
localized.


Pitch Barrier Fences


280. The term pitch barrier fence in the following
paragraphs means any pitch fence or wall which
exceeds the height of a crush barrier (1.12 metres)
measured from the spectator accommodation.


281. Pitch barrier fences are not normally
considered to be necessary except at sports grounds
used by association football clubs especially clubs
in the English football league.    They are usually
associated with soccer terraces rather than seated
areas and (with some exceptions) are not generally
considered necessary when seated accommodation
extends to the level of the playing area.    Similarly


                          95
family or club enclosures are unlikely to require
such a fence.


282. Whether a pitch barrier fence is installed will
depend on individual circumstances:       for example, a
history of hostile pitch invasions or other disorder
from a certain part of the ground, the extent to
which stewarding and policing is felt to be able to
deal with any attempted encroachment of the pitch,
availability of alternative solutions, for example a
smooth surfaced wall at least 1.22 metres high
(measured from the spectator accommodation).


283. Where a pitch barrier fence is installed it
should not impair visibility of the playing area.
If sightlines from a terrace are obscured congestion
may be caused - eg because spectators are unwilling
to move forward - or seated spectators may be
induced to stand up.    If such problems are not
resolved satisfactorily, consequential reductions in
capacity should result.     See Chapter 16.


284. The maximum height of a pitch barrier fence
should be 2.2 metres.     There should be no
overhanging sections and no spikes, barbed wire or
other obstacles installed or attached to it.


285. All pitch barrier fences must contain gates or
openings as described in paragraph              above.   If a
terrace is sub-divided into pens (see paragraph
, Chapter     ) each pen must have its own gate or
gates leading onto the pitch in addition to any side
exits.   [There must be sufficient pitch gates in
each pen capable of evacuating all the spectators in
each pen onto the playing area, within the emergency
evacuation time set for that section of the ground
or terrace (see Chapter          , paragraphs             ).]


                            96
Where gates are fitted they should , in common with
gates on normal egress routes open outwards (ie away
from spectators).     [Wherever possible they should be
kept unlocked.]


286. Whenever practicable to do so terraces should
not descend to a pitch barrier fence [see figure
].     A walkway between the fence and the terrace
should [if possible] be created and reserved solely
for use by police, club and first-aid personnel.     In
order to achieve this it may be necessary to take
out of use or remove completely one or two rows of
terracing.     Any drop into the walkway would need to
be protected by continuous crush barriers in order
to discourage access to the walkway except via
authorised points (ie radial gangways).


287.    [As an additional precaution, equipment should
be provided wherever pitch barrier fencing is
installed so that, if necessary, sufficient fencing
can be removed in order to release any trapped
spectators.    Trained operators provided by the club
should be available in order to use the equipment.
Ground operators will decide when such equipment is
to be used.]




                            97
CHAPTER 19


19.   ESTIMATION OF SAFE GROUND CAPACITY


To assess the number of spectators which can be
safely accommodated account should be taken of the
features of the individual ground, its
configuration, general condition, intended use and
any deviations from the Guide's provisions.


288. The previous sections of the Guide give
guidelines and safety considerations for individual
features of a ground.     This section describes a
method of calculating the number of spectators that
can be safely accommodated when taking into account
interactions between these individual features and
where there are deviations from the guidelines.       It
may be necessary to calculate various capacities if
the ground is used for more than one activity.


289. The calculations should be attached to a plan
of the ground and should be available with such
details as exits, stands, terraces, stairways,
passages, kiosks, seats and barriers.    A scale of
1:200 should be used for this purpose.     The plan
should be cross referenced and attached to the
calculations.


290. The method assesses:


      a.   the holding capacity of a terrace or
           viewing slope (that of a seated area
           generally being determined either by the
           number of seats when it conforms to
           guidelines or an acceptable reduced
           occupancy when the guidelines can not be
           m e t ); and


                            98
     b.      the capacity of a given exit/entry route
             from a terrace or stand.


291. The number of people that can be safely
accommodated on a terrace or in a stand (or other
covered accommodation) is either its holding
capacity, or the capacity of the exit/entry system
to be used in normal circumstances before and at the
end of an event (assessed in accordance with
paragraphs       below) or the emergency exit system
whichever is the smallest.


Holding capacity of terraces and viewing slopes


292. An even distribution of spectators on a terrace
or viewing slope is likely to be difficult to
achieve notwithstanding the measures described in
this guide because spectators may prefer to gather
in a certain part or parts of the viewing area.
This pattern of crowd dispersal and any other
relevant factors should be used and taken into
consideration when assessing the safe capacity for a
particular area.


293. In all cases the calculation of the capacity of
the standing area should take into account only
those parts of the viewing area from which the whole
of the playing area can be seen excluding gangways
(ie the "available viewing area").      If the
positioning and/or width of the gangways do not meet
the criteria of paragraphs       of Chapter 8 a
commensurate reduction must be made to the available
viewing area.


294. Where crush barriers conform to the
specifications in Chapter 9 and the viewing area is


                           99
 in good condition (see Chapter 8     ) the maximum
allowable overall packing density is 47 person per
10 square metres over the available viewing area.
Where the conditions of the viewing area materially
deviate from Chapter 8 a reduction must be made in
the packing density.    There is no lower limit to
this reduction, and if a viewing area is in such
poor condition that it is unfit for use, the figure
is 0.   Interpolation between these figures will be
necessary where the conditions fall between the two
extremes.


Example A


The capacity of the terrace is calculated by
multiplying the area available for standing by the
appropriate packing density.     The following formula
may be used:


     Capacity (Number of persons) = A x (0-47)
                                      10


where 'A' is the area available for standing in
square metres.


Peak viewing terrace


Barriers and pitch perimeter wall conform to the
Guide's recommendations on construction, height,
strength and spacing.


Net available viewing area 76 metres x 16 metres =
1216 square metres (excluding designated gangways)


Condition and drainage of terraces good.


Dimensions:      steps 375 mm width (Guide recommends


                           100
                 280 mm - 375 mm,
                 see Chapter    , paragraph   )
                 risers 70 mm* (Guide recommends
                 75 mm - 180 mm,
                 see Chapter    , paragraph   )


* Correction not possible without major
reconstruction so accepted in view of only minor
deviation of 5 mm and good condition of the
terrace:- ie fully acceptable for 47 persons per 10
square metres.


Capacity: 1216 x 47 = 5715
                   10




                          101
Example B (where there is material deviation from
the Guide)


Gross area for standing 76 x 16 = 1216 square
metres.


Condition of terrace: acceptable but


      a)     some unevenness caused by repair work


      b)     some cracking and rough surface in places


      c)     no gangways


Required gangway provision (see Figure       )
determined as:-


1 lateral gangway at rear leading to exit stairways:
ie 1 at 1.1 metres by 76 =       83.6 square metres


4 radial gangways: ie 4 at 1.1 by 14.9 = 65.6 square
metres


                                 Total     149.2


Available viewing area = 1216 - 149.2 = 1066.8


Packing density determined at 35 per 10 square
metres to allow for underfoot conditions.


Capacity 1066.8 x 35. = 3734
                    10




Note: Figure of 3734 is below -3960 quoted in example
E.   Therefore, any upgrading of terracing to
accommodate more than 3960 spectators would also


                           103
require installation of additional turnstiles and
improvements (if any) to entry routes).


If the crush barriers meet the height and strength
criteria set down in Chapter 9 but do not conform to
the distances laid down in Table           or the gaps
between them are greater than those described in
paragraphs     and Figure         of Chapter 9, the
capacity of the viewing area is calculated from the
provision of crush barriers.        The total length of
crush barriers (including the pitch wall or fence if
it serves as, and meets the requirements of, a crush
barrier) should be measured.        This figure is then
multiplied by either the recommended distance
between the barriers (see Table            ) or the actual
distance whichever is the lesser.        This establishes
the notional available viewing area (see Figure
).   This area is then multiplied by the density
factor determined for that area.


Example C (Spacing and distance of crush barriers do
not conform to Chapter 9)


Area for standing 76 x 16 = 1216 square metres
Terrace steps conform to dimensions of Chapter 8:
drainage and condition good


Terrace gradient 20° (1 in 2.7)


Crush barrier configuration as in Figure


Working load of pitch wall established by test meets
the higher strength of Table 2 Chapter 9.


Crush barriers consist of 12 at 6 metres in length
plus 2 at 3 metres in length.




                            104
Test/inspection of two barriers (see Figure       )
reveal sufficient doubts at to their integrity and
are discounted for calculation purposes.


Remaining barriers in Line A (see Figure        ) have a
safe working load (established by test) of the lower
strength of Table 2.


Barriers in Line B have a safe working load
(established by test) of the higher strength of
Table 2.


Calculation of (notional) available viewing area.


     (a)   Pitch wall: 76 metres less 4 exits at 1.1
           = 71.6 metres.    Recommended crush barrier
           distance (for higher strength) on a
           gradient of 20° = 3.4 metres (Actual
           distance from pitch wall to crush barriers
           5 metres).
           Notional available viewing area is
           therefore 71.6 x 3.4 = 243.4 square
           metres.


     (b)   Crush barriers: Line A = 4 at 6 metres
           plus 1 at 3 metres = 27 metres.
           Recommended distance between barriers (for
           lower strength) 2.3 metres (actual
           distance 8 metres).
           Notional available viewing area is
           therefore 27 x 2.3 = 62.1


           Crush barriers: Line B 6 at 6 metres = 1
           at 3 metres = 39 metres.    Recommended
           distance between barriers (for higher
           strength) 3.4 metres.   Actual distance
           behind barriers is 3 metres.


                            105
Notional available viewing area is
therefore 39 x 3 = 117 square metres.




              106
Total notional available viewing area:-


             243.4
              62.1
             117.0


             422.5


Density packing 47 per 10 square metres.


Capacity = 422.5 x 47 = 1986
                      10


Note:- average packing density for standing area as
a whole would therefore equate to 1986 divided by
1216 = 16.33 per 10 square metres.


Terraces or viewing slopes at older grounds not used
for major sporting fixtures and which are attended
by very few spectators may not have crush barriers
at all; or if they do their installation may be
random and not meet the specifications of Chapter
            The safe capacity in such circumstances has
to be assessed on the conditions prevailing at the
ground.     All relevant factors have to be considered
eg underfoot condition, the dispersal of the crowd
at fixtures.     The overall capacity of the terrace
will be limited and the average packing density will
be low.     One method of calculation is taken from the
pitch wall/fence (if any) discounting the rest of
the terrace.


Example D


Gross terrace/viewing area 76 x 16 = 1216 square
metres.


                            108
No pitch wall: spectator accommodation bounded by a
rail around the pitch and does not conform to the
specification of Chapter


Allow spectators a (notional) standing area of 76
metres by, say, four terrace steps at 375 mm per
step: ie, 7.6 x 1.5 = 11.4 square metres.


Available standing area (notional) = 11.4 square
metres.


Capacity = 11.4 x 47 = 536
                     10


Turnstile Capacity


The number of turnstiles may, however, affect the
holding capacity of a terrace if all spectators to
be accommodated in the viewing area cannot pass
through in at least 1 hour.


Example E


Available viewing area 76 metres x 16 metres = 1216
square metres.


Crush barriers and terrace conform to standards
described in Example A above.


Number of turnstiles serving the area = 6
Measured turnstile rate exceeds 660 per hour.
Maximum acceptable rate for calculation purposes -
660


Capacity = 660 x 6 = 3960




                            109
Exit Capacity


General considerations to be taken into account when
assessing the adequacy of exit systems are set out
in Chapter ....     The capacity of an exit system can
be calculated by assessing for each element in the
system (ie each gangway, doorway, stairway, exit
etc) the number of persons who can pass the limiting
point in that element in 8 minutes (ie egress time,
see Chapter      , paragraph         ).   The capacity of the
emergency exit system is the number of people who
can pass through the designated emergency exit route
in the appropriate emergency evacuation time (see
Chapter 5 paragraphs       ).        The calculation is made
by multiplying the width of the element by the
appropriate flow rate in Chapter 17 by the
appropriate time.


Where an element in the exit system is less than 1
metre wide that element should be omitted from the
calculation.


[Flow restricting elements of the kind described in
Chapter 6 should be ignored for the purpose of these
calculations.]


Example F


Area of terrace 76 x 16 = 1216 square metres
excluding designated gangways.


Maximum potential capacity =


1216 x 47. = 5715 (see example A).
       10




                               110
Exit capacity consists of 2 stairways in each corner
of the terrace leading to a concourse at the rear,
converging on 1 exit gate in the centre.        (See
Figure        .)


Analysis of exit capacity allowing a minimum of 8
minutes for spectators to pass through a fixed
point, using flow rates given in Chapter


[Stairways 12'-00" = 3.327 metres.       These are
divided into two channels of 1.1 metres and one
channel of 1.127 metres thereby providing 6 "unit
widths" for calculation purposes.


Each stairway capacity is therefore:-


       3.327 divided by .550 x 8 x 40 = 1935.7 (1936)


The capacity of the passage or concourse at the rear
of the terrace is measured at its narrowest points
(see Figure        ).   In sector A the distance measured
is 10'-00 (3.05 metres).


Exit capacity at this point is calculated as:-


       3.05 divided by .55 x 60 x 8 = 2661.8 (2662)


In sector B the narrowest point is measured as 4
metres.      Exit capacity at this point is calculated
as:-
       4.0   divided by .55 x 60 x 8 = 3490.9 (3491)


The exit gate is measured as 16'-00 (4.88 metres).


The exit capacity of the gate As calculated as:-


       4.88 divided by .55 x 60 x 8 = 4258.9 (4259)


                               111
                                                       /
From the above calculations it can be seen that:-


     a)      capacity of exit staircases = 3872
             (1936 x 2)


     b)      capacity of concourse = 6153 (3491 + 2662)


     c)      capacity of gateway = 4259


Terrace capacity is 3872 unless other limiting
factors apply.     If staircase capacity at (a) is
increased to more than 4259 the restricting element
in the exit system will be gateway (c).


The capacity of the emergency exit system is
calculated in the same way but using the relevant
emergency evacuation time and the exit routes
available for use in an emergency.


Example G


Details as in example F assuming that (a) emergency
evacuation time is judged to be 2^ minutes;       (b)
normal exit route is available for use in an
emergency;    (c) additional emergency exit routes to
the playing area are available by     means of 4
gangways at 1.1 metres each.


Staircase 3.327 metres divided by     .550 x 40 x 2% =
             604.9 (605)


Portal      3.05 metres divided by .550 x 60 x 2^ =
             831.8 (832)


Portal      4.00 metres divided by .550 x 60 x 2£ =
             1090.9 (1091 )


                              112
Gateway   4.88 metres divided by .550 x 60 x 2^ =
          1330.9 (1331)


4 gangways at 1.1 = 4.4 metres divided by .550 x 60
x 21 = 1200.


Capacity of the normal exit system is governed by
the staircases: 605 x 2 = 1210


Capacity of the exit system to pitch = 1200


Total = 2410




                          113
CHAPTER 20


20.    RECOMMENDED FLOW RATES


295. From stands and stairways a flow rate of 40
persons per minute per unit of exit width (ie 550
nun) should be used.


296. From terraces (including covered terraces) and
the ground generally a flow rate of 60 persons per
minute per unit of exit width should be used.


297.   [The flow rates quoted are notional for
purposes of calculation.    They assume that movement
is through an exit-width of at least 1.1 metres (ie.
a double unit-width) and that underfoot conditions
comply with those recommended elsewhere in the
Guide.   If, in an individual case, it is evident
from studies of crowd movement at a ground that a
different flow is actually achieved from those
mentioned, the actual rate may be used for
calculation purposes.


298. The flow rate of 60 persons per minute per unit
width is for movement off terraces where occupants
are likely to be able to move quickly across a level
surface and through wide exit gates.   Where a less
hurried departure is experienced from that
associated with football grounds at the end of a
match, the lower figure of 40 persons per minute
should be used for calculation purposes.     In any
case of doubt the lower figure should be used.]




                           115
                                                   ANNEX


TESTING AND INSPECTION OF CRUSH BARRIERS AND
HANDRAILS AND OTHER STRUCTURAL CROWD CONTROL
ELEMENTS


Objective


1.   The objective of visual inspections and
physical testing is to ascertain the condition and
strength of the crush barriers and handrails and
other elements in order to establish that they
comply with the requirements of the Guide and that
they are adequate to carry out their required
function with an established safety factor
(approximately 20% see Table     Chapter 10):- ie that
they will safely withstand the pressures generated
by the movement of spectators during entry, viewing
and egress.


2.   N o t e : forces generated may vary depending upon
the event, the size and nature of the crowd and its
dispersal.    Crowds at football matches including
rugby who are essentially static throughout the
match, occupying accommodation at a packing density
of up to 47/10 square metres and who leave all
together at the end of the game will probably
generate greater pressure on barriers, handrails etc
than spectators at other events such as cricket or
athletics.    The criteria for strength of handrails
and barriers etc envisages the more robust nature of
spectator movement and actions at football matches.


Personnel and Equipment


3.   The inspections and testing should be carried
out by or under the supervision of a competent,


                           116
suitably qualified engineer belonging to a
recognised professional institution.      The engineer
will be responsible for ensuring that the
inspections and testing are properly carried out and
that all results are accurately recorded and the
engineer must be satisfied that equipment used for
the tests is suitable for the purpose and is used in
the correct manner.      The equipment used should be
capable of a level of accuracy [+        kN] and have
the potential to test at least 12 kN per metre
width.      The equipment should also be capable of
measuring the deflection to a level of accuracy of
+ .5 nun.


Records


4.   Detailed records should be made and kept of all
observations, loadings, deflection/recovery readings
etc in respect of each structure inspected and
tested.     The record should include a standard record
sheet identifying each barrier tested and inspected,
its location (including cross-reference to the
plan), date of inspection and comments and state
clearly whether the barrier, handrail etc has passed
or failed.


Inspections


5.   All crush barriers and handrails etc should be
inspected annually taking due account of comments
recorded from previous inspections (see paragraph
above).


6.   Any visible defects, such as corrosion, cracks,
holes, misalignment, undue distortion, missing bolts
or fittings, should be noted and its potential
effect on the integrity and strength of the


                             117
structure assessed in order to determine whether its
condition is fit for its intended purpose.


7.    If it is considered that members or
connections, due to the nature of their
construction, have hidden defects such as corrosion,
further investigation should be made.     This may
involve partial dismantling if this can be done
without detriment to the structure itself.
                                      *

8.    Particular attention should be paid to areas
where corrosion or damage could result in a loss of
performance ie water traps.


9.    Should inspections result in any doubt as to
the integrity and potential strength of the barrier
or handrail etc it should be tested in accordance
with the Guide or deemed to have failed.


Testing


10.   Testing should be undertaken annually on a 25%
representative sample of crush barriers and
handrails etc throughout all parts of the ground.
Each year the sample should be different so that all
crush barriers and handrails are tested at least
once every 4 years.    The 25% sample does not include
any which, following inspection, are tested as a
result of doubts as to their integrity.


11.   The method of physical testing should be such
as to satisfy the objective stated in paragraph
above.    The methods given below, if undertaken
correctly, achieve this.


Test Method




                           118
12.    The test is in two parts: Bedding In Cycle and
Proof Test.    In each case the test consists of
evenly distributed force applied in the form of a
static load acting on the top rail of the barrier or
handrail at right angles to the longitudinal axis
and applied in increments.


13.    Deflection in one direction should be measured
immediately adjacent to the point of application of
the force at the centre line of the barrier in the
horizontal plane and in line with the force applied.
The deflection measuring equipment should be
properly set up on a firm part of the terrace
unaffected by any movement of the barriers.


Bedding In Cycle


14.    As an initial cycle, in order to allow for the
bedding in of the test equipment and any frictional
restraints, the barrier or handrail should be loaded
upto its design service load (see Table         Chapter
).    The bedding-in load should be applied in at
least 6 equal increments.     The maximum load should
be applied for one minute.


15.    The barrier or handrail may be considered to
have completed this part of the test satisfactorily
if it recovers to within 90% of its original
position prior to loading.        If the barrier or
handrail fails to achieve this level of recovery it
shall be considered to have failed the test unless
there is a satisfactory explanation for the results.


Proof Test


16.   For crush barriers the test is to consist of
the application of an evenly distributed force of


                            119
either 6.0 kN/metre width or 4.1 kN/metre width of
barrier as mentioned in Chapter 9.


17.     For handrails the test is to consist of the
application of an evenly distributed force of either
4.1 kN/metre width or 2.7 kN/metre width of handrail
as mentioned in Chapter 9.


18.     The force should be applied in ten equal
increments for two consecutive periods, the full
force being maintained for 5 minutes each period.
The interval between applications to be as short as
possible, ie to enable complete unloading and
reloading only.     A record should be kept of any
deformation during the loading periods, during the
periods of maintained loading, or during the
recovery period (see paragraph        above).


19.     If, on removal of the force for the second time
the recovery of the deflection is at least 95%
[90%](as measured from the barrier position at the
start of the proof test procedure - ie after the
bedding in cycle), the barrier or handrail should be
considered as having satisfied the loading
requirements.



20.     [Where the deflection is less than 5 mm and
there are no other signs of weakness (see paragraphs
      below) a recovery of the deflection of not less
than 75% (as measured from the barrier position at
the start of the proof test procedure) should be
considered as having satisfied the loading
requirements.]


Other




                            120
21.    Wherever possible comparison should be made
with the performance of other crush barriers of a
similar type and with the same barrier previously
subjected to the same or similar tests in order to
establish whether there are indications of a
reduction in overall performance which might
indicate a developing weakness requiring special
attention or more frequent testing and/or inspection
than the minimum.


22.    If at any time during the procedure, and
notwithstanding that the barrier or handrail has
satisfied the test cycle, doubt arises for any
reason (including such matters as corrosion,
cracking of the terracing or distortion of
connections) as to the safety of the barrier or
handrail, a detailed investigation should be carried
out (see paragraphs      above).   Unless the results
of this investigation remove the doubt as to the
safety of the barrier or handrail, the barrier or
handrail, as the case may be, should be deemed to
have failed.


Note


The principles of the testing procedure recommend
previous editions of the Guide are still valid as
are the results of such tests until re-testing is
required undeer paragraph 10 above.




                          121
                                                  ANNEX B


STEWARDING    (See Chapter 16)


1.   Stewards should be fit, active and ideally
between the ages of 18 and 55.     All stewards should
be capable of carrying out their duties and should
be properly trained to do so.


2.   Stewards must be informed in writing of all
that they are expected to know and do.    The
following list gives examples of typical tasks and
duties which stewards should be expected to carry
out and for which they should be prepared.      Stewards
should:


     i.    Monitor the crowd throughout the ground
           for signs of distress or overcrowding and
           take action in accotdance with standing
           instructions.


     ii.   Prevent overcrowding by ensuring the crowd
           limits in various parts of the ground are
           complied with.


     iii. Prevent spectators, as far as possible,
           from climbing fences and other structures
           eg floodlight pylons, and from standing on
           seats.   Where by virtue of the scale of
           the incident stewards are unable to
           prevent this, they should immediately
           report the matter to the nearest police
           officer or, if no police officer is
           present, to the chi^f steward or the
           safety officer.




                             122
iv.   Staff all parking areas to ensure all
      approaches and emergency exits are kept
      clear and that vehicles are correctly
      parked     in club car parks.


v.    Ensure that gangways and exits are kept
      clear.


vi.   Staffing of all openings in perimeter
      fence.


vii. Assist in the diversion of spectators to
      other parts of the stadium when the
      capacity for any area is about to be
      reached.


vii i.Identify and investigate any incident or
      occurrence among spectators, reporting
      their findings to the police or to
      management.


ix.   Know the location of and be able to
      operate effectively the fire-fighting
      equipment at the ground.


x.    Know the location of the first aid room
      and any first aid equipment kept
      elsewhere.


xi.   Be fully conversant with any methods or
      signals used to alert staff that an
      emergency has arisen.


xii. Be capable of recognising potential fire
      hazards and suspect packages, reporting
      such findings immediately to the nearest
      police officer or, if no police officers


                       123
      is in the immediate vicinity, the chief
      steward or the safety officer.


xiii.Comply promptly with any instruction given
      in an emergency by a police officer, the
      chief steward or the safety officer.


xiv. Remain at their allocated posts as
      instructed unless authorised or ordered to
      do otherwise by a police officer, the
      chief steward or the safety officer.


xv.   Report to the safety officer any damage or
      defect which is likely to pose a threat to
      spectator safety eg a damaged crush
      barrier.


xvi. Assist in the prevention of breaches of
      ground regulations.




                     124
                                                      ANNEX


FIRST AID, MEDICAL FACILITIES AND AMBULANCES


First aid staff and accommodation


1.   There should be at each sports grounds at each
match or event at least one trained first aider per
1,000 spectators.   The responsibility for securing
the attendance of first aiders lies with ground
management.


2.   Ground operators should provide accommodation
designated for the provision of first aid to
spectators.   This should be in addition to the
club's medical room.    The recommended minimum size
of the room should be 15 square metres in cases of
ground capacity not exceeding 15,000 and 25 square
metres where the crowd capacity is in excess of that
figure.   In any event the room should be large
enough to contain the minimum of a couch - with
enough space for people to walk round; a sink
providing hot and cold water and drinking water; a
worktop; and sufficient room to store stretchers,
blankets and pillows.   Care should be taken to
ensure that the door is large enough to allow access
for a stretcher or a wheelchair.


3.   The first aid room should contain suitable
storage for first aid materials.    The contents of
the store and any other first aid equipment should
be agreed with local medical or first aid services
in the light of likely crowd attendance.     Ground
operators should appoint someone with sole
responsibility for the equipment and materials in
the first aid room and for the upkeep of the room.




                          125
4.   First aid rooms should have heating, lighting,
ventilation and electric sockets.     The room should
be signposted throughout the ground and located in
such a position where it is accessible to both
spectators and emergency vehicles.     A telephone line
should be installed allowing internal and external
communication.


Medical Practitioner


5.   At matches or events where the number of
spectators is expected to exceed 2,000, the club
should employ a medical practitioner to be present
and available to deal with any medical exigency at
the ground.     He/she should be present at the ground
at least an hour before the start of the match or
the event and should remain until half an hour after
the end of a match.    His/her whereabouts should be
known to first aid staff and to those in the control
room who should be able to make immediate contact
with him/her.


Ambulance provision


6.   At least one fully equipped ambulance from or
approved by the local NHS ambulance authority should
be in attendance at all matches or events with an
anticipated crowd of 5,000 or more.    The number of
ambulances to be in attendance for matches where
larger crowds are expected should be determined
after consultation with the ambulance authority.


7.   The provision of ambulance facilities at
grounds is a matter for ground management.    They may
choose the source of the facility provide it has
been approved by the ambulance authority.




                           126
                                           ANN EX D


TESTS AND INSPECTIONS



1.   As indicated in Chapter 2 and Chapter 5,
regular and detailed inspections of the ground are a
necessary and important function of ground
management.    The following provides a tabulation of
tests and inspections and their frequency and
operation.



Before each event


2.   Test exit doors and gates and their locks if
they are to be locked.


3.   All automatic fire detection and fire warning,
emergency lighting and public address systems should
be tested 24 hours before an event.


4.   Turnstiles should be tested to make sure they
are in proper working order.


5.   Ensure that the ground does not contain any
accessible items which could be used as missiles.


6.   Ensure that there are no accumulations of
combustible waste especially below stands and in
exit routes and that any hazardous materials are
safely stored well away from public areas.


7.   Check that all entry/exit routes are clear of
obstruction.




                          127
8.    Ensure that sufficient numbers of stewards and
first aid staff are present to enable the event to
take place.


After each event


9.    Carry out a general visual inspection for signs
of damage which might create a potential danger to
the public.


10.   Inspect the ground to ensure that there are no
accumulations of combustible waste and ensure that
any hazardous materials are safely stored well away
from public areas.


Six monthly


11.   A review of the stewarding of the ground should
be carried out to ensure that all stewards have
sufficient and effective training.


12.   Exercises should be carried out with stewards
to ensure that emergency procedures operate
smoothly.


Annually


13.   A detailed inspection of the ground, including
all components and installations.


14.   Visual inspection of all crush barriers and
handrails and other structural crowd control
elements.


15.   Physical testing of a 25%'representative sample
of crush barriers and handrails and other structural




                          128
crowd control elements.   All elements should
therefore be tested at least once every 4 years.




                          129
             IN CONFIDENCE




           DRAFT REVISION NO   3


GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS


             27 JULY 1990




            IN CONFIDENCE
KH.7.5/GUIDESSG.DM



GUIDE TO SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS


1.    INTRODUCTION



Scope and Status of the Guide


1.   This booklet provides guidance to ground
management, local authorities and technical
specialists such as engineers on measures for
improving spectator safety at existing sports
grounds.   The Guide has no statutory force.
Although the Guide is a voluntary code many of its
recommendations will be given statutory force at
individual grounds designated under the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act 1975 by their inclusion in safety
certificates.


2.   Whether or not a ground is the subject of a
safety certificate ground operators who have primary
responsibility for the safety of their spectators
should apply the criteria, enlisting professional
expertise where necessary, in order to help ensure
safe conditions at their ground.


Background to the Guide


3.   Guidelines on measures for improving the safety
of spectators at sports grounds first became
available when the Wheatley Report on Crowd Safety
at Sports Grounds was published in 1972.   The
recommendations in the Appendix to that Report were
extended to include fire precautions and means of
escape from an emergency situation such as a fire,
and then formed the basis of the Guide to Safety at

                          1
Sports Grounds (which became known as the 'Green
Gui d e ').


4.     The application of those guidelines to football
grounds over the following few years revealed a need
for advice to be amended in certain respects.
Furthermore, since the safety of spectators can be
affected when crowds are disturbed by hooligan
elements, the recommendations of the Working Party
on Crowd Behaviour were incorporated in a new
version, published in 1976, which was aimed
specifically at football grounds.


5.    Following the fire at Bradford City FC ground
in 1985 in which 56 people died, a working party,
established under the aegis of Mr Justice
Popplewell's Inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control
at Sports Grounds, reviewed the Guide and produced a
series of recommendations which were taken into
account in consultation with others to produce a
revised and expanded second edition in 1986.


6.    This third edition incorporates further changes
made following re-examination of the guidelines in
the light of recommendations by the Inquiry by Lord
Justice Taylor who reviewed the guide with technical
assistance in the course of his inquiry into the
tragedy at Hillsborough in 1989.


Historical context


7.    Serious accidents at sports grounds involving
injuries on a large scale are fortunately few.     But
as demonstrated by those at Burnden Park in 1946,
Ibrox Stadium in 1971, Valley Parade in 1985 and
Hillsborough in 1989, the potential for disaster at
a crowded sporting event is such that it is


                           2
essential for ground management to take such steps
as are necessary to ensure reasonable safety at
their grounds.    This applies to all grounds
irrespective of the sport being played and whether
or not they are the subject of a safety certificate.


General principles of the Guide


8.    The problem of crowd safety at sports grounds
is complex and cannot be solved simply by ensuring
that each component of a ground, such as stairways,
passages or sections of terracing, is satisfactory
in itself.   The inter-relation of these and other
components is essential: none of them can be
considered in isolation without consideration of its
effect on the others, and they should all be
compatible and combine to form a balanced unit.


9.    The guide is intended to cover grounds where
sporting events of all kinds are held and where the
gathering of large crowds is likely to present a
safety problem.   Football has particular problems
such as overcrowding and misbehaviour, which are not
normally experienced to the same extent elsewhere.
Accordingly much of the guidance has particular
application to football grounds.       It should also be
recognised that crowd problems are often directly
related to the nature of the event and the numbers
attending it.


10.   The variety of type, function and layout of
sports grounds and the inter-relationship of the
different components means that a flexible approach
should be maintained to take account of the
individual nature of grounds.       The Guide does not
attempt to provide a universal minimum standard but
sets achievable standards.       Whilst it may therefore


                             3
be possible to deviate from individual guidelines
without detracting from the overall safety of the
ground any decision to do so should be recorded
together with the deviation(s) with supporting
documentation.       Unless alternative measures which
can be demonstrated to achieve an equal or greater
degree of safety are taken to those laid down in the
Guide,       a reduction of the numbers of spectators who
can be safely accommodated compared to the number
who would otherwise be accommodated will be
required.      That reduction may be severe.


11.     The Guide is aimed primarily at safety in
existing sports grounds and therefore attempts to
take account of the constraints and difficulties
which are present in these grounds.       Although it is
not in itself a design brief for new construction
work or reconstruction work at sports grounds, the
standards of such work should not be lower than
those set out in the Guide.       New work should conform
to the appropriate Building Regulations.       The scope
of new design work should lead to improved standards
on those that can be achieved at grounds already
bu i l t .


12.     When using the Guide to assess whether existing
circumstances provide adequately for the safety of
spectators, the criterion to be aimed for is that of
a reasonable degree of safety.       It would be
unreasonable,     if not impractical, to seek standards
for absolute safety of everyone attending a ground.


13.    The Guide is not specifically aimed at risks to
spectators from the sport itself, but clearly
management have a duty to take all necessary
precautions to safeguard spectators against the
effects of accidents in, or originating from, the


                              4
activity on the playing area.     Particular care is
needed when the sport entails the use and storage of
flammable fuels.


14.     The advice given in this Guide is without
prejudice to the operation of the Building
Regulations, the Health and Safety at Work etc Act
1974 and any other relevant legislation.


Using the Guide


15.     The principles referred to in paragraphs 8-13
above should be kept in mind by both ground
management and, where applicable, by the local
authority when applying the Guide to an individual
ground.     The Guide is an aid to professional
judgement and common sense, not a substitute.


16.     Although some of the safety standards are
likely to apply to all sports grounds however many
spectators are present, it is nevertheless important
to relate the Guide to the needs of each individual
grounds.     The required safety standard to be
attained should relate to the maximum number of
spectators who are to be admitted to the ground or
parts of it.     For example, a large football ground
with a maximum spectator capacity of tens of
thousands is likely to pose significant crowd
pressure risks particularly if it is full or nearly
full.     To accommodate such a crowd safely may entail
substantial remedial work if it is proposed to
maximise the potential of the accommodation;
alternatively, consideration might be given to
accepting a much smaller number of spectators who,
properly dispersed, could be accommodated safely
without having to incur costly repairs or
alterations.    Therefore the first step, using the


                            5
Guide's criteria, is to assess how many spectators
can be accommodated safely given the existing
condition of the ground.   In other words, determine
a safe ground capacity based on each viewing area,
entry and exit route.   This requires properly
detailed plans drawn to scale (1:200) of the ground.
[Annex A provides an example of the type of plan and
should be read in conjunction with Chapter 19.]


The problems


17.   There are essentially four types of safety
problem to be considered within a ground and its
immediate surroundings, all of which are inter­
related.


18.   Underfoot conditions: The first hazard is
tripping, falling etc by individuals which can not
only have serious consequences for the individual
concerned, but can lead to a serious incident
involving others.   This type of problem can be
remedied by proper care and maintenance; and
attention to good building practice.


19.   Crowd pressures: The second type involves crowd
pressures and is potentially the more serious.     When
large crowds are present and densities are high,
pressures build up within the crowd either through
motion or swaying which make it difficult, or even
impossible, for individuals to control their own
movements.   Under these conditions crowd pressures
can escalate to a dangerous level and if a person
stumbles or falls the crowd cannot adapt to avoid
him or her or to stop to help.   Since this type of
danger arises from crowd pressures its remedy lies
in their removal or restraint within safe limits.
These dangers arise particularly on terraces and in


                           6
entry/exit routes.   Careful attention must be paid
to avoid overcrowding, to restrain surges and
similar pressures on the terraces and to ensure free
movement throughout the entry/exit systems.


20.   Emergency evacuation: The third type of safety
problem cannot be divorced from the second and in
some ways is an extreme version of it.    The danger
arises from emergency situations which can develop
following, for example an outbreak of crowd disorder
or fire.   The orderly evacuation of large crowds may
under emergency conditions become a very serious
problem.


21.   Fire: the fourth is the risk from fire itself,
particularly where there is a large crowd in a
confined area of an elevated covered stand where
spectators are in the upper tiers of a building, the
materials and construction of which might in
themselves constitute a fire risk (see Chapter 13).


Overcoming the problems


22.   Good ground management:   The importance of good
ground management cannot be emphasised too strongly
(see Chapter 2).   Much of this Guide contains advice
which should form part of the general upkeep and
maintenance of a sports ground.    If followed it will
reduce or eliminate risks to spectators and in the
long term should prove cost effective by preventing
serious defects.   A well-maintained and well-run
venue makes commercial sense and may attract more
events and a greater number of spectators.


23;   Improving safety by new design:   As mentioned
in paragraph 11 above, new design work can provide
an opportunity to enhance spectator safety and


                           7
should be given the highest priority when deciding
upon the design, layout, materials and loading of
new buildings, or alterations in a ground.        Close
attention should be paid to new and existing exits
and exit routes, slip-resistant surfaces, lighting
and ease of maintenance.      All parts of the viewing
areas should always have a clear unobstructed view
of the playing area and designs should take account
of the need to facilitate effective stewarding,
which can plays an important role in controlling
crowd movement (see Chapter 16).


24.   New design work also offers the chance to
improve amenities and standards of comfort for
spectators.   Attention to decor and careful planning
of catering or other refreshment areas can encourage
spectators to arrive in good time, influence the use
of different ingress and egress routes and may
contribute towards improving crowd behaviour.        Where
segregation of spectators is a feature, special
attention is needed in order to ensure a good
standard of amenity is available in each segregated
part of the ground.


25.   Care and maintenance:       Although controlling
crowd numbers may serve to reduce some risks to an
acceptable level, remedial work is likely to be
necessary to overcome others.        Obvious defects such
as trip hazards (particularly at the head of stairs
or steps), loose or weak handrails on stairs, and
obstructed exits or exit routes, should be rectified
as part of a continuous programme of remedial care
and maintenance of a ground.        Structures should be
sound (see Chapter 4) and inspected by suitably
qualified persons (see Chapter 5).       Design, layout
and signposting of entrances, exits, entry and exit
routes require particular attention so as to ensure


                              8
that they can safely cope with the number of
spectators who will use them either in normal
circumstances or in an emergency (see Chapters 6 and
7).     Similarly, the condition of terraces or viewing
slopes (see Chapter 9) and condition of correctly
sited crush barriers (see Chapter 10) are important
factors.     Broken, uneven terraces causes stumbling.
Barriers not only serve to break up crowd pressures
but also assist in controlling movement from the
terraces by regulating the rate of arrival at exits
to suit their capacity, and encouraging the
formation of queues so that spectators arrive at
exits in an orderly fashion.


26.     Fire precautions:    Proper precautions against
the risk of fire are vital (see Chapter 13).       Good
ground management is crucial in reducing or
eliminating the risk.       Accumulation of litter is a
prime potential source of fire but can be eliminated
by regular and frequent inspections, good
housekeeping, ground maintenance and safe provision
over the care and storage of flammable materials.
The nature and type of materials used in the
construction of covered areas and stands will
strongly influence the safety measures required in
them.    For example, in some circumstances
consideration may have to be given to restricting
the number of spectators and/or to the provision of
additional exits from the building if it is to
continue in u s e .




                              9
CHAPTER 2


2. MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITY


Effective ground management is an essential element
in achieving safety.     Management should constantly
look to improve safety standards.


27.   The responsibility for the safety of spectators
inside the ground lies at all times with the ground
operator ie those who stage the event and/or
administer the ground.     Local authority safety
officers, police and fire officers will advice
management to discharge this responsibility and in
certain circumstances may require measures to be
taken to achieve reasonable safety standards.       This
does not however exonerate ground management from
its responsibility for the safety of its spectators.


Safety Policy


28.   As part of the drive for success of the club,
team or individual event, senior management,
directors and board members must devote time, effort
and resources to safety management at the ground,
both in its day to day use or for any special event.
They should have a written policy of safety for
spectators and employees at the ground.     This should
be known to all staff and voluntary workers who may
be involved in ground operations.    The management
should require regular, periodic reports on safety
measures taken and progress on those in hand.       They
should ensure that they are made aware of details of
any minor incidents (which might suggest underlying
problems) and the action taken to rectify them.
Such details should be kept in written form and,


                            10
together with the policy on safety, should be
available for inspection.


Safety Officer


29.   There should be an appointed safety officer who
should be of sufficient competence, status and
authority effectively to take responsibility for
safety at the ground and be able to authorise and
supervise safety measures.   He/She or an appointed
deputy should be in attendance at a central control
point when an event takes place.     His/Her sole duty
during the course of the event is that of safety and
he/she should be easily identifiable. All staff
should know the location of the central control
point, who is in charge of safety on the day in
question and the line of communication.


30.   There should be a drawn up programme of checks,
inspections, tests, personal training and remedial
work programmes so as to eliminate or minimise the
potential risks to spectators.     The safety officer
is responsible for ensuring that such inspections
are carried out on all structures, installations and
equipment etc so that they are safe and fit for the
purpose for which they were intended.     The results
of any remedial action, as and when taken, should be
recorded.   He must be given the resources to carry
out these tasks, for which he should be accountable
to the most senior management level or Board of
Directors to whom he should have the right of direct
access.


Restrictions


31.   Where restrictions on crowd numbers to parts of
the ground are required for safety reasons they must
be imposed and enforced.     Similarly, if a part of
the ground is required to be closed, for instance
because it is potentially unsafe for spectators this
must be done, and it must not be opened up as a
result of an "attractive" fixture or event, unless
measures have been taken beforehand to remove the
dangers which led to its closure in the first place
and approval given by the appropriate authority to
re-open it.


Fire safety


32.   Management should ensure that structural fire
protection of buildings is adequate, and that fire
warning systems are correctly installed and properly
maintained in accordance with manufacturers'
instructions or British Standards.     Similarly,
suitable fire-fighting equipment must be provided
and maintained to the standards specified in this
Guide (see Chapter 13).


Staff Awareness


33.   Staff training, particularly for stewards, in
carrying out both their normal duties and ensuring
that they are aware of their role in an emergency
situation, should be given high priority.     All staff
should be informed in writing what their duties are,
how to effect them and from whom to seek advice if
in doubt.     These details should be available for
inspection.     The safety officer should also carry
out active supervision and organise emergency drills
to maintain standards (see Chapter 16.)     These
details should be available for inspection.


First Aid Provision




                            12
34.   A properly equipped and staffed First Aid room
and suitable medical facilities should be provided
(see Annex B) in consultation as necessary with the
local ambulance authority and local medical first
aid services.


Miscellaneous


35.   General repair and maintenance should be
undertaken with spectator safety in mind; litter
should not be allowed to accumulate.     Minor repairs
should be quickly and properly carried out.


Summary of Management Responsibilities


36.   A summary of management responsibilities is
contained below


      i.    Appoint a safety officer


      ii.   Where required, apply for and ensure
            compliance with the terms and conditions
            of a safety certificate or other notice
            covering the safety at the ground.


      iii. Draw up and keep up to date records and
            plans of the ground; to maintain the
            general fabric of the ground, and arrange
            an annual detailed inspection of the
            ground.


      iv.   Arrange annual inspection of all crush
            barriers, handrails and ensure testing of
            a representative sample of any barriers
            and protection rails, keeping a record of
            their location and results of the tests.




                           13
v.    Maintain and test all electrical
      installations and, in accordance with the
      relevant British Standards, the systems
      for emergency lighting, communications and
      fire warning/detection, and fire-fighting
      equipment.


vi.   Assist the police and emergency services
      in the preparation of contingency plans
      including arrangements for stopping or
      delaying an event, for:


      a.   various emergency situations
           including fire;


      b.   possible crowd disturbance;


      c.   coping with the exceptionally large
           numbers of spectators arriving at the
           ground; and


      d.   the failure of any detection,
           warning, lighting or communications
           system or other equipment.


vii. Devise a clear system of communications
      inside and outside the ground (including
      direct communication with any police
      control within the ground).


viii.Take necessary fire prevention and
      precautions measures.


ix.   Consult the fire authority about emergency
      evacuation time; fire risk in all parts of
      the ground particularly in stands; fire­
      fighting equipment.


                      14
x.    Consult the police and emergency services
      on access for emergency vehicles.


xi.   Store safely and away from public areas
      any hazardous and flammable materials,
      combustible items, and any accumulations
      of combustible waste which cannot be
      cleared from the ground before the next
      event.


xii. Provide first aid facilities and first aid
      staff.


xiii.Consult with the police to arrange
      adequate policing and police facilities
      and ensure that, where the police are to
      be present at the ground, there is a
      clear, understanding of the division of
      duties and responsibility as between them
      and the management.


xiv. Recruit, train and deploy stewards and to
      organise and carry out emergency
      evacuation drills using those staff.


xv.   Staff any secured exit gates at all times
      when the public are in the ground, to
      ensure that they can be opened immediately
      from inside by anyone in an emergency.


x v i . Ensure that all gangways and exit routes
      are unobstructed and capable of being used
      to their full capacity at all times when
      the public are in the ground.




                      15
xvii.Provide directional flow, exit and
      emergency exit signs.


xviii.Before each event:


      a.   test exit doors and gates, and their
           locks if they are to be locked;


      b.   test lighting, communications and
           fire warning/detection systems; and


      c.   check the ground for any
           accumulations of combustible litter,
           especially below stands and in exit
           routes; and for any source of
           potential missiles.


      d.   check the operation of the
           turnstiles.


      e.   check that all entry/exit routes are
           clear of obstruction.


      f.   ensure that there are sufficient
           stewards for the event.


xix. After each event:


      a.   to carry out a general visual
           inspection for signs of damage; and


      b.   to liaise with police so as to gain
           full benefit from any debriefing
           about crowd control.


xx.   To keep records of:




                      16
           a.    attendance figures; and


           b.    all inspections and tests, any
                 defects noted and the remedial/other
                 action taken.


           c.    any accident or reported incident
                 which might have led to an accident.


37.   Management should ensure that details of all
consultations,   arrangements, plans etc between    them
and the   police and other emergency services are
notified to the relevant local authority if there is
a safety certificate issued in respect of the ground
or stand(s) within the ground.




                           17
CHAPTER 3


3.    PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES


Proper provision to accommodate safely people with
disabilities should be made at all grounds.


38.   The safety measure set in the Guide should not
be construed in such a way as to place undue
restrictions on people with disabilities.


People with impaired mobility


39.   Although it is unlikely that anyone whose
mobility is severely impaired will occupy standing
accommodations they will often wish to occupy seated
accommodation, perhaps with friends or relatives,      in
stands.     Arrangements should therefore exist to meet
such wishes wherever it is possible to do so, for
example by the provision of wheelchair spaces within
the seated area, preferably in different parts so
that there is a choice of seating position.     Such
provision should take account of the sightlines
available from the allocated areas to ensure that
occupants have an unrestricted view.


40.   Wherever possible there should be more than one
ingress/egress for those with impaired mobility.
Although movement to and from accommodation at
ground level is easier for users of wheelchairs,
consideration should be given to the means by which
they can be accommodated on other levels without
prejudicing their safety or the safety of others.


41.   Where a person leaves their wheelchair in order
to occupy a seat, provision should be made for the


                            18
wheelchair to be readily accessible without it
causing an obstruction in a gangway or exit route.
Those who remain in their wheelchair should not
obstruct the movement of others.


42.   Support services and facilities for disabled
people should also be available within the stand.
Toilet facilities should be provided.    Consideration
should be given to how refreshments might be made
available to those unable to leave their seats
unaided.


43.   New design work for stands should incorporate
guidance in BS 5588 Part 8 Code of Practice for
means of escape for disabled people.    Where, because
of constraints posed by existing buildings, it is
not possible or practicable to apply the Code fully,
alternative ways of meeting its objectives should be
sought.


44.   The arrangements described above should be in
addition to any special provision made for the
admission (often at pitch level) of vehicles used by
people with impaired mobility.   The location of such
vehicles should be agreed with the relevant safety
authority in order to ensure that access to the
ground by emergency vehicles and means of escape are
not compromised.


45.   Ramps which are to be used by wheelchair users
should conform to BS 5810.


Use of lifts in an emergency


46;   A lift should be used as a means of escape from
a stand only [in the case of fire] if it is an
evacuation lift or firefighting lift operated under


                          19
the direction and control of an appointed steward
designated with specific responsibility for its use
in an evacuation using an agreed evacuation
procedure.   BS 5588 Part 8 recommendations should be
followed.


People with impaired vision


47.   Signposting (see paragraphs 76 and 91)
especially fire or other safety signs, should be
sited so that as far as possible they can be easily
seen and readily distinguishable by those with
impaired vision or colour perception.   Advice is
available from the Royal National Institute for the
Blind or the National Federation of the Blind of the
UK.


People with impaired hearing


48.   Although people with impaired hearing may
experience difficulty in hearing messages broadcast
on a system designed for those with normal hearing
(see Chapter 14) a hearing impairment does not mean
that in all cases a person is insensitive to sound
and that they do not have a sufficiently clear
perception of all conventional alarm signals.     Where
this is not the case it is reasonable to expect
spectators who have been alerted to prepare for
evacuation to warn those with impaired hearing.


49.    Where they exist, electronic score boards and
television and television monitors should be used to
give information on evacuation.




                          20
C H A P TE R 4


4.    GENERAL FABRIC AND STRUCTURAL MATTERS


To meet safety requirements, all components,
installations and structures, eg terraces, stands,
stairs, barriers and pylons, should have the
strength and durability, and be maintained in such
condition and arranged in such a manner as to
perform properly their required functions.


50.    The design and construction of buildings and
installations should be in accordance with good
engineering and building practice, as set out in the
relevant British Standard specifications and codes
of practice.     They should be properly maintained and
repaired by suitable qualified persons.       Specialist
advice from appropriately qualified engineers
belonging to recognised Institution should be sought
to assess the safety and strength of load-bearing
elements in buildings and installations such as
crush barriers,      (see Chapter 10) brick/block walls
etc (see Chapter 9, paragraph 145).


51.    When walls,   including boundary walls, and
fences are to withstand crowd pressures, they should
be designed and maintained to withstand such
pressures safely and allowance should be made for
forces simultaneously and independently induced by
other factors eg wind forces or attached
installations.


52.    All parts of the ground used by the general
public, and especially the exit routes, should have
minimum headroom of not less than 2 metres.      Exit




                              21
routes should wherever possible have a headroom of
2.4 metres.


53.     Precautions should be taken to prevent people
from climbing on to roofs, pylons, hoardings and
other structures.     Where possible such structures
should be fitted with unclimbable devices eg stout
barriers or close-boarded enclosures.     Spikes,
barbed wire etc should only be installed above the
minimum headroom specified in paragraph 52 above and
preferably at a minimum height of 2.4 metres from
the base.     Spikes, or other similar devices should
not be installed on pitch perimeter fences.     Neither
should such fences have sections overhanging or
returning inwards towards spectators,    (see Chapter
18) .


Electrical installation/wiring


54.     All electrical installations should comply with
the current edition of the Regulations of the
Institution of Electrical Engineers, or have been
awarded a certificate of satisfaction from a
chartered electrical engineer.


55.     For new installations a diagram of the main
electrical circuit should be fixed in a position
easily accessible to the technical staff.     All main
switches or circuit locaters should be clearly
labelled to indicate the circuits which they
control.     Fuse-ways of such circuits of distribution
boards should also be clearly labelled.


56.     All cables and conductors of wiring systems
used for low voltage circuits of permanent
electrical installations should be enclosed
throughout in a protective covering of material


                            22
which has sufficient strength to resist mechanical
damage - for example armoured cables, mineral
insulated sheathed cables protected by screwed metal
conduit or trunking complying with BS 4678 Part 1 or
Part 4, or rigid PVC conduit complying with relevant
British Standards.


57.   The base of any floodlighting tower should be
earthed in accordance with BS 6651 which also
contains advice on bonding and earthing for
lightening protection.


58.   Where the natural lighting in any section of
the ground accessible to the public is deficient,
adequate artificial lighting should be provided.      If
the ground is to be used after dark, all parts
accessible to the public should be provided with
means for lighting adequate to enable them to see
their way into, within and out of the ground.     These
provisions are particularly important in relation to
entry and exit routes and stairways used by the
public.   Emergency lighting provided in addition to
normal lighting should conform to BS 5266: Part 1
(see Chapter 15).
CHAPTER 5


5.    INSPECTIONS AND TESTS


Inspections and tests should be carried out by
suitably qualified persons on behalf of management
to ensure that the safety standards of the Guide are
maintained.


59.   A detailed inspection of the ground,    including
all components and installations, should be arranged
annually by the management.      It should be carried
out by a person with a relevant and recognised
professional qualification, and experience of
inspecting existing structures.


60.   Engineers commissioned to assess structural
safety of buildings may find the appraisal
techniques recommended by the Institution of
Structural Engineers (ISE) in the "Appraisal of
Existing Structures", published in 1980, of
assistance.   Hard and fast rules on the extent to
which a structural appraisal is necessary for
individual buildings are difficult to lay down: much
will depend upon the type of installation, its size,
condition, materials used in construction and
standard of maintenance.      A full appraisal is
however unlikely to be necessary unless defects are
identified or in evidence from the analysis of
information on the structure and visual inspection.


61.   Inspection and testing of crush barriers (see
also Chapter 10) should be carried out in accordance
with Annex D of this Guide.     When the guidelines are
first applied to a particular ground, a
representative sample of barriers of all types from


                           24
all areas of the ground should be selected for
testing.    Thereafter testing of barriers should take
place every 4 years unless from visual inspection
doubts are raised as to their strength/integrity, in
which case they should be retested.    Testing should
be carried out by or under the supervision of a
suitably qualified engineer, ie a structural or
civil engineer.


62.   Warning, detection, lighting and public address
systems are vulnerable to vandalism, and this should
be borne in mind when installing them.    All
automatic fire detection and fire warning, emergency
lighting and public address systems should be tested
24 hours before an event, in accordance with the
methods laid down in BS 5839: Part 1 and BS 5266:
Part 1 respectively.


63.   Turnstiles should be tested to make sure they
are in proper working order.    In case any of these
systems is not operating properly and cannot be
fixed before the event, contingency plans should be
formulated,   in consultation with the emergency
services,   for the use of acceptable substitute
measures or (if necessary) the closure of any areas
of spectator accommodation until the fault is
remedied.


64.   Before an event, and at major soccer grounds in
particular,   steps should be taken to ensure that the
ground does not contain any accessible items which
could be used as missiles (eg piles of bricks,
stones etc).


65;   The ground should be inspected before and after
each event to ensure that there are no accumulations
of combustible waste and that any hazardous


                           25
materials (if essential to be stored) are safely
stored well away from public areas.


66.   Following each event, a general visual
inspection of the ground should be made for signs of
damage which might create a potential danger to the
public.     Particular attention should be paid to the
condition of terraces, viewing slopes and stairways.
Crush barriers and balustrades should be examined
for deformation of any other overt signs of
weakness.    The fire precautions measures should also
be inspected for damage, and alarm and other
electrical installations should be checked to ensure
compliance with the relevant British Standards.
Turnstiles should be checked for damage which might
impair their efficiency.


67.   Records should be kept and maintained of all
inspections and tests together with a record of
remedial actions taken.     The required level of
competence of those carrying out the test should be
specified and the record of the results certified by
those carrying out the work together with their
qualification and status.


68.   Annex C provides a tabulation of tests and
inspections and their frequency of operation.




                            26
CHA P T E R 6


6. INGRESS


The admission of spectators should be accurately
monitored and controlled in order to ensure that
overcrowding does not occur.      Spectators should be
admitted at a rate which is compatible with the
dispersal arrangements for them inside the ground.


Turnstiles


69.    Where entry to a ground or parts of it is
controlled by turnstiles, these, by their number and
location, control not only the rate of admission
but, to a large extent,   the dispersal of spectators
within a ground to the particular sections.
Turnstiles should be of such numbers as to admit
spectators at a rate whereby no unduly large crowds
are kept waiting for admission and yet at no faster
rate than the arrangements for distributing
spectators within the ground permit.


70.   Each section should be served by its own
metered turnstiles which keep a tally of the number
of spectators admitted to that section.      Where a
section is served by a bank or banks of turnstiles,
arrangements must ensure that the metering system is
capable of recording the total of all the turnstiles
for that section or that the total can be quickly
available at any given time and conveyed without
delay to the central control so that appropriate
action can be taken   once a pre-determined figure
(ie a figure which is less than the capacity for the
section) has been reached.      This is especially
important if a capacity or near capacity crowd is


                           27
expected or if a particular section of a ground is
known to be popular or likely to accommodate an
unusually high number of spectators for a particular
event.



71.   The correlation between each viewing area in
the ground and the turnstiles serving it should be
as such to ensure that all spectators intended to be
admitted to that viewing area can pass through the
turnstiles within one hour.        If that cannot be
achieved,   the capacity of that viewing area should
be reduced accordingly or the number of turnstiles
for that part of the ground increased (see also
Chapter 19).


72.   The maximum rate at which spectators can pass
through turnstiles will depend on a variety of
factors such as the design and age of the equipment,
the ability of the operator and the ticketing
arrangements.    The rate of admission at each
turnstile will therefore depend greatly upon local
circumstances.   The through-put or flow-rate through
turnstiles should therefore be measured at least
once a year and recorded.        Where a recorded flow-
rate is less than 660 persons per turnstile per hour
the actual figure should be used for calculation
pruposes of paragraph 71 above.        The maximum upper
figure for calculation purposes should not exceed
660 persons per hour.


Computer Monitoring


73.   Intercommunication systems and centralised
computer monitoring should be installed wherever
practicable and at grounds in the 1st and 2nd
Division of the English Football League, Premier


                            28
Division of the Scottish Football League and grounds
used for international or other major sporting
events.


Entrances and Entry Routes


74.   Entrances to viewing areas should, where
practicable, be designed in such a way and so
located as to allow for the even distribution of
spectators and to prevent local pressure building
up.   Attention should also be given to the siting of
turnstiles so that the flow of people from them to
the viewing area(s) is, so far as possible, evenly
distributed to the entrances to the viewing
accommodation.   Where this distribution is uneven
and gives rise to congestion at an entrance
consideration will have to be given to changing the
turnstile arrangements or siting in order to
encourage better use of under-used entrances.
Additional or alternative measures should also be
taken: for example improved sign-posting and
increased stewarding.


75.   Entrances and entry routes should not be
obstructed.   Entry and exit routes are often common
to each other and in such cases the considerations
which apply to exit routes therefore apply also to
entry routes (see paragraphs 92 - 96 of Chapter 7).
Amenities such as refreshment kiosks or toilets
should be located away from the area of the
turnstiles, entrances and entry/exit routes.


Signposting


76.   Clear, comprehensive signposting must be
provided in order to show the routes to different
parts of the ground.    Tickets (where issued) should


                           29
clearly identify the location of the accommodation
for which it has been issued.     Information on the
ticket should correlate with the information
provided both inside and outside the ground.
Retained ticket stubs should [as far as possible]
contain information which will help guide spectators
once they are inside the ground.


Programmes


77.   Where possible, programmes should include a
plan of the ground indicating the entry/exit routes
to or from different parts of the ground and their
destination.


Crowd Build-Up


78.   Dangerous overcrowding can be caused if
spectators are able to force their way into a ground
already full or near to full capacity by scaling or
breaking through boundary walls or fences or the
gates in them.     To avoid this danger such walls,
fences and gates should be of appropriate height and
strength and should not provide the opportunity for
hand or foot holds which might assist climbing.
They should be regularly inspected.
79.   Installation of closed circuit television
should be considered in order to assist in the
monitoring of crowd densities outside the ground and
throughout the ingress/egress routes (see paragraph
250 Chapter 14).


80.   Contingency plans should be made to deal with
situations where the available entrances at a ground
have proved insufficient to stop unduly large crowds
from gathering outside.    Local knowledge of the
ground, crowd patterns and advice from the police


                            30
should be taken into account in drawing up
contingency plans.   Opening additional or under­
used entrances may have to be considered.    However,
under no circumstances should there be uncontrolled
admission into the ground.




                          31
CHA P TE R 7


7.    EGRESS


There should be a smooth, unimpeded passage through
an exit route and a free flow of people from one
element to the next until they reach the boundary of
the ground.


81.    It is generally recognised that a period of
great risk to crowd safety is at the time of
leaving.       Pressures can be set up within a departing
crowd; such pressures can and must be contained and
controlled by careful attention to the detailed
design of barriers (Chapter 10), stairways (Chapter
8), gangways (Chapter 9) and exits.


82.    Additional consideration which must be given to
egress from covered stands and seated accommodation
is given in paragraphs 164-167 of Chapter 11.
[Calculation of the exit systems is contained in
Chapter 19 and paragraphs 88-90 below.]


Exit Routes/Systems


83.    A smooth free flow through an exit route to the
outside is best achieved by controlling the crowd
flow at the beginning of the exit route, so that
departing spectators are held back in a relatively
safe place eg on the terrace, enabling access to the
exit route at a calculated rate.       That is to say the
width of the first part of the exit route leading
from the terrace or other enclosure should have the
same or lower capacity than any subsequent element.
The exit route will then be able to discharge people
at a rate compatible with that at which they enter
into the route.


                              32
84.   Where deviations in design or construction from
the recommended guidelines are such as to create a
manifest danger, that section of the exit system
should be closed until remedial action has been
taken, and a reduction made accordingly in the
spectator capacity of the section of the ground it
serves ie the exit route is excluded from the
capacity calculations (see paragraph 88 below).     Any
exit route which contains an element less than 1
metre wide should be excluded from the calculation.


85.   Exit systems should ensure that in the event of
an emergency which blocks the usual exit route
spectators will be able to use an alternative exit
route including forward evacuation on to the pitch
which will normally form part of the emergency
evacuation route (see Chapter 13 paragraph 222).


86.   There should be no "funnelling" effect causing
people to converge on a narrower means of access or
egress.   This will slow down the rate at which
people can pass through the entire exit system and
pack more closely together.    However a narrowing in
the exit route may be acceptable when it is preceded
by an open space or "reservoir area" where the
holding capacity is sufficient to contain the
spectators held up because of the difference in the
flow rate into and out of the reservoir area (but
see also paragraph 87 below).   The capacity of the
reservoir areas should be calculated using the
appropriate flow rate given in Chapter 20 and the
recommended exit time given in paragraph 85 below.
A packing density of 40 persons per 10 square metres
of the area available for standing within the
reservoir area is the maximum for safety.




                          33
Arrangements should be such as to prevent this being
exceeded.

87.   Reservoir areas should be avoided wherever
possible and should not be permitted within 45
metres of any combustible building within the ground
eg a timber stand, or within 15 metres of any non­
combustible building within the ground.


Egress time


88.   Some research has indicated that when it takes
more than about 7 minutes to vacate an area of
terraced spectator accommodation, the crowd flow
tends to become turbulent.     In these conditions the
rate of flow may be reduced and individuals can lose
control over their own movements which may thereby
increase the potential for accidents.     Although
spectators normally leave seated accommodation in a
more leisurely fashion exits from each area of
spectator accommodation whether seated or standing
should be designed and constructed so that all
spectators can leave that area and pass into a free
flowing exit route system within a notional time of
8 minutes or less (see Chapter 13 paragraph 228).


89.   Egress time will normally be no different to
the emergency evacuation time (see Chapter 13).
This is because the exit routes available for use by
spectators in an emergency are identical to those
used by them in normal circumstances - for example
the upper tiers of a stand.    In such circumstances
if the capacity of the exit routes is considered
insufficient for evacuation purposes the number of
spectators occupying the accommodation will have to
reflect that exit route capacity.




                          34
90.   In some cases additional exits or exit routes,
not normally used by spectators, may be made
available for them (e.g.     where the playing area or
perimeter track is used as part of the emergency
evacuation route but does not form part of the
normal egress route).     In such circumstances there
should be a route leading from the playing area or
perimeter track which provides an exit from the
ground.


Signposting


91.   A comprehensive system of signposting which
clearly indicates routes to the various parts of the
ground, and to exits from the ground, should be
provided.     Signs relating to fire safety should be
in accordance with BS 5499: Part 1: 1984, and other
safety signs (eg first aid facilities) should be in
accordance with BS 5378: Part 1: 1980.      Exit gates
themselves should be clearly signposted, preferably
using illuminated signs in accordance with BS 2560
or BS 4218.     Directional signs should be provided to
encourage crowds in any particular section to flow
in one direction when leaving the ground and should,
wherever practicable, provide information on the
destination of the exit route (eg north side car­
park, High Street) so as to provide confidence to
people using them, especially if they are evacuating
the premises.     Signs using pictograms are likely to
be of particular value.


Exit routes


92.   Exit routes should be kept clear of
obstructions.     In particular, no catering, sales or
toilet facility should be situated in such a way
that it, or any queue it attracts, obstructs an exit
route.

93.   The minimum width for any section of an exit
routes should be 1.1 metres.     However, the required
width for any particular section is dependent on the
crowd flow it will be required to carry.     (For
capacities of exit routes, see Chapter 19,
paragraphs 309 - 312).


94.   Where there is a simple exit route, ie a direct
passage from the accommodation area to the exit gate
from the ground, every part of that route should be
able to accommodate the flow from the terrace or
stand exit.


95.   For a more complex exit system which combines a
number of exit routes and/or offers a choice of
alternative routes to exits, the system should be
analysed in the form of a network in order to check
that the capacity of the exit from the terrace or
the stand is sufficient to ensure a free flow of
spectators to the various exits from the ground.
Where branching of routes gives spectators a choice
of paths, the proportion of the crowd likely to use
each path should be derived from local knowledge, eg
the exit closest to a railway or bus station may be
likely to attract a higher proportion of spectators.


96.   Grounds which have complex exit systems
described in paragraph 95 should have illustrative
plans of the network system which serve each
section,    identifying the capacity of the routes
within the system and clearly showing them on the
plans.     These plans should be kept with the drawings
of the section of the ground to which they relate.
Any changes to the ground which affect the


                            36
entry/exit routes should be identified on the
network plan.     An example of a network plan is given
below and others are contained in Chapter 19.



Exit doors


97.   All exit doors on an exit route should always
be capable of opening outwards so that crowds can
escape in an emergency.     This is particularly
important for doors within covered stands and at the
foot of stairways.


98.   All doors on an exit route should be secured in
the fully open position before the end of play.
When open, no door should obstruct any gangway
passage, stairway or landing.


99.   All exit gates from the ground should open
outwards.     Where this is impracticable for existing
doors, eg because it would cause an obstruction on a
public highway, the gates should be resited (ie put
further back) within the exit route they serve, or
provision made for two-way opening.     Where
practicable exit gates should be sited adjacent to
entrances.     There should be no obstructions eg no
changes in level etc at exit doors.


100. Sliding or roller-shutter gates should not be
used because they are incapable of being opened when
pressure is exerted in the direction of crowd flow
and have mechanisms or runways which are vulnerable
to jamming.


101. All exit gates, unless secured in an open
position, should be staffed at all times while the




                            37
Figure 40 EXIT SYSTEMS 'C 0
         Leading from the West r side Enclosure




                    4
                        t
                           D             L
                                   Passage

                               Stairs


                 O                           4


                                                        Gateway-


                               Portal


                 S tairs


                                   Passage

                                Portal

                 Stairs

                                   Passage


                                   Passage
                               Portal


                 S tairs          Passage
                                                 Passage



                                  Passage
                               Portal


                 S tairs
                                  Passage



                               Portal



                 S tairs




Figure -tl   Exit S y ste m s C St D represented as networks.
ground is used by the public and be capable of being
opened immediately from inside in an emergency.


102. Facilities should be provided in order to eject
anyone whose presence is unwanted and to enable
people to leave the ground at any time.   For this
purpose a number of reversible turnstiles or,
preferably, pass doors, so operated as to limit the
opening to the passage to one person at a time,
should be provided.   Reversible turnstiles are not
acceptable as a means of escape from a ground and
should not form any part of, or be installed into,
the normal or emergency exit system of the ground.




                          38
C HAPTER 8


8.   STAIRWAYS AND RAMPS


The disposition and construction of stairways and
ramps should be such as to help provide a smooth and
unimpeded ingress and egress for spectators under
all conditions set out in Chapters 6 and 7.


103. For the purpose of this section the term
"stairway" has the meaning given to it in the
Glossary (Annex F) and is distinct from a radial
gangway on a terrace or in a stand.        Guidelines on
terrace gangways is given in Chapter 9, paragraphs
133-140 and for stands in Chapter 11, paragraphs
168-170.


104. Movement on stairways, especially downwards
poses a considerable potential risk to crowds both
in normal circumstances such as at the end of an
event, or in an emergency.        The effects of
stumbling, pushing and jostling, and congestion are
potentially dangerous if, as a result, the crowd
suddenly surge forward.    Likewise,     if sections of
the crowd decide, without warning,       to change
direction the resultant turmoil can have disastrous
consequences.   Steep ramps can also cause or
exacerbate uncontrolled forward movement and lead to
an accident.


105. Stairways should therefore minimise hazards by
having uniformity of width, going and risers, secure
footing, not too steep a gradient, and a width
sufficient to allow free movement but narrow enough
to provide everyone with access to a handrail.        The
head of the stairway should be so designed that flow
onto it is uniform across its width and crowd


                             39
pressures cannot easily be generated.     Flights
should not provide long, uncontrolled paths down
which crowd pressures and surges can be created.
Adequate separation should be provided between
channels and multi-channel stairway arrangements so
that there is no overspill from one channel to
another.


Disposition of stairways


106. Stairways should be carefully positioned to
take advantage of natural light and ventilation.
Where the natural lighting is deficient the stairway
should be adequately lit by artificial light (see
Chapter 4, paragraph 58 and Chapter 15, paragraphs
255-258 for emergency lighting).


Construction of stairways


107. The width, rise and going of the steps should
be uniform within each stairway, and should ideally
be uniform throughout the entire exit system.


108. Stair treads should be provided with slip-
resistant surfaces and durable edgings.     Adequate
drainage should be provided.


109. Open risers should not be used.


110. On any stairway the preferred going of treads
should be 305 mm but not less than 280 mm; and
preferred height of risers should be 150 mm but not
more than 190 mm.


Stairways should:


     i.    be without winders;


                            40
      ii.    be in flights of not more than 16 or fewer
             than 3 steps; and


      iii. not have more than 2 successive flights
             without a turn, and, if there are more
             than 12 steps in a flight, should not have
             more than one flight without a turn.


111. The going of the landing between flights should
not be less than the width of the section or channel
of the flight.


112. Protection should be provided on both sides of
all stairs and landings.     Where next to open wells,
or spaces, such protection should be enclosed,      in
accordance with Building Regulation requirements,
and should be not less than 1.1 metres in height
(measured vertically from the centre of the step, or
the surface of the landing).     The protection should
have a strength equivalent to that of the crush
barriers of the weaker type, described in Chapter
10.   (ie 3.4 kN/metre width design force, 4.1
kN/metre width test load.)


113. Ideally every person on a stairway should have
access to a handrail.     The minimum width of a
stairway or stairway channel should be 1.1 metres.
The maximum width of a stairway channel should be
1.65 metres.     Consideration will have to given to
accepting existing stairways wider than 1.65 metres
but which do not exceed 2.2 metres without division
provided they comply with all other requirements of
the Guide.      Stairways of 2.2 metres or more should
be divided into channels having a width of between
1.1 metres and 1.65 metres (see example at Figure ).




                            41
114. The strength of the handrails (including
supports) used to divide a stairway into channels
should be as described in Chapter 10 i.e. 3.4
kN/metre width design force or 4.1 kN/metre width
test load for handrails at right angles to the
direction of the crowd flow; 2.2 kN metre width
design force or 2.7 kN/metre width test load for
handrails parallel to the direction of the flow.


Figure


Examples of division of stairways


A       5' staircase (1.525 m)




                       I-SXS-,




Notes


No centre rail considered desirable because stairway
width is under 1.65 metres.


Handrails at each side should project at least
300 mm.


Flow rate calculation reflects actual width


1.525 m x 40 = 111
.55


                             42
     B      7' staircase      (2.135 metres)


                               L---- L£il£__^
^— —------------------------ ,----------------------------
___________________________       I


                                  1




    Notes


     Consideration given         here to the option of      dividing
     the staircase into two sections           of 1.0675    metres or
     accepting it as a single channel stairway.            Division
    would mean that each channel would be less than the
     recommended minimum of 1.1 but in certain
     circumstances may be judged perferable to having no
     centre rail at all.          Factors to take into
     consideration would         include use of staircase (ie
    whether or not heavily loaded) its length, number of
    risers and landings, number of winders.


    Handrails should project at least 300 mm.


    Flow rate calculation             1.0675 x 40 x 2 = 155
                                      .55




                                      43
              12' staircase   (3.66 m)
/h &




       A 12 staircase divided into 3 channels of 1.22
       metres each.


       Handrails should project at least 300 mm at each
       end.


       Flow rate calculation       1.22 x 40 x 3 = 266
                                   .55



       115.   Handrails should project not more than 100 mm
       and should be provided on both sides of all
       stairways,   steps and landings at a height of not
       less than 840 mm (measured vertically form the
       centre of the step or the surface of the landing).
       All handrails should extend by at least 300 mm
       beyond the top and bottom of any stairway or ramp.


       Access to stairways


                                   44
116. Access to the head of the stairways should be
controlled along the following lines to ensure a
free flow of spectators.


117. Where a stairway is divided into channels the
access should be designed to secure a uniform flow
down each channel.


118. The approach to the head of the stairs should
be level and should be so arranged that the
spectators converge on the stairway from the front
and/or the sides only.     There should be no approach
from behind, involving movement around the ends of
the balustrades or side walls of the stairway,
except where this approach is already controlled by
physical means such as by the gangways in the seated
areas of the stand.


119. The extent of the approach in the direction of
the stairway should not be       less than 1.1 metres   and
preferably not more than 3 metres.


Figure    Examples of an approach(s) to the head of
          a staircase


120. Where restrictive elements such as barriers or
gateways are installed in the approach from the
terrace to a stairway in order to meet the foregoing
provisions, the total width of the passage formed by
these elements should not be more than two-thirds
the minimum width of the stairway.       This is to
accommodate the slower flow rate down a staircase as
compared with the flow rate on flat areas and
through portals (see Chapter 20).




                            45
                                  Barrier



                                        a r r i e i o —/'         ^
                                                  Handrails
                                   Of       & i       9)    9   \ 9




                                        down



                T h e w id t h o f A and B t o b e n o t less th a n 1.1m
         T h e a g g r e g a t e w id th o f A + B t o b e n o t m o r e th a n 3 m
                                        2(A+B) = % C
T h e ca p a c ity o f this sta ir w a y w o u ld b e calculated from t h e w id th C

Jig u re       Example of an approach to the head of a staircase
121. For an application of these principles to a
multiple stairway leading direct from a terrace, see
Figures       and


Figure        Exits attracting spectators from higher up
              the terrace should be protected by
              barriers so that spectators are forced to
              pass around them and approach from the
              side.


Discharge from stairways


122. All exit stairways should discharge either:


        i.    at ground level and lead directly to a
              place of safety* in the open air; or


        ii.   on to walkways or concourses of adequate
              dimensions at any level provided these
              also lead directly to a place of safety in
              the open air.


*       In Scotland 'place of safety' is a defined term
        in the Scottish Building Regulations.


Fire Protection


123. This is dealt with in Chapter 13, paragraphs
224-226.


Ramps


124. The gradient should preferably be constant and
not broken by steps.


125. The maximum gradient acceptable will depend on
the particular ramp's length, purpose and usage but


                              46
   t




                         DOWN




igu re   Exits attracting spectators from higher up the
         terrace should be protected by barriers so that
         spectators are forced to pass around them and
         approach from the side.
a ramp subject to heavy crowd flow should not exceed
a gradient of 1 in 10 .

126. Ramps installed for wheelchair users should
conform to BS 5810 (see also Chapter 3 on provision
for people with disabilities).




                          47
CHAPTER 9


9.   TERRACES AND VIEWING SLOPES


Arrangements should be made to encourage the even
distribution of the crowd on the terraces to provide
ease of ingress and egress; to control and
facilitate movement, particularly if a local
emergency should arise during the event; and to
prevent the build up of pressures from reaching
dangerous proportions.


127. Terraces are recognised as presenting a special
safety problem especially at football grounds.        The
following guidance is therefore aimed mainly at
football stadia but can be applied to any ground
where standing terraces or viewing slopes are used
for accommodating spectators.


128. In addition to the incidental dangers of
standing for long periods on steep terraced slopes,
crowds may be are subject to excessive pressures
generated by spectators straining to see the event,
by excitement, or by surging deliberately induced by
a certain type of spectator.     Failure to provide
spectators with an unobstructed view invites them to
stretch and strain, and which may also generate
dangerous pressures within the crowd.



Terrace steps


129. A terrace step should not be less than 280 mm
or more than 380 mm wide.    The preferred dimension
is between 355 mm and 380 mm.




                            48
130. The height of risers should be between 75 mm
and 180 mm.     75 mm is related to the minimum width
of 280 mm.     If the riser height is greater than 180
mm, a crush barrier should be provided at the top of
the riser.


131. Excessive variations in the gradient of a
terrace should be avoided.       Gradients steeper than 1
in 2 could be dangerous [and should not form part of
any new design wor k].


132. The surface of terrace steps should be even and
of a slip-resistant material.      Adequate drainage
should be provided to prevent rainwater causing
deterioration.


Gangways


133. For the purpose of this section the term
'radial gangway' has the meaning given to it in the
Glossary [Annex F ] .


134. Gangways, both radial and lateral are the means
by which spectators are channelled in an orderly way
to viewing areas or the vomitory exits which begin
the exit route(s) from the terrace or stand.      Siting
of gangways, together with crush barriers (see
Chapter 10) and barriers governing the flow at the
head of stairways (see paragraphs 120-121, Chapter
8) and handrails dividing stairways (see paragraphs
114-115, Chapter 8) should be designed to provide
(as far as possible) a uniform flow of spectators to
each of the exits from the viewing area.


135. All gangways should be even and free from trip
hazards.     Surfaces should be slip resistant. They
should be painted with a non-slip paint in a


                            49
conspicuous colour and spectators should be informed
by signs and other means (for example in programmes
and by the public address system) that no standing
is allowed in them (see point xvi Chapter 2).       Where
necessary stewards should be used to enforce the
instruction.


136. Every spectator on the terraces should be
within 12 metres of a gangway or exit, so that they
can move quickly into to exit routes in normal
circumstances or in the event of emergency.       This
may be achieved by a pattern of gangways (not less
than 1.1 metres wide) linked to the exit system.


Lateral Gangways


137. Spectators should be discouraged from standing
in lateral gangways because this disrupts the free
movement along them.    Spectators on the terrace
steps behind the gangway may have their view
obstructed, which may cause them to stretch and
strain (see paragraph above).    Spectators are
usually discouraged from standing in these gangways
if they   are sunk approximately 150 mm and if crush
barriers were provided behind but not immediately in
front of them.


Radial Gangways


138. Spectators should be discouraged from standing
in radial gangways.    Here again movement on the
gangway is obstructed by the presence of spectators
using it to view the activity on the playing area.
Moreover radial gangways are often relatively long
and uncontrolled downward paths through terraces and
spectators standing in them are not protected by
crush barriers in the event of a sudden movement


                           50
forward.   Although difficult to do so it is
essential that radial gangways are kept clear. It
may be helpful to sink them approximately 150 mm
and, where possible, to interrupt an otherwise
continuously descending gangway by turns along
lateral gangways.


139. Balustrading at the foot of radial gangways
should be as strong as crush barriers of the
stronger type, ie, 5.0 kN/metre width design force,
or 6.0 kN/metre width test load (see also Chapter
10) .


140. Radial gangways should not contain winders.
Where the gangway is stepped the going should be
uniform and the step dimensions should be compatible
with those for the terrace which they serve (see
paragraph 129 above).


Division of spectator accommodation


141. A ground should be divided into sections to
prevent potentially hazardous migrations by
spectators which might cause dangerous overcrowding.
Each section of a ground must have its own limit of
safe capacity (see Chapter 19) and be served by
turnstiles or other arrangements which keep a tally
of the number of people admitted (see Chapter 6).
Each section of a ground, for example, each end or
side, should be self-contained with its own
entrances, exits and toilet/refreshment facilities.
Consideration should be given to providing suitable
access from one major section to another for use in
an emergency.


142. Sporting events such as greyhound racing
spectators may need to move freely between different


                          51
parts of the ground and this should be borne in mind
when considering access to and from the sections of
the ground and when considering the need for
subdivisions of sections in paragraph 144 below.


143. Other sports, including Rugby Union and Rugby
League, also frequently allow the freedom of
movement for spectators.     The advantage of this
arrangements is that it provides spectators with an
opportunity to disperse throughout the ground in a
way which avoids concentrations of the crowd.
Grounds may nevertheless still have their popular
areas.     Considerable care is therefore needed to
ensure that any concentration of spectators does not
exceed the safe capacity for the particular area in
question.    Well trained stewards can be valuable in
checking, monitoring and marshalling of spectators
at such grounds.     In cases where mobility of
spectators is a feature of the event, overall
calculated packing density for standing should be
below the maximum of 47 persons per 10 square
metres.


144. Each of the major sections should be subdivided
by such means as gangways and crush barriers,
arranged so as to minimise the sway and surge of
spectators and to discourage movement throughout the
section.    If a section of a terrace or viewing slope
is sub-divided into smaller sections by structural
means such as fences or railings, arrangements at
the ground must be such as to ensure that these sub­
divisions cannot be filled to beyond their safe
limit (see also Chapter 6 paragraph 70).


145. Railings,   fences etc dividing sections of the
ground should be of the strength of the crush
barriers, as should handrails dividing stairways


                            52
into channels as appropriate, described in table 2
of Chapter 10.        Brick/block and similar solid
structures lacking sufficient mass or tensile
strength are poorly suited to withstand horizontal
pressures, and where used to divide spectator
accommodation,       should be subject to regular
structural appraisal by appropriately qualified
persons (see Chapter 4).


Crush barriers


146. Detailed advice on crush barriers is given in
Chapter 10.


Viewing slopes (ie non-stepped sloping areas
providing standing accommodation for spectators)


147. The surface of this form of terrace should be
covered with a slip-resistant material, eg packed
ash, and should be even and properly drained.


148. The desirable maximum gradient for a viewing
slope is 1 in 6 (ie 9 . 5 d e g r e e s ) .   Note: this is
different to the stepped terraced gradient quoted in
paragraph 131 above.          Viewing slopes with any
steeper gradient should have continuous crush
barriers between gangways.


149. The spacing of crush barriers should be the
same as for those on terracing (see Chapter 10).


Terrace to touchline distance


150. To prevent undue crowd pressures generated by
spectators stretching and straining for an
unobstructed view, it is desirable to provide a




                                   53
minimum distance between the front of the terrace
and the playing area of the pitch.

151. The minimum recommended distance between the
two is 3 metres where the terrace gradient is 30° or
steeper.   Where the gradient is shallower than this,
it may be advisable to increase this distance so as
to enable spectators to obtain a clear view.




                          54
CHAPTER 10


10.   CRUSH BARRIERS AND HANDRAILS


Many of the hazards arising from crowd pressure on
terraces can be eliminated by provision of well
constructed, correctly positioned and properly
mounted crush barriers which positively control and
contain crowd movement.



Dimensions and Design Features


152. In order to locate the top rail against that
part of the body most able to tolerate pressure the
height of crush barriers should be between 1.02
metres and 1.12 metres above the nosing of the step
immediately behind the barrier, with a preferred
height of 1.1 metres [see Figure      ].   OoV"


153. Crush barriers should be designed so that there
are no sharp projections or edges.    Although a
barrier with a top rail of 50 mm diameter tube has
been favoured at many sports grounds, research has
shown that there would be advantages in the use of a
flat rail of 100 mm vertical depth.


Spacing of Crush Barriers


154. The maximum spacing of crush barriers will be
dependent on the gradient of the terrace or viewing
slope.   Paragraphs 155 - 161 below give
recommendations for the spacing and strength of
crush barriers.


155. Ideally, crush barriers should be provided
along the full width of a terrace, with gaps only at


                            55
the radial gangways.       An example of crush barrier
configuration is shown at Figure                       .                        /s/o-f- cxJtA&tsirJUsi


156. Where it is not practicable for such barriers
to be continuous between radial gangways, the
alignment of gaps in successive rows of barriers on
a terrace should form an angle of less than 60° to
the barriers.    There must be no more than 2
consecutive gaps in any line of gaps.                      (See
figure       overJ/^af).




                 \1         Ba rr ie rs

                                          1      /
                                                /
                                               A 60°   max


riCCv'-' -
                                          /
                                              / I             Ba rr ie rs

                                                                            }

Figure    Crush barrier configuration where barriers
are not continuous (see paragraphs 156 -157)



157. Where there are gaps in the line of crush
barriers these should be at least 1.1 metres and not
more than 1.4 metres in width.


158. Column A in Table 1                      provides the maximum
distances between barriers conforming to the greater
strength requirements of crush barriers as described


                                  56
      above;   column B provides the maximum distances
      between barriers conforming to the lesser strength
      requirements.    Interpolation may be made between
      these figures.    The distinction previously made
      between 'peak' viewing areas and other areas has
      been removed.


TA B LE 1




                                                 Maximum horizontal
                                                 distance between barriers


Terrace Gradient


                    Step riser:   Step width :          A        B



05°            ie        1   in        11.4            5. 0m    3. 3m


10°                      1   in         5.7            4. 3m    2.9m


15°                      1   in         3.7            3. 8m    2. 6m
 o
to
o




                         1   in         2.7            3. 4m    2. 3m


25°                      1   in        2.1             3.1m     2.1m


30°                      1   in        1 .7            2. 9m    1 .9m




      Strength of Crush Barriers and Handrails


      159. The structural integrity of crush barriers is a
      major factor in ensuring safety and a 25%


                                  57
representative sample from each part of the ground
should be tested annually (see Chapter 5 and Annex
D).   All barriers should also be visually inspected
each year for signs of wear, distortion, corrosion
or other signs of weakness.        If from such
inspections and the records of earlier inspections
and tests, there is any doubt as to the integrity of
a barrier it should be tested.       This test should be
in addition to the 25% representative sample.


160. Existing crush barriers and handrails should be
capable of resisting the forces indicated in the
existing test load columns of Table 2 overleaf when
applied in a test as described in Annex D.           Where
existing crush barriers and handrails fail to meet
these test conditions, they should be replaced or
strengthened in such a way as to do so.           Barriers
and handrails so strengthened should be retested in
accordance with Annex D.


161. New crush barriers or handrails should be
designed to resist safely a horizontal force as
indicated in the " design force" column in Table 2
applied as a static load acting on the top rail of
the barrier or handrail at right angles to the
longitudinal axis.   The foundations of new barriers
or handrails should be designed to resist the
overturning movements and sliding forces, induced by
the forces described in the "design force" column
overleaf, with a factor of safety of 2.




                              58
TABLE 2


Table of strengths for crush barriers and handrails




                            Design Force   Test Load
                            for New         for Existing
                            Barriers        Barriers




Crush barriers spaced in    5.0 kN/metre width   6.0 kn/metre width
accordance with the
distances in column A
of Table 1


Crush barriers spaced in    3.4 kN/metre width   4.1 kN/metre width
accordance with the
distances in column B
of Table 1


Handrails at right angles   3.4 kN/metre         4.1 kN/metre
to the direction of flow    width                width




Handrails parallel to       2.2 kN/metre         2.7 kN/metre
the direction of flow       width                width




                                    59
CHAPTER 11


11.     COVERED STANDING AND SEATED ACCOMMODATION



The general safety considerations for stands are
similar to those for other parts of the ground but
with the additional need to safeguard spectators
against the risk of fire (see Chapter 13).


162. Stands may consist of seated accommodation only
or may contain a mixture of both seated and standing
areas.      The following advice can be applied to all
sports grounds where spectators are so accommodated.


163. The opportunity provided by new design work
should be taken to enhance the comfort and amenities
for spectators (see paragraphs 23 - 24, Chapter 1).
This is particularly relevant to redevelopment of
major football grounds when all-seated stands are
provided.


164. All spectators should have a clear,
unobstructed view of the whole of the playing area.
Designs should ensure that sightlines are such that
spectators are encouraged to remain seated and do
not have to strain or stretch to view the playing
area.     Cantilevered stands should protect as many
spectators as possible from the elements.       Exits and
exit routes (which will also serve as entrances and
entry routes) should be based on the principles set
out in Chapters 6 and 7.


165. There is generally a less hurried departure
from the seated accommodation in stands at the end
of an event.     Moreover,   spectators are induced by
the layout of the seats to form orderly queues.


                              60
Even so, attention should be paid to the points
below as well as the other structural considerations
in respect of stairways, entrances/exits and where
appropriate, density levels and crush barriers.


166. Fire safety is particularly important and is
dealt with in Chapter 13.        Every stand should be
provided with sufficient exits to allow for the
orderly evacuation of all the spectators to be
accommodated.   Egress/evacuation time will depend to
a large extent on the fire hazard present in the
stand (see Chapter 13, paragraphs 227 -232) and
should be no longer than 8 minutes (see examples in
Chapter 19).


167. New work should conform to the relevant
Building Regulations requirements and should
incorporate fire safety engineering for the
protection of the occupants.        Seats and gangways
should be so positioned as to provide ready access
to exits.   No spectator in any part of the seated
area should have to travel more than 30 metres from
their seat to the nearest exit measured along the
line of the seatway and gangway.


Gangways


168. As with gangways on terraces (Chapter 9,
paragraphs 133 - 140) all gangways in stands should
have a slip resistant surface.       They should be of
sufficient width for the seats served        and in no
case less than 1.1 metres wide without projections.


169. Any stepped side gangway should be provided
with a hand-rail fixed at a height of 840 mm
(measured vertically above the mid-point in the
going of the step) and projecting no more than 75 mm


                            61
into the gangway.   The handrail should conform to
the strength requirement of Table


170. Radial gangways in viewing areas (seated or
standing) should be uniform.     Where the gangway is
stepped, the going and riser of the steps should
meet the dimensions set out in paragraph 107 and
should not contain winders.    The gangway need not
contain intermediate landings and the provisions of
paragraph 110 (ii) and (iii) on the number of steps
in a flight and the number of turns which apply to
stairways are not appropriate.


Balustrading


171. Those sections of balustrading at the foot of
gangways or stairways should be as strong as crush
barriers of the stronger type.     [Other balustrading
which will not be subject to pressure from mass
crowd movement should conform to normal requirements
of Building Regulations and British Standards.


Seating


172. All seats should be securely fixed in position.
The use of tip-up seats allows more circulation
space, the automatic type being preferable.      All
seating should comply with the relevant part of the
BS 5852 - Fire Test for Furniture.


173. The minimum area allotted to each seated person
should be as follows:


Benches/seats without arms     460 mm     wide
Seats with arms                500 mm     wide




                          62
[These widths should be increased by 50 nun for
c o m f o r t] .

Benches/seats without backs             610mm     deep
Seats with backs                        760 mm    deep


174. To enable people to move freely between rows of
seats there should be at least 305 mm between
perpendiculars from the foremost projection of one
seat and the back of the seat in front of it - see
figure.            The minimum 305 mm is included in the 610
mm and 760 mm depth measurement of the seating area.
See Figure


175. The number of seats in a row should not
normally exceed:


a.     14 where there is a gangway at one end only; and
b.     28 where there is a gangway at both ends.




                                   63
                clear
                s e a tw a y




             __________
Example o f fixed seats.




                                         clear
                                         seatway


                     ri


                               tip-up
                               seats.-




Example o f tip-up seats.
CHAPTER 12


12.   TEMPORARY STANDS AND OTHER TEMPORARY STRUCTURES


176. The nature of temporary stands and other
temporary structures, whether or not covered, used
to accommodate spectators at a sports ground is
likely to vary considerably as will the materials
used in their construction.      Some may be erected for
a single event only.     Even so there is no
justification for accepting a lower standard of
safety in such structures then elsewhere within the
sports ground, and the design and construction of
temporary structures should be in accordance with
good engineering and building practice, should pay
particular regard to public safety and should
satisfy all relevant British Standards.


177. The principles of this Guide are applicable to
temporary stands and structures and particular
attention is drawn to:


Chapter 4 - General Fabric and Structural Matters
Chapter 7 - Egress
Chapter 8 - Stairways    and Ramps
Chapter 13 - Fire Safety
Chapter 20 - Recommended Flow Rates


178. All temporary stands should be capable of
withstanding any load or force to which they may be
subjected and account    should be taken   of any
external factors such    as wind forces.Failure of
any one support member or connection should not
render the structure unstable.       As far as
practicable the area around supporting frames should
be secure to prevent unauthorised access, and frames
should be so designed that they are firmly locked


                            64
into position and cannot be tampered with by
unauthorised persons.


179. Consultation with the local authority and
building authority (if different) should take place
at an early stage prior to the erection of any
temporary stand.    Consultation should also take
place with the fire authority about access for fire­
fighting purposes.


180. Siting.   Choice of location may be limited but
factors which need to be considered include: load-
bearing capability of the ground,     its slope or
unevenness, drainage, availability of mains
services, access/egress for spectators and for
emergency vehicles, overhead power lines, and the
proximity of surrounding buildings in relation to
the risk of fire.    The condition of the site should
be regularly checked to ensure its load-bearing
capabilities have not deteriorated; settlement of
ground may cause instability and so require
repacking and re-levelling.      The site should be
prepared and maintained so as to provide an even
surface for those parts to which the public have
access.   In order to be accessible for the disabled
the ground surface should be such as to ensure their
mobility at all times.


181. Assembly/dismantling.      The assembly and
dismantling of stands should be carried out by or
under the supervision of persons experienced and
trained in the proper performance of such work and
in accordance with the manufacturers'     instructions
whenever available, or in accordance with drawings
and plans made by a competent engineer.




                           65
182. Work should be carried out only where lighting
is sufficient to allow it to be safely and properly
performed and checked.    No assembly or dismantling
work should be carried out to the danger of members
of the public in the vicinity.


183. The work should be carried out in a proper
manner, using correct parts, and tools of a proper
size and design.   Care should be taken with the
handling of components to avoid damage or
distortion.


184. All components should be closely examined
during assembly and dismantling for signs of wear,
deformation or other damage, and where necessary
replaced by sound components of matching material
properties and dimensions.      Temporary repairs using
makeshift components should be avoided.


185. Care should also be taken to ensure all
components are correctly aligned; they should not be
bent, distorted or otherwise altered to force a fit.


186. On completion, assembly work should be checked
with particular attention given to fastenings and
connections.


187. Tents/marquees and other such structures.
These types of structures can present special fire
safety problems and guidance is contained in the
Home Office/Scottish Office publication "Guide to
Fire Precautions in Existing Places of
Entertainment"   (ISBN 0 11 340907 0   £8.50).


188. All tents should be capable of withstanding any
forces particularly wind (including uplift so
caused) and those caused by the build up of snow or


                           66
heavy rain, to which they may be subjected.
Emergency arrangements should be made for the
dismantling, either partial or total, of a tent
should conditions arise that could lead to any
collapse or distortion.   Where such work in any way
affects the stability of the tent or the safety of
members of the public, the work should not commence
until the immediate area has been cleared of all but
essential staff.


189. Supporting poles or structures, guy ropes and
stays should be used as necessary and correctly
formed, and secure anchorages made to the ground to
ensure that the tent is stable and maintains its
correct shape.


190. The stability of the main tent poles and
supporting structure should be independent of the
sheeting fabric, ie any tearing or defect occurring
in the fabric should not result in the collapse of
all or any part of the main structure.


191. Particular attention should be paid to the main
supporting poles or structures and top braces of
large tents where they have to be raised to a
considerable height.   Damage or distortion to these
members could considerably weaken the structure.
Where such damage does occur, the members should be
replaced or repairs or modifications carried out so
as to bring them up to full working strength.


192. Where solid frames or units, eg doors, are
linked to a tent structure they should be rigidly
formed and adequately braced, and care should be
taken that they do not overstress local areas of the
tent.




                          67
193. Foundations to poles or frames should be
properly prepared and subjected to regular checks as
should wire bracing or guys, the tension of which
should be re-adjusted as necessary.




                         68
CHAP TE R 13


13.   FIRE SAFETY


Safety from fire is achieved by measures which will
restrict initiation, rate of early growth and later
spread of fire; provide and protect escape routes;
segregate higher fire risk areas; provide warning
(and where necessary detection) of fire; and assist
fire-fighting operations.


194. The type of accommodation which represents the
greatest hazard in the event of fire is the covered
stand where spectators sit or stand.       New structures
will conform to Building Regulations requiring them
to have a reasonable degree of structural fire
protection.       Existing structures will vary
considerably in age and materials used in
construction.       The qualities of combustibility and
ability to propagate and spread of fire of the
materials used in construction have an important
effect on the standard of fire precautions required
to ensure reasonable safety.        It may be difficult in
some cases to improve the fire resistance of an
existing structure to any significant extent but it
should be done wherever practicable even though in
some cases substantial alterations may be needed to
provide reasonable protection from fire.


195. With new stands there is much more opportunity
to incorporate from the start comprehensive measures
for fire safety and to consider properly the impact
of each measure on the others.       Design features for
new stands should include the following:


      a.       internal finishes which have low
               flammability;


                               69
b.   seating, partitioning and any other fixed
     or removable contents including seat
     cushions which possess low flammability
     characteristics and fire risk potential
     and are limited in amount;


c.   contents which are not capable of being
     easily dismantled;


d.   no inaccessible places where litter can
     collect;


e.   adequate structural resistance to fire;


f.   fire resisting separation from any spaces
     below or communicating with the stand;


g.   as far as possible, no storerooms or other
     spaces communicating with the stand.
     Where this is unavoidable, storerooms or
     other spaces communicating with the stand
     should be provided with fixed fire
     extinguishing systems appropriate to the
     fire risk posed by the materials to be
     stored or contained;


h.   escape routes should keep people well
     clear of the smoky gases produced by a
     fire (which in general means that initial
     movement of people from the back of the
     viewing areas should be downwards) and
     should be planned in such a way as to
     avoid the use of the playing area as an
     escape route;




                     70
      i.     later stages of escape routes which are
             incapable of being significantly
             threatened by continuing fire;


      j.     the provision of alternative, widely
             separated escape routes; and


     k.      a roof geometry which should restrict
             smoke and flame travel along the underside
             of the roof.


     1.      consideration should also be given to the
             provision of smoke ventilation within
             structures (see paragraph 206).



Minimising fire risk


196. One potential cause of fire arises from the
accumulation of waste paper, programmes, food and
drink cartons etc dropped by spectators.        Such waste
can be easily set alight by smokers' materials and
the resulting fire may then spread to the structure,
especially the ones that are constructed of more
combustible materials.      Every effort should be made
to reduce this hazard.      Accumulations of litter, for
example near catering facilities, should be cleared
from the ground as quickly as possible or kept in a
safe, fire resistant container or room pending
clearance.    Arrange should be made for the frequent
emptying of litter bins during the course of the
even t.


197. All parts of buildings should be inspected
before and after an event (see also Chapter 5,
paragraph 63) and any accumulation of litter cleared
away as described above.     It is particularly


                             71
important to ensure that litter does not accumulate
in escape routes or under stands.


198. Smoking should be discouraged, in stands which
are constructed of or contain combustible or
flammable items.


199. A common feature in construction of stands
which is a fire risk is the existence of voids under
the seating and under the flooring itself.     These
voids can become a resting place for paper, cartons
and other combustible materials which can be
ignited, unnoticed, by carelessly discarded
cigarette ends etc.     Seating arrangements should,
wherever possible, be such that floor surfaces are
accessible for the removal of litter.     Where voids
below flooring exist they should if practicable be
excluded; for example, where a stand is built into a
natural slope the underneath area can be filled in
with concrete.     Where this is not practicable they
should be completely sealed off to stop litter
accumulating in them, or be entirely open to allow
easy access for inspection and removal of
combustible waste.



200. Items such as cushioning should comply with BS
5852.   Cushioning and other flammable materials,
when stored in bulk, represent a risk of a swiftly
developing fire.     They should be stored in a fire-
resistant container or room well away from spectator
accommodation as should paper items such as
programmes.   Similarly, hazardous materials, for
example fuels (whether in containers or within fuel
tanks and machinery) fertilizers, weed killers and
paints should be kept (if at all) well away from
public areas and stored in a room which has fire


                            72
resistance of at least 1 hour.     Other high fire risk
areas, eg enclosed or underground car parks situated
under stands, should also have fire resistance of at
least 1 hour.     Stores used for materials referred to
above should provide access direct from the open
air.    When the store has a depth of 6 metres or
more, alternative means of escape from it should be
provided.


201. Where catering facilities are provided, special
care should be taken to ensure that any fuel or
power supply used for cooking, for example LPG
cylinders, is safely stored and used, in accordance
with the advice of the authority responsible for
enforcement of the Health and Safety at Work etc Act
1974.   Useful guidance is given in Health and Safety
Executive Guidance Notes CS4,    "The Keeping of LPG in
Cylinders and Similar Containers" and CS8, "Small
Scale Storage and Display of LPG at Retail
Premises".


Prevention or retardation of fire growth/spread


202. Where, despite all precautions, a fire has
started,    it is vital to ensure that the rate of
growth in its early stages is restricted to
proportions which will not overwhelm the
arrangements provided for safe escape.     This is best
achieved by controlling the amount and nature of the
materials (especially the combustibles) in a stand,
both in terms of the contents (loose and fixed) and
in those parts of the fabric of the stand to which a
fire would have access (especially internal
linings).


203. An important additional line of defence is
prompt action by ground staff using the fire­


                            73
fighting equipment available at the ground to tackle
the fire and keep it in check ("first-aid" fire­
fighting) until the fire brigade arrives.     These
measures are crucial because the quicker a fire
develops, the less time there is available to escape
from it.    A fire should not be able to develop
unnoticed anywhere underneath or adjacent to the
spectator area of the stand, so that its spread
would be likely to break through into the spectator
accommodation.


204. The spectator viewing area in the stand should
be separated from any other adjacent circulation
space or void by a construction having fire
resistance of not less than half an hour, except
that where the vomitory exits from the viewing area
lead into a safe exit route they should not be
fitted with fire doors.    This is because they would
disrupt the movement of spectators into the exit
route.


205. Walls and ceiling linings within stands and
ceiling linings beneath the stand seats should have
a flame spread classification of not less than Class
1 when tested in accordance with BS 476: Part 7.


206. Restricting the extent and speed of the spread
of fire in its later stages is also important in
order to reduce the possibility of escape time being
further threatened.    Most measures which reduce the
rate of fire growth in early stages will also serve
to restrict the fire spread in the later stages.
The following measures could mainly affect the later
spread.    For some roof configurations venting
systems may offer a means of reducing the spread of
fire (including movement of flames along the roof)
and hot smoky gases.    The science of fire and smoke


                           74
venting is however complex and advice from the fire
authority should be sought on whether this would be
advantageous in a particular case.


207. Where the roofs of buildings are so connected
that smoke and flame could travel to two or more
sides of the playing area, a wide break in the roof
should be made of sufficient width to prevent spread
from one side to the other, unless the flame travel
could be eliminated by the prevention measures
mentioned above.


208. Flammable roof material should not be used.
Where it exists it should be replaced by non­
combustible materials.       Where this is not
practicable,       it should be underdrawn with non­
combustible board.


Fire warning systems


209. All buildings in the ground (including stands)
to which public or staff have access should be
provided with an electrical fire warning system to
alert staff.       The system should be designed to
accommodate the emrgency evacuation procedure of the
ground and should be approved by the fire authority.
An indication of the warning and its location should
be given to a central control point (see Chapter 14
paragraphs 237 and 246).       The system should conform
with BS 5839: Part 1 in terms of its components,
installation and maintenance.       The central control
point and, where necessary, other selected positions
in the ground should have facilities to call the
fire brigade and other emergency services.       Stewards
and other officials should be trained in what they
should do if they discover a fire (see paragraphs
2 2 0 - 2 2 1 ).


                               75
210. The area underneath the spectator accommodation
should have a system for detecting a developing
fire.    In order to give an early warning in an
unoccupied area an automatic fire detection (AFD)
system should be considered, conforming to BS 5839:
Part 1 in terms of its components, installation and
maintenance.    It should be connected so that any
alarm will be communicated to the central control
point.


211. Any fire detection equipment should be tested
regularly in accordance with the advice given in the
British Standard specification.


212. Where areas of high fire risk such as large
storerooms and enclosed or underground car parks are
situated under stands, consideration should be given
to the installation of an automatic fire
extinguishing system, eg sprinklers,    instead of an
AFD system.    Here again any such system should be
connected so that warning of fire is communicated to
the central control point.


Emergency lighting


213. Emergency lighting is dealt with in Chapter 15
paragraphs 255 - 258.


Fire-fighting equipment


214. Advice should be sought from the local fire
authority on the type, the amount and siting of
fire-fighting equipment.     The succeeding paragraphs
give general guidelines.




                           76
215. In major grounds it may be necessary to provide
a suitable water supply for fire fighting in the
form of hydrants.


216. For "First aid" fire fighting by members of the
staff, hydraulic hose-reels should be provided to BS
5306: Part 1.   These should be sufficient to provide
adequate protection to the whole floor area, and
should be installed in a suitable position by
entrances, exits and stairways.


217. Where hose-reels are not provided, portable
fire extinguishers should be installed in sufficient
numbers to give adequate cover.      The number and type
will depend upon the size, layout, fire separation
and risk in each structure.      Fire extinguishers
should conform to BS 5423 and be sited and
maintained according to BS 5306: Part 3.


218. Fire blankets and fire extinguishers of a type
appropriate to the cooking facilities used should be
kept in all catering facilities.


219. It should be borne in mind when considering
location of fire-fighting equipment that it may need
to be sited so that it cannot be vandalised but yet
is readily accessible to staff in the event of fire.


Emergency procedures and staff training


220. It is essential that plans should be made for
dealing with emergencies,   including fire.     The onus
to do this lies with ground management.       Joint
consultation between management, police, fire,
ambulance and other emergency services should take
place in order to produce agreed plans of action for
all foreseeable types of emergency.     While the


                            77
public are in the ground the number of staff on duty
should be sufficient to cover entrances, exits and
other strategic points and to fulfil other essential
duties (see Chapter 16).


221. All such staff should be trained in the use of
the fire-fighting equipment provided, and in the
action they should take in the event of fire.           This
is management's responsibility but the local fire
authority's advice should be sought on whether the
content of the proposed training programme is
adequate.


Means of escape


222. "Means of escape" is the structural means
whereby a safe route is provided for people to
travel from any point in a structure to a place of
safety without outside assistance.        In existing
accommodation,    the means of escape in the event of
an emergency will usually be the same as the normal
egress routes but there may be an additional "route"
of forward escape on to the playing area and then
out of the ground.     It is the management's
responsibility to ensure that all exit routes for
use in an emergency are clearly signposted (see
paragraph 91, Chapter 7) and capable of being safely
and effectively used at all times when the ground is
occupied.


223. It is vital that the emergency exit routes are
sited so that people using them will be least
affected by the fire or its products, for example
smoke, toxic gases, heat etc.        Initial travel should
if possible be downwards.        This is because in the
event of fire, its dangerous products will travel
upwards and accumulate densely at the highest


                            78
points.   Further stages of the exit routes should be
so arranged as to take people progressively further
away from the fire, along a route where they cannot
be significantly affected by the fire or its
products.   There should be more than one emergency
exit route from a stand or a terrace in case one
becomes blocked.   The emergency exits within any one
structure should be as widely separated as practical
planning considerations will allow, to minimise the
risk of them all being blocked by the same cause.


Fire protection for stairways and passages


224. Where a stairway, passage or any other part of
an emergency exit route passes up, down or through a
stand or other building used by spectators, it
should be in a fire resistant enclosure separated
from the remainder of the stand by a structure
having fire resistance of not less than one hour.
Such exit routes should discharge to a place of
safety in the open air (which may be inside or
outside the ground).


225. The surface finish of walls and ceilings of all
emergency exit stairways should be of a standard
corresponding to Class 0 (as defined in the guidance
issued in connection with the Building Regulations
1985 for England and Wales and the Building
Standards (Scotland) Regulations 1981-84).


226. Any door forming part of the enclosure to a
stairway should be self closing and have a fire
resistance of not less than half an hour.


Emergency evacuation time




                            79
227. The emergency evacuation time is the notional
time it would take spectators to leave their viewing
positions and reach a place of safety, an exit route
in the open air, a protected stairway or emergency
exit route with fire resistance in accordance with
paragraph 224 above.     It is calculated from the
spectator capacity of the accommodation (see Chapter
19) and the flow rate (see Chapter 20) through
restricting parts of the exit system used for
evacuation purposes.


228. The emergency evacuation time will depend
largely on the fire hazard present in the
accommodation in question.       Spectator accommodation
which has for any reason the potential for rapid
fire spread (for example because of the type of
construction,    interior use and contents and/or the
nature of the internal linings which would be
exposed to fire) should have an emergency evacuation
time of not more than 2% minutes.      However, an
increase in this time will be acceptable where the
possibility of rapid fire spread is or reduced by
the provision of fire safety measures (either active
or passive systems) and the emergency exit routes
are not vulnerable to a fire occurring within the
building.   For example, an open terrace of fire
resistant construction such as concrete; or a stand
which incorporates the fire safety design features
described in paragraph 195 above, where spectators
are not totally enclosed and can move into protected
exit routes or exit routes in the open air would
normally merit the maximum evacuation time of 8
minutes as allowed for normal egress (see Chapter 6
paragraph 88).




                            80
229. The conditions within a particular ground may
well call for interpolation between the times
referred to in paragraph        above.   In all cases, the
advice of the fire authority should be sought.


230. Where the playing area or perimeter track is
accessible to spectators and is considered as a part
of the exit route, it can be taken into account in
calculating the emergency evacuation time.       Where
there is a pitch perimeter fence, wall or moat it
should have access points in accordance with Chapter
18, paragraph 283 which can serve as exits and which
can be taken into account in the calculation of the
emergency evacuation time.


231. Where the playing surface of a pitch is made of
synthetic materials, advice from the fire authority
should be sought to establish if it can be properly
considered an emergency exit route in a fire.       This
is because it is possible that some forms of
artificial turf might in themselves constitute a
hazard in the event of fire because of flamespread
and fumes etc caused by decomposition of the
material as a result of heat radiation.


232. If the playing area is wholly surrounded by
covered accommodation with no breaks in the roofing
(see paragraph 207) the advice of the fire authority
should be sought.


Access for emergency vehicles


233. Adequate roads for emergency vehicles such as
fire appliances and ambulances should be provided so
that speedy and direct access can be obtained to all
buildings within the ground; wherever possible these




                           81
access routes should be separate from those used by
spectators entering and leaving the ground.


234. The police and local fire authority should be
consulted about the width, clearance, height and
supporting strength required of these access roads.
Wherever possible access roads should provide for
the parking of emergency vehicles so that exit
routes used by crowds are not seriously obstructed.


235. Wherever practicable and where necessary roads
within { of a mile of the ground should be kept
entirely free of parked vehicles so as not to delay
or obstruct the access of emergency vehicles.




                         82
C HAPTER 14


14.   COMMUNICATIONS


There should be a communications system capable of
clearly relaying essential messages to all parts of
the ground inside and outside in both normal
circumstances and in an emergency.


236. Precise requirements for communications will
depend on the sort of ground and the numbers of
people that attend there.     In general the
communications system should be determined after
consultation with the police and emergency services.
It should be available for use, capable of coping
with all emergencies and should have an override
facility.     It is ground management who should
provide and operate the necessary equipment for this
purpose as well as provide competent staff, suitably
trained in its use.


Central Control


237. There should be a central control room
commanding a good view of the whole ground from
which the communications system should operate.        It
should contain the facility to communicate quickly
with staff, the public and the emergency services.
Subject to paragraph 246 below the safety officer
and his staff should be responsible for the
operation of the communications system.


238. There should be inter-communication between the
central control and all turnstiles or banks of
turnstiles and all entry and exit gates used by the
public (see also Chapter 6).     Metering systems to
record all admissions should be installed at


                            83
turnstiles and, to ensure that ground capacities are
not exceeded in any section, arrangements should be
made for central control and police control room
where providedto be informed immediately a
predetermined number of spectators has been admitted
through each turnstile.


Public Address/System Warning


239. The public address system should be able to
communicate with individual areas outside and inside
the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole
ground.


240. Emergency use of the system as part of the fire
warning system means that it will also need to
comply with BS 5389 Part 1 (Code of practice for
system design,   installation and servicing of Fire
Detection and Alarm Systems in Buildings).


241. Important announcements relating to crowd
safety should be preceded by a loud signal to catch
the attention of the crowd despite a high level of
noise in the ground.   This signal, followed by the
voice-over transmission should be different to, and
distinct from, any other signals which may be in
general use on the system.      This arrangement should
be prominently displayed in every programme sold for
every event.


242. The public address equipment should be
installed so that broadcast messages can be heard
under reasonable conditions (including emergencies)
by all persons of normal hearing in any part of the
ground to which the public has access.      Installation
should conform to the relevant guidance contained in
BS 6259 (Code of Practice for Planning and


                           84
Installation of Sound Systems).        The power supply to
the system should be such as to enable it to
continue to operate in an emergency such as fire or
a failure of the mains supply for upto 3 hours.


243. In the event of an emergency it is essential
that clear, accurate information is given to
spectators at the earliest possible time.        Messages
should be positive leaving those to whom they are
addressed in no doubt as to what is required of
them.   They should be pre-arranged, worded with the
agreement of the police,    fire auhtority and, where a
safety certificate is in force for the ground or
stand(s) within the ground,       the local authority.


Back-up Provision


244. Loud hailers should be available for the use of
stewards and police in all parts of the ground for
directing or instructing spectators.


245. Any police radio facilities available for the
maintenance of law and order should augment and not
supersede the ground communications system.


Police Control Room


246. Where there is sufficient special police
presence inside the ground to warrant a police
control room, such a room should be provided for use
by the officer in charge.        This control may be in
addition to that used by the ground safety officer
in which case an adjoining or a joint control room
should be considered.   There must be a clear,
unequivocal understanding by both police and
management as to the tasks, duties and
responsibilities which will be undertaken by the


                            85
police and those which will be undertaken by the
ground management (see also Chapter 17, paragraph
270).     There must be established lines of
communication between them.


247. International grounds, grounds of clubs in the
English Football League and clubs in the Premier
Division of the Scottish Football League should
provide a police control room which is:-


        (a)   well placed so as to command a good view
              of the whole pitch and the spectators
              surrounding it;


        (b)   of sufficient size for the officer in
              charge, his deputy, management
              representative and enough officers to
              operate radios,    telephones and any other
              equipment.    There should be space for
              others who may need to visit the room for
              example, other senior officers,
              management, representatives of the
              emergency services and local authority;


        (c)   properly equipped with suitable CCTV,
              radio,   telephone facilities.


248. Where necessary the control room should be
sound-proofed against excessive noise.         The room and
equipment should be to the satisfaction of the chief
officer with responsibility for the ground.


249. There should be sufficient operators in the
police control room to enable all radio
transmissions to be received, evaluated and
answered.     The radio system should be such as to
give operators in the control room priority over,


                                86
and the capacity to override, others using the same
channel.     Additional channels should be used, where
necessary,    to prevent overcrowding of the airwaves.
To complement radio communications there should be a
completely separate system of land-lines with
telephone links between control room and key points
( such as turnstiles, stewards' control point,
secretary's office, referee's room, advertising
board control,    chief fire marshall, stadium lighting
control, match doctor, casualty clearance points and
first aid room).


Close Circuit Television


250. Consideration should be given to the
installation of CCTV in order to monitor turnstiles
(inside and outside the ground) ingress/egress
routes, concourse areas, terraces and any other area
where there is likely to be a crowd build-up.     CCTV
should normally be installed for this purpose at
grounds used for major events and in particular at
grounds referred to in paragraph 247 above.     Before
decisions are reached analysis of each ground is
necessary.     Each part of the spectators
accommodation should be assessed for the nature and
degree of risk in order to determine whether CCTV
will be of use, if so the individual needs and
whether alternative measures can be taken which
achieve equal or better results.


251. Supplementary guidance on procurement and
maintenance of CCTV based on research carried out by
Home Office Scientific Development Branch can be
obtained from




                            87
CHAPTER 15


15.   AUXILIARY POWER


Auxiliary power should be available and be
sufficient to enable emergency lighting, the Public
Address system CCTV and other electrically powered
installations to function for at least 3 hours after
the failure of the normal supply.


General


252. In the event of a power failure consideration
should be given to cancellation of the event.     If
the auxiliary power supply is capable of supplying
the entire load for the ground for at least 3 hours
it may be possible to continue a fixture or event
provided it is scheduled to finish and the ground
cleared within this period and no other emergency
situation exists at the ground.     To supply such a
load a generator rather than a central battery
system is likely to be required and an additional
emergency power supply will be necessary.    Ground
management should take into account the needs for
the ground in deciding the type of power provision
and make contingency plans for the failure of the
power supply (see Chapter 2).


253. Auxiliary power equipment should be located in
a secure room to which the public do not have
access.   The room should be of fire-resisting
construction of a standard of not less than 1 hour.


254. All equipment should be installed, maintained
and tested in accordance with the manufacturers
instructions and relevant British Standards.




                          88
Emergency lighting


255. Emergency lighting, for use in the event of a
failure of the general lighting, should be provided
in all parts of the premises accessible to the
public and along all exit routes, with exit signs
clearly illuminated.     Installation should be in
accordance with BS 5266: Part 1.     The system should
be completely separate from the general lighting
system, although a one-circuit system incorporating
staggered sub-circuits would be an acceptable
alternative.   Unless exceptionally two entirely
independent supplies can be obtained from outside
sources,   the emergency circuit should be connected
to a source of power located on the premises,      for
example storage batteries or a diesel generator,
with a delay of not more than 5 seconds.


256. The system should be capable of maintaining         the
necessary level of illumination for a period of 3
hours from the time of failure of the normal supply.


257. The emergency lighting should operate
automatically on the failure of the main lighting.


258. Emergency lighting systems should be tested
regularly in accordance with BS 5266: Part 1.


Public Address System


259. Where the public address system is part of the
fire warning system    it should conform to   BS 5839
Part 1 (see Chapter    13 paragraph 209 and   Chapter 14
paragraphs 239 - 243).    Auxiliary power will in such
circumstances therefore be needed to ensure the
continued use of the system in the event of fire or
other emergency.


                            89
CHAPTER 16


16.   STEWARDING


Effective stewarding should prevent overcrowding in
sections of the ground, reduce the likelihood and
incidence of disorder, help disperse spectators in
such a way as to reduce crowd pressure and provide
the means to investigate, report and take early
action in am emergency.


260. It should be emphasised to stewards that they
are deployed to assist in the safe operation of the
ground, not to view the activity taking place.


261. Staffing levels and stewarding requirements
will vary depending upon the size and configuration
of the ground, the nature of the event and crowd
levels, but there are six basic duties which
stewards are called upon to carry out.   These are:


      a)   to control or direct spectators who are
           entering or leaving the ground, to help
           achieve an even flow of people to the
           viewing areas;


      b)   ability to recognise crowd densities,
           signs of crowd distress and crowd dynamics
           so as to help ensure safe dispersal of
           spectators on the terraces or viewing
           slopes;


      c)   to patrol the ground to deal with any
           emergencies eg. raising alarms or
           extinguishing fires;




                            91
     d)    to staff entrances, exits and other
           strategic points, especially exit doors
           and exit gates from the ground which are
           not continuously open whilst the ground is
           in use;


     e)    to assist police as appropriate or as
           requested with crowd control; and


     f)    to undertake specific duties in an
           emergency.


262. A more detailed check list of the kind of
duties which stewards are liable to undertake is at
Annex E.   It should be borne in mind that this is
only an example and not necessarily an exhaustive
list of duties.


263. Stewards should be fit, active, not less than
age 18 and ideally not more than 55 years old.       They
should be fully capable of carrying out the duties
allocated to them.    Every steward should be fully
appraised in writing of his duties and
responsibilities and should carry on him a general
check list of them.     Where a ground such as one used
by an association football league club has high
police presence, duties and responsibilities of
stewards should be agreed with the police and form
part of any written understanding or statement of
intent agreed with the police.     Stewards should
attend pre-match briefing and should be made aware
as necessary of the arrangements and any contingency
plans to deal with the arrival of away supporters.


264. Effective training and supervision should be
provided by management so that all stewards, whether
regular or casual, know not only what their duties


                            92
are but how to carry them out and why.          This is
e s p e c i a l l y important in emergencies when it is
essential that stewards and their supervisors are
fully aware of and practiced in the part they are to
play in the plans drawn up with the emergency
services.    Exercises should be carried out before
the start of and mid-way through the season so as to
ensure that emergency procedures operate smoothly,
and a record kept of the duration of the exercise,
details of the instruction given and by whom (see
Chapter 2, paragraph xiv ).        At least 14 days' notice
of the intention to hold such exercises should be
given to the local authority, the police and
emergency services.


265. Management should appoint a chief steward
responsible for co-ordinating responsibilities of
all stewards.    Control of stewards should be from a
central point with an efficient means to communicate
with the them (see also Chapter 14).


266. All stewards should be readily identifiable eg.
by the wearing of distinctive clothing such as
luminous tabards which are numbered and distinctive
from those worn by police and emergency services.
Armbands are not acceptable.


267. Any stewards from visiting teams and who will
be operational during an event must arrive before
the ground is open to the public in time to be fully
briefed as to the construction and configuration of
the ground, the safety arrangements and their
specific duties.




                              93
CHAPTER 17


17.   CROWD BEHAVIOUR


Where there is a disorderly element among the crowd
intent on violence, additional safety measures are
needed to contain and minimise the potential
disruption, to isolate quickly, identify and remove
the offenders and to prevent their re-entry on
future occasions.


268. Although the problem of crowd disorder at
sporting events is one which affects primarily
professional association football, other sports are
not immune from it.     Therefore, whilst the following
advice is directed mainly at those grounds where
professional association football is played,
especially grounds used by English Football League
clubs, the general principles should also be borne
in mind by management at other grounds where major
spectator sports are played.


269. The 'European Convention on Spectator Violence
and Misbehaviour at Sporting Events and in
particular at Football Matches'    (HMSO, Cmmd 9649),
which came into force on 1 November 1985, sets out
in general terms measures to be taken to prevent and
control violence by spectators.     The Standing
Committee on the Convention in April 1989 adopted a
comprehensive report on measures to counter
hooliganism and guidelines on ticket sales.        In
addition all clubs in the Football League are
required by League regulations to have in place
local plans for crowd control and safety, drawn up
in consultation with local authorities, local police
and other relevant organisations.    For matches in
European competitions, UEFA has issued binding
instructions in their document 'Order and Security
in the Stadia'    (Third Edition,   1985).     The following
paragraphs cover some of the main areas that require
the attention of ground management.          The advice they
contain is not comprehensive and is intended to
supplement rather than replace existing
instructions, codes of practice etc.


Policing


270. Although the measures described elsewhere in
the Guide will help achieve reasonable safety at a
sports ground,    for management to discharge its
responsibility properly, a special police presence
inside the ground may be necessary.          The number and
disposition of the police must be determined by the
Chief Police Officer in whose area the ground is
located.     Where there is such a presence there
should be a clear, written understanding or
'statement of intent' agreed between the police and
the ground management setting out the functions and
responsibilities of each as to crowd safety.          A copy
of the statement should be available to the local
authority.    Dealing with disorder (as distinct from
normal ground operations and crowd management on the
premises) as in any other circumstances will fall to
the police.


271. Ground management should give all possible
assistance to the police and provide police control
facilities within the ground (see also Chapter 14,
paragraph 246).


272. Proper advance planning with the police is
essential to counter potential crowd disorder.
There must be an effective liaison between club and
police for this purpose to including not just the


                            95
arrangements inside the ground but also the escort
of visiting supporters, their likely numbers, their
separate entry to the ground and their departure at
the end of the match.   There should be debriefing
meetings as necessary to evaluate existing
arrangements and provide the flexibility necessary
to deal with different circumstances.


Crowd movement


273. If crowd movement is to be controlled by the
sub-division of terraces or viewing slopesby
structural means, such as railings or fences, in
order to help the police contain any disorder, the
greatest care must be taken to ensure that these
sub-divisions or 'pens' cannot be filled beyond
their specified safe limit.    Dividing structures
should comply with the strength requirements set out
in Chapter 10.   Each pen must be assessed for its
safe limit, the limit specified, recorded and
arrangements made to ensure it is not exceeded.
Ideally each pen should be self-contained, serviced
by its own entrance/exit, refreshment facilities and
toilets - in keeping with the principles of Chapter
6 and 9.   If the pens are not self-contained and
arrangements cannot be made to keep a reliable count
of spectators admitted to them, then, unless it is
known in advance that the total number of spectators
will be less than the capacity of the smallest pen,
either the pens must not be used or the dividing
fences removed and the whole area controlled as a
complete section.


Segregation


274. Home and visiting supporters at professional
association football matches may have to be


                          96
segregated but segregation is not advocated for
other sports where crowd disorder is not a problem.
This should be borne in mind when considering the
division of grounds used for other sports as well as
association football.


275. Where possible a neutral or sterile zone should
be provided within a ground so that home and
visiting supporters are not physically close to each
other.   The arrangements for admitting spectators
into the ground, whether by tickets purchases in
advance or through payment at the turnstiles, should
be drawn up in consultation with the police, and
must be carefully controlled to ensure as far as
possible that segregation is effective and known
troublemakers are excluded.


276. Segregation arrangements may also have to
include measures which deter spectators from
invading the pitch or playing area.     At the same
time the arrangements will need to provide for the
police to have effective access to the terraces in
the event of an outbreak of violence.      Moreover,
since the playing area is, will need to be
accessible for evacuation in an emergency (see
Chapter 7, paragraph 85 and Chapter 13, paragraph
222), any structural means used to deter
unauthorised encroachment onto the pitch, must allow
for such access   (see also Chapter 18).


Detention and removal of trouble makers


277. At larger soccer grounds, particularly where
there has been a record of frequent crowd trouble,
secure detention rooms shoulds be provided if
requested by the police.




                           97
278. There should be adequate vehicular access for
the unobtrusive removal of detainees (see also
Chapter 13, paragraphs 233 - 235 on access for
emergency vehicles).


Refreshments


279. Hard containers such as glasses, bottles or
cans can make dangerous missiles and should not be
used for the sale of refreshments.     All refreshments
should be served in soft containers.     adequate
receptacles should be available for rubbish disposal
and collection (paragraph        ).


280.   [Alcohol should not be on sale for consumption
on the terraces or in the stands [at football
grounds].



281. Note: The Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol
etc) Act 1985 applies to any ground in England and
Wales used for an international association football
match or a match involving a football league club.
In Scotland the Criminal Justice (Scotland) Act 1980
applies to grounds used by clubs in the Scottish
Football League, Highland League and to the
international stadia used for association football
and Rugby Union.




                            98
CHA P TE R 18


18.   PITCH PERIMETER FENCE/WALL



A pitch perimeter fence/wall may not only delineate
the playing area from the spectator accommodation
but may have to serve as a crush barrier, and in
some situations will serve as a means to discourage
or prevent access to the playing area except in an
emergency.


282. The type, strength and height of a pitch
perimeter fence or wall will vary according to its
location and required function.     At one extreme, at
a certain type of ground or small stadium used by
very few spectators,    there may be no need for a
perimeter fence or wall at all;     or if such a wall
or fence exists it may need to consist of little
more than a rail to mark the playing area.     At the
other extreme, some major soccer stadia, may have a
fence which prevents access to the pitch in normal
circumstances (see also Chapter 17, paragraph 276)
but allows for access in emergency as part of the
measures taken to prevent or contain any outbreak of
crowd disorder.   Such a fence may be limited to one
part of the ground for example, the "away supporters
end" or it might encompass other sections.


283. Any pitch fence or wall, whatever its height,
which delineates the spectator area from the playing
area restricts or impedes access to the pitch.       The
extent of the restriction depends upon the nature of
the fence or wall.     All pitch fences and walls must
therefore contain gates or openings (if no gates are
fitted) which allow access to the playing area or
any perimeter track in an emergency and, if the


                            99
perimeter track is used as part of the normal exit
system, in normal circumstances.     Openings should be
no less than 1.1 metres wide.     They should align
with radial gangways (where provided) and be not
less than of the same width as those gangways.
Openings or gates should be properly stewarded,
should be clearly marked and painted a different
colour from the rest of the fence or wall.     Gates,
where fitted, should open away from the spectators
and should be kept unlocked.


284. If spectators can lean on the perimeter fence
it should be deemed a crush barrier and fulfil the
conditions of height and strength specified in
Chapter 9 although if the fence is of solid
construction its height may be more than 1.12
metres.   This is because the pressures acting on a
person forced against such a fence are distributed
over a large area of the body, unlike the situation
with a normal crush barrier, where the pressures are
localized.


Pitch Barrier Fences


285. The term pitch barrier fence in the following
paragraphs means any pitch fence or wall which
exceeds the height of a crush barrier (1.12 metres)
measured from the spectator accommodation side of
the fence or wall.


286. Pitch barrier fences are not normally
considered to be necessary except at sports grounds
used by association football clubs especially clubs
in the English football league.     They are usually
associated with soccer terraces rather than seated
areas and (with some exceptions) are not generally
considered necessary when seated accommodation


                          100
extends to the level of the playing area.      Similarly
family or club enclosures are unlikely to require
such a fence.


287. Whether a pitch barrier fence is installed will
depend on individual circumstances:     for example, a
history of hostile pitch invasions or other disorder
from a certain part of the ground, the extent to
which stewarding and policing is felt to be able to
deal with any attempted encroachment of the pitch,
availability of alternative solutions,    for example a
smooth surfaced wall at least 1.22 metres high
(measured from the spectator accommodation).


288. Where a pitch barrier fence is installed it
should not impair visibility of the playing area.
If sightlines from a terrace are obscured congestion
may be caused - eg because spectators are unwilling
to move forward - or seated spectators may be
induced to stand up.    If such problems are not
resolved satisfactorily,    consequential reductions in
capacity should result.     See Chapter 19.


289. The maximum height of a pitch barrier fence
should be 2.2 metres.     There should be no
overhanging sections and no spikes, barbed wire or
other obstacles installed or attached to it.


290. All pitch barrier fences must contain gates or
openings as described in paragraph 283 above.      If a
terrace is sub-divided into pens (see paragraph 144,
Chapter 9 and paragraph 27 3, Chapter 17) each pen
must have its own gate or gates leading onto the
pitch in addition to any side exits.     There must be
sufficient pitch gates in each pen capable of
evacuating all the spectators in that pen onto the
playing area within the emergency evacuation time


                            101
set for that section of the ground or terrace (see
Chapter 13, paragraphs 227 - 232 and also Example G,
Chapter 19).]     Where gates are fitted they must, in
common with gates on normal egress routes open
outwards (ie away from spectators).


291. Whenever practicable to do so terraces should
not descend to a pitch barrier fence [see figure
].     A walkway between the fence and the terrace
should [if possible] be created and reserved solely
for use by police, club and first-aid personnel.     In
order to achieve this it may be necessary to take
out of use or remove completely one or two rows of
terracing.     Any drop into the walkway would need to
be protected by continuous crush barriers in order
to discourage access to the walkway except via
authorised points (ie radial gangways).


292.    [As an additional precaution, equipment should
be provided wherever pitch barrier fencing is
installed so that,    if necessary, sufficient fencing
can be removed in order to release any trapped
spectators.     Trained operators provided by the club
should be available in order to use the equipment,
the nominated senior police officer will decide when
such equipment is to be used.]




                            102
                                                         Oo/nr^«''




      6 s
                 S,'fctr4e                 .‘IL




        I------




            ^   ^v.V^
    - 'jjQ✓n.c2-j ^ *A^.




€                                           «


                j* vVd.      ^.•&Qy^Jas_[ U cjScSL   '
CH A PT E R 19


19.   ASSESSMENT OF SAFE GROUND CAPACITY


To assess the number of spectators which can be
safely accommodated account should be taken of the
features of the individual ground, its
configuration, general condition,          intended use and
any deviations from the Guide's provisions.


293. The previous sections of the Guide give
guidelines and safety considerations for individual
features of a ground.           This section describes a
method of calculating the number of spectators that
can be safely accommodated when taking into account
interactions between these individual features and
where there are deviations from the guidelines.              It
may be necessary to calculate various capacities if
the ground is used for more than one activity.


294. The calculations should be attached to a plan
of the ground and should be available with such
details as exits, stands,          terraces, stairways,
passages, kiosks, seats and barriers.           A scale of
1:200 should be used for this purpose.           The plan
should be cross referenced and attached to the
calculations.


295. The method assesses:


       a.        the holding capacity of a terrace or
                 viewing slope (that of a seated area
                 generally being determined either by the
                 number of seats when it conforms to
                 guidelines or an acceptable reduced
                 occupancy when the guidelines can not be
                 m e t ); and


                                  103
     b.   the capacity of a given exit/entry route
          from a terrace or stand.


296. The number of people that can be safely
accommodated on a terrace or in a stand (or other
covered accommodation) is either its holding
capacity, or the capacity of the exit/entry system
to be used in normal circumstances before and at the
end of an event (assessed in accordance with
paragraphs exit capacity below) or the emergency
exit system whichever is the smallest.


Holding capacity of terraces and viewing slopes


297. An even distribution of spectators on a terrace
or viewing slope is likely to be difficult to
achieve notwithstanding the measures described in
this guide because spectators may prefer to gather
in a certain part or parts of the viewing area.
This pattern of crowd dispersal and any other
relevant factors should be used and taken into
consideration when assessing the safe capacity for a
particular area.


298. In all cases the calculation of the capacity of
the standing area should take into account only
those parts of the viewing area from which the whole
of the playing area can be seen excluding gangways
(ie the "available viewing area").   If the
positioning and/or width of the gangways do not meet
the criteria of paragraphs 133 - 140 of Chapter 9 a
commensurate reduction must be made to the available
viewing area.


299. Where crush barriers conform to the
specifications in Chapter 10 and the viewing area is


                         104
in good condition (see Chapter 9) the maximum
allowable overall packing density is 47 person per
10 square metres over the available viewing area.
Where the conditions of the viewing area materially
deviate from Chapter 9 a reduction must be made in
the packing density.     There is no lower limit to
this reduction, and if a viewing area is in such
poor condition that it is unfit for use, the figure
is 0.     Interpolation between these figures will be
necessary where the conditions fall between the two
extremes.


Example A


300. The capacity of the terrace is calculated by
multiplying the area available for standing by the
appropriate packing density.       The following formula
may be used:


        Capacity (Number of persons) = A x (0-47)
                                        10


where 'A1 is the area available for standing in
square metres.


Viewing Terrace


301. Barriers and pitch perimeter wall conform to
the Guide's recommendations on construction, height,
strength and spacing.


Net available viewing area 76 metres x 16 metres =
1216 square metres (excluding designated gangways)


Condition and drainage of terraces good.


Dimensions:       steps 37 5 mm width (Guide recommends


                            i 05
                 280 mm - 375 mm,
                 see Chapter 9, paragraph 129)
                 risers 7 0 mm* (Guide recommends
                 7 5 mm - 180 mm,
                 see Chapter 9, paragraph


* Correction not possible without major
reconstruction so accepted in view of only minor
deviation of 5 mm and good condition of the
terrace:- ie fully acceptable for 47 persons per 10
square metres.


Capacity: 1216 x 4J7 = 5715
                   10
Example B (where there is material deviation from
the Guide)


302. Gross area for standing 76 x 16 = 1216 square
metres.


Condition of terrace: acceptable but


      a)     some unevenness caused by repair work


      b)     some cracking and rough surface in places


      c)     no gangways


Required gangway provision (see Figure        )
determined a s :-


1 lateral gangway at rear leading to exit stairways:
ie 1 at 1.1 metres by 76 =        83.6 square metres


4 radial gangways:    ie 4 at 1.1 by 14.9 = 65.6 square
metres


                                  Total     149.2


Available viewing area = 1216 - 149.2 = 1066.8


Packing density determined at 35 per 10 square
metres to allow for underfoot conditions.


Capacity 1066.8 x 3.5 = 3734
                     10




Note: Figure of 3734 is below 3960 quoted in example
E.   Therefore, any upgrading of terracing to
accommodate more than 3960 spectators would also


                            107
evrr-s
      ___




                                                       j4 r©i,




'.   i-R£ ^^99 cluJ-VA   C.^   V'-I^-^   0   o*eVr<^         a   ^ ;L*\ej   ^   ^r qv^Y
require installation of additional turnstiles and
improvements (if any) to entry routes).


303. If the crush barriers meet the height and
strength criteria set down in Chapter 10 but do not
conform to the distances laid down in Table           or
the gaps between them are greater than those
described in paragraphs       and Figure    of Chapter
10,   the capacity of the viewing area is calculated
from the provision of crush barriers.      The total
length of crush barriers (including the pitch wall
or fence if it serves as, and meets the requirements
of, a crush barrier) should be measured.      This
figure is then multiplied by either the recommended
distance between the barriers (see Table         ) or
the actual distance whichever is the lesser.         This
establishes the notional available viewing area (see
Figure       ).   This area is then multiplied by the
density factor determined for that area.


Example C (Spacing and distance of crush barriers do
not conform to Chapter 10)


304. Area for standing 76 x 16 = 1216 square metres
Terrace steps conform to dimensions of Chapter 8:
drainage and condition good


Terrace gradient 20° (1 in 2.7)


Crush barrier configuration as in Figure


Working load of pitch wall established by test meets
the higher strength of Table 2 Chapter 10.


Crush barriers consist of 12 at 6 metres in length
plus 2 at 3 metres in length.




                           108
fis.r-J                                                                                 PKlTJ




                                                                                                      A As.      *3




                                                                                                '»*    LTka fV


          (• t yv\4l{ t^-3
                                                                       f. f j-w? V?J'




                                                   »■   cJg C   c U o e. ^ W             f'aQtcv,<? tXu>\     |b ujjw-'
                             IO   iIvl)<,M »-* \
Test/inspection of two barriers (see Figure       )
reveal sufficient doubts at to their integrity and
are discounted for calculation purposes.


Remaining barriers in Line A (see Figure        ) have a
safe working load (established by test) of the lower
strength of Table 2.


Barriers in Line B have a safe working load
(established by test) of the higher strength of
Table 2.


Calculation of (notional) available viewing area.


     (a)   Pitch wall: 7 6 metres less 4 exits at 1.1
           = 71.6 metres.    Recommended crush barrier
           distance (for higher strength) on a
           gradient of 20° = 3.4 metres (Actual
           distance from pitch wall to crush barriers
           5 metres).
           Notional available viewing area is
           therefore 71.6 x 3.4 = 243.4 square
           metres.


     (b)   Crush barriers: Line A = 4 at 6 metres
           plus 1 at 3 metres = 27 metres.
           Recommended distance between barriers (for
           lower strength) 2.3 metres (actual
           distance 8 metres).
           Notional available viewing area is
           therefore 27 x 2.3 = 62.1


           Crush barriers: Line B 6 at 6 metres = 1
           at 3 metres = 39 metres.    Recommended
           distance between barriers (for higher
           strength) 3.4 metres.   Actual distance
           behind barriers is 3 metres.


                            109
Notional available viewing area is
therefore 39 x 3 = 117 square metres.




              110
Total notional available viewing a r e a :-


            243.4
              62.1
            117.0


            422.5


Density packing 47 per 10 square metres.


Capacity = 422.5 x 17 = 1986
                     10


Note:- average packing density for standing area as
a whole would therefore equate to 1986 divided by
1216 = 16.33 per 10 square metres.


305. Terraces or viewing slopes at older grounds not
used for major sporting fixtures and which are
attended by very few spectators may not have crush
barriers at all; or if they do their installation
may be random and not meet the specifications of
Chapter 10.    The safe capacity in such circumstances
has to be assessed on the conditions prevailing at
the ground.    All relevant factors have to be
considered eg underfoot condition, the dispersal of
the crowd at fixtures.      The overall capacity of the
terrace will be limited and the average packing
density will be low.      One method of calculation is
taken from the pitch wall/fence (if any) discounting
the rest of the terrace.


Example D


306. Gross terrace/viewing area 76 x 16 = 1216
square metre s.


                             112
No pitch wall: spectator accommodation bounded by a
rail around the pitch and does not conform to the
specification of Chapter 18, paragraph 284.


Allow spectators a (notional) standing area of 76
metres by, say,   four terrace steps at 375 mm per
step: ie, 7.6 x 1.5 = 11.4 square metres.


Available standing area (notional) = 11.4 square
m e tres.


Capacity = 11 .4 x .47 = 536
                     10


Turnstile Capacity


307. The number of turnstiles may, however, affect
the holding capacity of a terrace if all spectators
to be accommodated in the viewing area cannot pass
through in at least 1 hour.


Example E


308. Available viewing area 7 6 metres x 16 metres =
1216 square metres.


Crush barriers and terrace conform to standards
described in Example A above.


Number of turnstiles serving the area = 6
Measured turnstile rate exceeds 660 per hour.
Maximum acceptable rate for calculation purposes -
660


Capacity = 660 x 6 = 3960




                            113
Exit Capacity


309. General considerations to be taken into account
when assessing the adequacy of exit systems are set
out in Chapter 7.   The capacity of an exit system
can be calculated by assessing for each element in
the system (ie each gangway, doorway, stairway, exit
etc) the number of persons who can pass the limiting
point in that element in 8 minutes (ie egress time,
see Chapter 7, paragraph 88).    The capacity of the
emergency exit system is the number of people who
can pass through the designated emergency exit route
in the appropriate emergency evacuation time (see
Chapter 13 paragraphs 227 - 232).    The calculation
is made by multiplying the width of the element by
the appropriate flow rate in Chapter 20 by the
appropriate time.


310. Where an element in the exit system is less
than 1 metre wide that element should be omitted
from the calculation.


[Flow restricting elements of the kind described in
Chapter 7 should be ignored for the purpose of these
calculations.]


Example F


311. Area of terrace 76 x 16 = 1216 square metres
excluding designated gangways.


Maximum potential capacity =


1216 x .47 = 5715 (see example A).
       10




                          114
Exit capacity consists of 2 stairways in each corner
of the terrace leading to a concourse at the rear,
converging on 1 exit gate in the centre.          (See
Figure          .)


Analysis of exit capacity allowing a minimum of 8
minutes for spectators to pass through a fixed
point, using flow rates given in Chapter 20.


[Stairways 12'-00" = 3.327 metres.          These are
divided into two channels of 1.1 metres and one
channel of 1.127 metres thereby providing 6 "unit
widths" for calculation purposes.


Each stairway capacity is therefore:-


         3.327 divided by .550 x 8 x 40 = 1935.7 (1936)


The capacity of the passage or concourse at the rear
of the terrace is measured at its narrowest points
(see Figure          ).   In sector A the distance measured
is 10'-00 (3.05 metres).


Exit capacity at this point is calculated as:-


         3.05 divided by .55 x 60 x 8 = 2661.8 (2662)


In sector B the narrowest point is measured as 4
metres.        Exit capacity at this point is calculated
a s :-
         4.0   divided by .55 x 60 x 8 = 3490.9 (3491)


The exit gate is measured as 16'-00 (4.88 metres).


The exit capacity of the gate is calculated as:-


         4.88 divided by .55 x 60 x 8 = 4258.9 (4259)


                                115
                                             fV   A ' T l U X.


                                                                          " V 1
                                                                           i — :>    12 * <T 3-3^7- ^
                               T

         m         ■c3-c^.
     ^       l'°                   ^                    Cf+ni)

                    M         ^
                             £ t /r




                                                                         0N /
                                                                         /S <c)-cu
                                                                 (j^O
          2.66 ,2.                                                              m<c
         -*-----                                                  *f ©

         p'b.fA'UJ?                                   |°0
                              >s
ft



                                       av\
        9   (JL'Y w   a
                                      Oi-VcJ W «vtj




                                       fhl<?
                                         G ’’C

  « —
                             IO') (
                      ■© -
pcrKC                 P o '-m j
From the above calculations it can be seen that:-


     a)      capacity of exit staircases = 3872
             (1936 x 2)


     b)      capacity of concourse = 6153 (3491 + 2662)


     c)      capacity of gateway = 4259


Terrace capacity is 3872 unless other limiting
factors apply.     If staircase capacity at (a) is
increased to more than 4259 the restricting element
in the exit system will be gateway (c).


The capacity of the emergency exit system is
calculated in the same way but using the relevant
emergency evacuation time and the exit routes to the
playing area and therefore to outside the ground
available for use in an emergency.


Example G


312. Details as in example F assuming that (a)
emergency evacuation time is judged to be 2^
minutes;    (b) normal exit route is available for use
in an emergency;    (c) additional emergency exit
routes to the playing area are available by means of
4 gangways at 1.1 metres each.


Staircase 3.327 metres divided by .550 x 40 x 2^ =
            604.9 (605)


Portal      3.05 metres divided by .550 x 60 x 2^ =
            831.8 (832)




                            116
Portal    4.00 metres divided by .550 x 60 x 2^ =
          1090.9 (1091)
Gateway   4.88 metres divided by .550 x 60 x 2^ =
          1330.9 (1331)


4 gangways at 1.1 = 4.4 metres divided by .550 x 60
x 2i = 1200.


Capacity of the normal exit system is governed by
the staircases: 605 x 2 = 1210


Capacity of the exit system to pitch = 1200


Total = 2410




                          117
CHAPTER 20


20.    RECOMMENDED FLOW RATES


313. From stands and stairways a flow rate of 40
persons per minute per unit of exit width (ie 550
mm) should be used.


314. From terraces (including covered terraces) and
the ground generally a flow rate of 60 persons per
minute per unit of exit width should be used.


315.   [The flow rates quoted are notional for
purposes of calculation.    They assume that movement
is through an exit-width of at least 1.1 metres (ie.
a double unit-width) and that underfoot conditions
comply with those recommended elsewhere in the
Guide.   If, in an individual case, it is evident
from studies of crowd movement at a ground that a
different flow is actually achieved from those
mentioned, the actual rate may be used for
calculation purposes.


316. The flow rate of 60 persons per minute per unit
width is for movement off terraces where occupants
are likely to be able to move quickly across a level
surface and through wide exit gates.   Where a less
hurried departure is experienced from that
associated with football grounds at the end of a
match, the lower figure of 40 persons per minute
should be used for calculation purposes.     In any
case of doubt the lower figure should be used.




                           119
                                                                                                                                        1        i       r
         T H 0 K a .6 » tfA ft[
                                                                                                                                                                              ANNEX A

                                                                                                                                                                              .Recommended scale 1:200
     • ■4 'J L l l t l M f tl m        «•
     t ‘4 O i k K 'V i r M *i **t i r t s                                                                                                                                      (Chapter 1 p a r a g r a phI 6re fer s)
     ii i.<            m    is uuo *r
     n« *»L iCi a   ! ►<   t'sjaiil
                                                                                                                                                                               (Anji'ck n o t d ra w n L o s c a l e )
                                                                                                                 ,£i£.I?S!Ei
              U0V5LS.
                                                                        LAN NJMMJ aPLA ( K M T CM*MO
                                                                           t Pt&rtJC* WH(X t \ i NOT CHSTBuU
                                                                        txrt B u r n s




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        H01US
                                                                W Jm [SFA T ^JG     S U IO
                                                                tuu SAltNCLUtliri

                                                                NORTH TF R R A fF




                                                                                                                                                                                l * U U*t«l            U U flM D m
                                                                                                                                                                                I K (TIN f o S J l t * U a u l r < J
                                                                                                                                                                                    t T»» |I a £ iu h a lU O V>
                                                                                                                                                                                KnMU&!•< K*t




                                      VEST   TERRA CT                                                                                   EAST   TERRACE




                                                                                                                                                                                                               m 8 U C ._ T > C R O l/G Mf X R f
It
        \QI-                                                                                                                       fo




                                                            SOUTH   S { ATlNG   STAND




                                                        □   □                                      □                           □                                                                                                   PLAN      O f GM3UM0
                                                                                                                                            n w in ii        1   __________

                                                                                                                                                             \XP
                                                                                                  U pyfitK.i['Qfrt?!>nhFAn[                                                                                                           I ^ P 55
                                                 AN N E X B




FIRST AID, MEDICAL FACILITIES AND AMBULANCES


First aid staff and accommodation


1.   There should be at each sports grounds at each
match or event at least one trained first aider per
1,000 spectators.     The responsibility for securing
the attendance of first aiders lies with ground
management.


Accommodation


2.   Ground operators should provide accommodation
designated for the provision of first aid to
spectators.     This should be in addition to the
club's medical room.     Any room set aside for this
purpose should be large enough to contain a couch
with enough space for people to walk round; a sink
providing hot and cold water and drinking; a
worktop; and sufficient room to store stretchers,
blankets and pillows.    The recommended minimum size
of the room is 15 square metres.     Where the
authorised capacity of the room exceeds 15,000 and
the size of the accommodation should,    ideally, be
increased to at least 25 square metres.     Care should
be taken to ensure that the doorway is large enough
to allow access for a stretcher or a wheelchair.


3.   First aid rooms should have heating,    lighting,
ventilation and electric sockets.    The room should
be signposted throughout the ground and located in
such a position where it is accessible to both
spectators and emergency vehicles.    A telephone line




                            120
should be installed allowing internal and external
communication.


4.   The first aid room should contain suitable
storage for first aid materials and equipment which
should be agreed with local medical or first aid
services      Ground operators should appoint someone
with sole responsibility for the equipment and
materials in the first aid room and for the upkeep
of the room.



Medical Practitioner


5.   At matches or events where the number of
spectators is expected to exceed 2,000, the club
should employ a medical practitioner to be present
and available to deal with any medical exigency at
the ground.    He/she should be present at the ground
at least an hour before the start of the match or
the event and should remain until half an hour after
the end of a match.    He/she should be made aware of
the location and staffing arrangements of the first
aid room(s).    His/her whereabouts should be known to
first aid staff and to those in the control room who
should be able to make immediate contact with
him/her.


Ambulance provision


6.   The ground operator should make arrangements
for the provision of at least one fully equipped
ambulance either from the NHS ambulance authority
or, if from elsewhere,   approved by the ambulance
authority to be in attendance at all events with an
anticipated crowd of 5,000 or more.    Any additional
ambulances to be provided for events where larger


                           121
crowds are expected should be determined after
consultation with the ambulance authority.




                        122
                                                ANNEX C


TESTS AND INSPECTIONS



1.   As indicated in Chapter 2 and Chapter 5,
regular and detailed inspections of the ground are a
necessary and important function of ground
management.    The following provides a tabulation of
tests and inspections and their frequency and
operation.



Before each event


2.   Test exit doors and gates and their locks    if
they are to be locked.


3.   All automatic fire detection and fire warning,
emergency lighting and public address systems should
betested 24 hours before   an event.


4.   Turnstiles should be tested to    make surethey
are in proper working order.


5.   Ensure that the ground does not contain any
accessible items which could be used as missiles.


6.   Ensure that there are no accumulations of
combustible waste and that any hazardous materials
are safely stored well away from public areas.


7.   Check that all entry/exit routes are clear of
obstruction.




                           123
8.    Ensure that sufficient numbers of stewards and
first aid staff are present to enable the event to
take place.


9.    Ensure that first aid equipment and materials
are maintained at the required level.
After each event


10.   Carry out a general visual inspection for signs
of damage which might create a potential danger to
the public.


11.   Inspect the ground to ensure that there are no
accumulations of combustible waste [and ensure that
any hazardous materials are safely stored well away
from public areas.]


Pre-Season/Mid-Season


12.   Check the stewarding arrangements to ensure
that all stewards have sufficient and effective
training.


13.   Test, by carrying out exercises that emergency
procedures operate smoothly.


Annually


14.   Arrange detailed inspection of the ground,
including boundary walls,    fences, gates and all
components and installations.


15.   Arrange the visual inspection of all crush
barriers and handrails and other structural
elements.




                            124
16.   Arrange the physical testing of a 25%
representative sample of crush barriers and
handrails and other structural crowd control
elements.    All elements should therefore be tested
at least once every 4 years.


17.   Visual inspection of all boundary walls,   fences
and gates.




                          125
                                          ANNEX D


TESTING AND INSPECTION OF CRUSH BARRIERS AND
HANDRAILS AND OTHER STRUCTURAL CROWD CONTROL
ELEMENTS


Objective


1.   The objective of visual inspections and
physical testing is to ascertain the condition and
strength of the crush barriers and handrails and
other elements in order to establish that they
comply with the requirements of the Guide and that
they are adequate to carry out their required
function with an established safety factor
(approximately 20% see Table     Chapter 10):- ie that
they will safely withstand the pressures generated
by the movement of spectators during entry, viewing
and egress.


2.   Note: forces generated may vary depending upon
the event, the size and nature of the crowd and its
dispersal.    Crowds at football matches including
rugby who are essentially static throughout the
match, occupying accommodation at a packing density
of up to 47/10 square metres and who leave all
together at the end of the game will probably
generate greater pressure on barriers, handrails etc
than spectators at other events such as cricket or
athletics.    The criteria for strength of handrails
and barriers etc envisages the more robust nature of
spectator movement and actions at say football
matches.


Personnel and Equipment




                           126
3.    The inspections and testing should be carried
out by or under the supervision of a competent,
suitably qualified engineer belonging to a
recognised professional institution.       The engineer
will be responsible for ensuring that the
inspections and testing are properly carried out and
that all results are accurately recorded and the
engineer must be satisfied that equipment used for
the tests is suitable for the purpose and is used in
the correct manner.       The equipment used should be
capable of a level of accuracy +. 5% of the test
force. The deflection measuring equipment should be
calibrated and be capable of a level of accuracy of
+, .5 m m .


Records


4.    Detailed records should be made and kept of all
observations,      loadings, deflection/recovery readings
etc in respect of each structure inspected and
tested.       The record should include a standard record
sheet identifying each barrier tested and inspected,
its location (including cross-reference to the
plan), date of inspection and comments and state
clearly whether the barrier, handrail etc has passed
or failed.


Inspections


5.    All crush barriers and handrails etc should be
inspected annually taking due account of comments
recorded from previous inspections (see paragraph
above).


6..   Any visible defects,     such as corrosion, cracks,
holes, misalignment, undue distortion, missing bolts
or fittings, should be noted and its potential


                              127
effect on the integrity and strength of the
structure assessed in order to determine whether its
condition is fit for its intended purpose.


7.    If it is considered that members or
connections, due to the nature of their
construction, have hidden defects such as corrosion,
further investigation should be made.     This may
involve partial dismantling if this can be done
without detriment to the structure itself.


8.    Particular attention should be paid to areas
where corrosion or damage could result in a loss of
performance ie water traps.


9.    Should inspections result in any doubt as to
the integrity and potential strength of the barrier
or handrail etc it should be tested in accordance
with the Guide or deemed to have failed.


Testing


10.   Testing should be undertaken annually on a 25%
representative sample of crush barriers and
handrails etc throughout all parts of the ground.
Each year the sample should be different so that all
crush barriers and handrails are tested at least
once every 4 years.    The 25% sample does not include
any which,    following inspection, are tested as a
result of doubts as to their integrity.


11.   The method of physical testing should be as
given below.


Test Method




                            128
12.    The test is in two parts: Bedding In Cycle and
Proof Cycle.     In each part an evenly distributed
force is applied horizontally on the top rail of the
barrier or handrail at right angles to the
longitudinal axis and is applied in increments.
Crush barriers and handrails must comply with with
the requirements of both parts of the test in order
to be considered satisfactory for further continued
use.


13.    The deflection measuring equipment should be
properly set up on a firm part of the terrace
unaffected by any movement of the barriers or
handrail.     The deflection in the horizontal plane
should be measured at the anticipated location of
maximum deflection, eg at the centre of a barrier or
handrail span (when testing the rail) or the top of
the upright (if testing the upright).


Bedding In Cycle


14.    In order to allow for the bedding in of the
test equipment and any frictional restraints,         the
barrier or handrail should be loaded up o its design
service load (see Table      Chapter    ).   The bedding-
in force should be applied in at least 5 equal
increments.     Deflections should be monitored at each
increment of the load cycle.      The maximum force
should be maintained for 5 minutes.


15.    The barrier or handrail may be considered to
have completed this part of the test satisfactorily
if, on removal of the force, the recovery is at
least 75% of the maximum deflection as measured from
the original position prior to loading or if the
permanent deflection is less than 2mm.       If the
barrier or handrail fails to achieve this level of


                            129
recovery it shall be considered to have failed the
test unless there is a satisfactory explanation for
the results.


Proof Cycle


16.   The proof cycle is to consist of two
consecutive applications of the proof force, the
interval between each application should be as short
as practicable,   ie to enable complete unloading.


17.   For crush barriers the proof force is either
6.0 kN/metre width or 4.1 kN/metre width of barrier
as mentioned in Chapter 9.


For handrails the proof force is either 4.1 kN/metre
width or 2.7 kN/metre width of handrail as mentioned
in Chapter 9.


18.   Each of the two applications of proof force
should consist of 5 equal increments, the full proof
force being maintained for 5 minutes for ewach
application.    A record should be kept of any
deflection during loading, maintained loading, or
unloading (see paragraph     above).


19.   If, on removal of the force after the second
application the recovery is at least 95% of the
maximum deflection or the permanent deflection is
less than 2mm (as measured from the barrier position
at the start of the proof test cycle - ie after the
bedding in cycle),   the barrier or handrail should be
considered to have satisfied the proof cycle loading
requirement.



Other Considerations


                           130
20.    Wherever possible comparison should be made
with the performance of other crush barriers of a
similar type and with the same barrier previously
subjected to the same or similar tests in order to
establish whether there are indications of a
reduction in overall performance which might
indicate a developing weakness requiring special
attention or more frequent testing and/or inspection
than the minimum.


21.    If at any time during the procedure, and
notwithstanding that the barrier or handrail has
satisfied the test requirements, doubt arises for
any reason (including such matters as corrosion,
cracking of the terracing or distortion of
connections) as to the safety of the barrier or
handrail, a detailed investigation should be carried
out (see paragraphs       above).   Unless the results
of this investigation remove the doubt as to the
safety of the barrier or handrail, the barrier or
the handrail    as the case may be, should be deemed
to have failed.


Note


22.    The principles of the testing procedure
recommended in previous editions of the Guide are
still valid as are the results of such tests until
re-testing is required under paragraph 10 above.




                           131
                                                    AN N E X E


STEWARDING      (See Chapter 16)


1.   Stewards should be fit, active, not less than
age 18 and ideally not more than 55 years of age.
All stewards should be capable of carrying out their
duties and should be properly trained to do so.


2.   Stewards must be informed in writing of all
that they are expected to know and do.       The
following list gives examples of typical tasks and
duties which stewards should be expected to carry
out and for which they should be prepared.         Stewards
should:


     i.      Monitor the crowd throughout the ground
             for signs of distress or overcrowding and
             take action in accordance with standing
             instructions.


     ii.     Prevent overcrowding by ensuring the crowd
             limits in various parts of the ground are
             complied with.


     iii. Prevent spectators, as far as possible,
             from climbing fences and other structures
             eg floodlight pylons, and from standing on
             seats.     Where by virtue of the scale of
             the incident stewards are unable to
             prevent this,    they should immediately
             report the matter to the nearest police
             officer or, if no police officer is
             present,    to the chief steward or the
             safety officer.




                               132
 iv.   Staff all parking areas to ensure all
       approaches and emergency exits are kept
       clear and that vehicles are correctly
       parked   in club car parks.


v.     Ensure that gangways and exits are kept
       clear.


vi.    Staff all exits including openings in
       perimeter fence.


vii. Assist in the diversion of spectators to
       other parts of the stadium when the
       capacity for any area is about to be
       reached.


viii. Identify and investigate any incident or
       occurrence among spectators, reporting
       their findings to the police or to
       management.


 ix.   Know the location of and be able to
       operate effectively the fire-fighting
       equipment at the ground.


 x.    Know the location of the first aid room
       and any first aid equipment kept
       elsewhere.


 xi.   Be fully conversant with any methods or
       signals used to alert staff that an
       emergency has arisen.


 xii. Be capable of recognising potential fire
       hazards and suspect packages, reporting
       such findings immediately to the nearest
       police officer or, if no police officers


                       133
        is in the immediate vicinity,    the chief
        steward or the safety officer.


        Comply promptly with any instruction given
        in an emergency by a police officer,    the
        chief steward or the safety officer.


  xiv. Remain at their allocated posts as
        instructed unless authorised or ordered to
        do otherwise by a police officer, the
        chief steward or the safety officer.


  xv.   Report to the safety officer any damage or
        defect which is likely to pose a threat to
        spectator safety eg a damaged crush
        barrier.


  x v i . Control of turnstiles including the
        closure of turnstiles when the capacityfor
        a particular area is about to be reached.


 x v i i . Assist in the prevention of pitch
        invasion.


xviii. Staff vehicle parking areas to keep clear
        all approaches and emergency exits and
        that vehicles are correctly parked.


  xix. Assist in the identification of spectators
        who are banned from the ground by the
        club, those who do not possess tickets at
        all ticket matches and those in possession
        of forged tickets.


  XX.   Assist in the prevention of breaches of
        ground regulations.




                        134
