[TAYREV]

           ,                            FROM:   MISS A J STEWART
                                                SARD
                                                925 6370

                                        DATE:   29 May 1992

                                        cc:     Parliamentary Secretary
                                                Permanent Secretary
                                                Mr L P Wright
                                                Mr Pittman
                                                Miss Booth
                                                Miss MacLean
                                                Mr Newsom
                                                Mr Baden
                                                Mr Ellingford
                                                Mr Hopson

SECRETARY OF STATE


RE-EXAMINATION OF ALL-SEATING: DRAFT LETTER AND ANNOUNCEMENT


1.   Following yesterday's meeting I attach:


     -         at Flag A . a single draft letter to   the Home Secretary
               which will be copied to other Ministers with an
               interest, including the Chancellor and the Leader of
               the House;


     -         at Flag B a revised draft arranged Parliamentary Answer
               announcing the re-examination and your preliminary
               conclusions.


Timing and handling


2.   Letters      to Ministers are to issue today. with a request for
responses by close on Tuesday. The PQ will be         laid on Wednesday
for answer on Thursday. Thursday's lunch with sports editors will
provide an opportunity for you to brief on your intentions: we
shall prepare an aide-memoire.


3.   You will want to alert Tom Pendry MP on Thursday morning to
the imminent announcement. We shall provide a letter. I shall
                                                                           1
contact the FLA, Football Trust etc on the day, preparing them to
receive letters inviting their views.


4.   Mr Holgate will pursue with Lord Chief Justice Taylor's
office the options for you to let him know what is afoot. Your
preference yesterday was to speak to him on the telephone, with a
short letter as an alternative.


5.   The Parliamentary announcement will form the core of a press
notice which will be prepared by Information Division. We shall
provide press briefing.




MISS A J STEWART




                                                                  2
#
    DRAFT ANNOUNCEMENT   ON   POLICY   TOWARDS   ALL-SEATING   AT   FOOTBALL
    GROUNDS

    Q.   To ask the Secretary of State for National Heritage, if
         there is to be a reconsideration of the policy towards the
         all-seating requirement at football grounds.

    A.   The Government keeps under continual scrutiny the safety of
         sports grounds. In recent months we have been examining the
         all-seating requirement for Football League grounds in the
         context of the representations that have been made and our
         concern to ensure the highest standards of safety that are
         reasonably practicable given all the factors involved,
         including the size of particular grounds. League status and
         the financial health of the clubs concerned. The safety of
         our sports grounds must, however, remain paramount.

         We have decided that it would be wrong to review either the
         principle   or the timetable for all-seating at First
         Division grounds in the Football League (the new Premier
         League) . It is essential that our top clubs meet the
         standards necessary to compete in Europe and make full use
         of the resources available to them to provide grounds of
         which we can all be proud. We also remain firmly committed
         to the principle of all-seating for the great majority of
         Second Division clubs.

         There may be circumstances, however, in which standing
         accommodation can be retained at Third and Fourth Division
         clubs in the Football League. We also need to consider the
         position at those Second Division clubs with very low
         average attendances.   Further representations are being
         invited from a number of interested organisations to assist
         me in finalising our re-examination of these and related
         issues. I intend to make a further announcement as soon as
         possible.

         For the time being all Second, Third and Fourth Division
         clubs should continue to plan on the basis of all-seating
         being a requirement by the stated dates.

         My Rt Honourable Friend,      the Secretary of State for
         Scotland, intends to consult the Scottish Stadia Committee
         on the question of a reexamination of the all-seated
         requirement at designated grounds within the First and
         Second Divisions of the Scottish Football League. The policy
         for the Premier Division is unchanged.




                                                                           1
                                                   DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL HERITAGE
                                                   Horse Guards Road, London SW1P 3AL
                                                   Telephone: 071-270 5925
                                                   Facsimile: 071-270 6026

From the Secretary of Statefor National Heritage
THE RT. HON. DAVID MELLOR QC MP

           The Rt Hon Kenneth Clarke QC MP
           Secretary of State for the Home
            Department
           Queen Anne's Gate
           LONDON SW1H 9AT




            ALL SEATING REQUIREMENT AT FOOTBALL LEAGUE GROUNDS

            Following the decision to transfer responsibility for the safety
            of sports grounds in England and Wales from your Department to
            mine, and the correspondence between you and Kenneth Baker before
            the election, I have been looking again at the all-seating
            requirement at Football League grounds in England and Wales and
            have concluded that this should be re-examined. In view of the
            expertise which your Department still retains in this matter and
            the possible implications for fire safety and public order, I
            thought it right to give you an opportunity to comment on the
            scope of the re-examination.

            I have come to the view that it would be right to make a public
            announcement now to remove some of the press speculation about
            its scope and the damaging uncertainty which this has created in
            football. I therefore propose to go public next Thursday, 4 June,
            by means of a Parliamentary Answer and associated Press Notice. I
            should be grateful for your response by close on Tuesday in order
            to meet this timetable.

            During the election campaign, as you know, the Prime Minister
            made clear that he would consider dropping the requirement at
            Third and Fourth Division grounds in the Football League, but
            that he was not prepared to give way on the central
            recommendations for the First and Second Divisions. The attached
            draft announcement reflects these views. I am, however, inserting
            the minor qualification that, in looking again at the policy for
            all-seating at Third and Fourth Division grounds, we will need to
            ensure that no anomalies are created with respect to the Second
            Division clubs, some of which have low average attendances.
            Although I also intend to examine the timetable for the Second
            Division Clubs, any public announcement at this stage that the



                                                                                        1
         SECRETARY OF STATE FOR NATIONAL HERITAGE




August 1994 deadline might be extended for any or all of those
clubs would undermine the progress which is being made by some
clubs to achieve it.

Among the related issues which need to be addressed are the scope
of the remit of the Football Licensing Authority, whether
transitional arrangements are necessary for clubs which are
promoted and, if standing accommodation is to retained, whether
the FLA needs new powers to require terracing to be brought up to
a sufficient standard.

The announcement is drafted to allow for the possibility of a
joint initiative with Scotland. It reflects what I understand to
be Sir Hector Monro's position that, if there is to be a re­
examination in Scotland, it should be restricted to the First and
Second Division clubs and that the Scottish Stadia Committee
would first be consulted on the principle.  If necessary,
however, I shall proceed with my announcement next week for
England and Wales only.

I am copying this letter to Ian Lang, David Hunt, Norman Lamont,
Tony Newton and Sir Robin Butler.




DAVID MELLOR
