       HOME OFFICE
           G2 DIVISION
 Fire and Emergency Planning Dept
Queen Anne 5s Gate London SWiH 9AT
         Tel: or-273 S S 2Z
           011

        With Compliments
   THE FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY

     Room 1022
     50 Queen Anne's Gate
     London
     SW1H 9AT
                                                    $
     Telephone: 071-273-    2 322                     .nuary 1
                                                             1991


        f    % (

ALL-SEATED FOOTBALL STADIA

I am grateful for your letter of 16 January.    I agree entirely
that it would be helpful for the Home Office, Department of
Education and Science, the Trust and the Authority to be able to
agree on the principles of taking forward the move towards all­
seated stadia.   We all have different roles in relation to this
issue and clubs should not be faced with conflicting or diverging
approaches.

Before commenting on your points of detail, I should explain that
the document which I sent to you is simply a statement of the
Authority's current position.   It has no status other than that
and it is not for publication. We may prepare further statements
in the course of time, as a way of trying to be precise about our
policies.

Whilst I appreciate that the Home Office will normally consult
the Authority about the application of the all-seated principle
to individual clubs, I am surprised that you cannot envisage any
circumstances in which the Authority might wish to approach the
Home Office. The Authority is of course well aware that in some
cases clubs will be able to comply with; the all-seated principle
by taking standing areas out of commission, but there will be
cases where this will not meet the need or where to do so might
cause exceptional difficulties.    At this stage, the Authority
envisages that relocation is as likely as any issue to result in
instances of excessive hardship if application of the time-table
was to be enforced come what may.

Through its team of inspectors, the Authority will be in very
close contact with clubs and local authorities.     The Authority
will be exercising great care in preparing licences to ensure
that the conditions are both conducive to public well-being and
no more onerous than they need be to achieve that purpose.    The
Authority must have regard to an individual club's progress
towards all-seated in assessing the full provisions of the
licence.   If the Authority's assessment revealed particular
problems in the application of the all-seated programme to the
club then it would certainly wish to take this up with the Home
Office; that may be after or before the Home Office has consulted
the FLA about the particular licence.
In relation to third and fourth divisions, I do not think that
it will be very long before the Authority comes to a view about
the application of the all-seated principle to these clubs. The
point is therefore likely to be more of academic interest.
However, I do not think that your proposed sentence is entirely
correct.  There may well be some third division clubs who will
have to introduce seating, notably those with relatively little
seating at present who gain promotion to the second or even to
the first division before August 1994. I think the only comment
which we might add to forestall complacency is that it must not
be assumed that the Authority is likely to take a different view
on third and fourth division grounds from the one it has adopted
in respect of those in the first and second divisions.

We shall of course take careful note of your views in making the
views of the Authority more generally known.




                                       “■y£TUv£




                                         G E DUNKLEY
                                         Chief Executive




Mr P E Bolton
Fire & Emergency Planning Department
Home Office


                                                               2
