From: Mr Nagler                              cc        Ms Adams
      Finance Division 2                               Mr Yates
      8 June 1989                                      Mr Chilcot
      Ext 3472                                         HMCIC
                                                       Mr Boys Smith
                                                       Mr Malone-Lee
                                                       Miss Edward=
                                                       Mr Addison
                                                       Mr Sandifo:
                                                       Mr Whalley
                                                  «-/ Mr Archer
                                                  ■“""■"Ms Ransford
                                                       Mr Durbin

Mr Storr

HILLSBOROUGH: COSTS OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
This submission concerns the request from West Midlands Police
Authority that the Home Office should meet the costs of their
investigation into the Hillsborough tragedy.  It recommends that
the costs of that investigation should fall initially on South
Yorkshire Police Authority, but proposes that the Home Secretary
should seek approval from the Chief Secretary to offer South
Yorkshire a special payment on terms similar to those which
applied in the miners' strike. The letter needs to go as soon as
possible in order to secure a reply in time for Lord Ferrers'
meeting with South Yorkshire on 2 0 June.
Home Secretary's undertaking on costs

2.   The Home Secretary has already accepted, in his reply of 28
April to a Parliamentary Question from Mr Beaumont-Dark and in
his letters to West Midlands MPs, that the additional costs of
the police investigation by West Midlands police officers should
not fall on the West Midlands Police Authority. He has not given
any specific undertaking on how the costs should be met.
West Midlands' position

3.   Lord   Ferrers met theWest Midlands Police Authority and
Chief Constable on 25 May.   The members of the Authority argued
that the Home Office should meet West Midlands costs directly.
They claimed that the investigation was in effect being conducted
for Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry. The Chief Constable said that
the actual approach to him to conduct the investigation had come
from HM Chief Inspector of Constabulary, and that in his view he
had been asked to conduct it and was conducting it on behalf of
Lord Justice Taylor, not on behalf of the Chief Constable of
South Yorkshire, Mr Peter Wright.

4.   LordFerrers explained that    it was our understanding of
South Yorkshire's position that the investigation had been
initiated   by Mr Wright andrelatedto the actions of his force,
although it was also being placed at  the service of the Taylor
enquiry.
E.R.
       South Yorkshire's position

       5.   Home Office officials met the Clerk of South Yorkshire
       Police Authority and an Assistant Chief Constable for South
       Yorkshire Police on 18 May.     The South Yorkshire position was
       somewhat different from West Midlands.     They accepted that Mr
       Wright had initiated the investigation, but claimed that it had
       subsequently been largely taken over by the Taylor enquiry; Mr
       Dear was reporting directly to Lord Justice Taylor.          They
       suggested that the scope of the investigation was being dictated
       primarily by the needs of the national enquiry and that the whole
       cost should be borne by central government. South Yorkshire have
       since indicated that they wish to pursue this case at a meeting
       with Lord Ferrers.

       Origin and purpose of investigation

       6.   It is fairly clear that, whatever Mr Dear's interpretation
       of events,    Mr Wright was the initiator in seeking an
       investigation by an outside force.     This is borne out by the
       terms of South Yorkshire Police's own press notice about the
       investigation (copy attached at Annex A).

       7.   Although the decision was taken early on to place the
       results of the investigation directly at the service of the
       Taylor enquiry, the main subject of the investigation concerns
       the policing of South Yorkshire.      An investigation into the
       events of the day would have been needed, irrespective of whether
       there was a public enquiry, and Mr Wright very properly decided
       that an investigation by an outside force would be desirable.

       8.   The scope of the investigation has clearly broadened because
       of the Taylor enquiry.   There are elements of the investigation
       which have been prompted by the needs of the enquiry (eg seeking
       evidence on the design of football grounds and the procedure for
       issuing safety certificates). It also appears that the taking of
       witness statements for a public enquiry would normally be
       performed by Treasury Solicitors, whereas in this case the police
       are undertaking that function by interviewing in the course of
       their investigation most of those who would be called to give
       evidence to the enquiry.

       9.   Nevertheless the investigation as a whole is primarily
       concerned with the policing of the events on the day; it would
       have been necessary to the Chief Constable for his own purposes,
       in order to provide evidence to coroners' inquests as well as to
       Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry, and in order to satisfy himself as
       to the conduct of his police force and draw any necessary lessons
       for future events, as well as to deal with any possible
       complaints against his officers (none have yet been received).
       In our view it follows that South Yorkshire should meet the costs
       of the enquiry initially.   But there is a strong case for making
       a special payment to them in order to assist with meeting the
       costs.

       Costs of Investigations

       10.   The Treasurer of West Midlands Police Authority said at the
E.R.
       meeting with Lord Ferrers on 25 May that costs were running at
       around £2 million per month in the early stages of the
       investigation (which involved some 350 officers). Having spoken
       to the Deputy Treasurer of West Midlands' Police Authority we
       understand that their best estimate at present for the total
       costs of the investigation, which is now being scaled down, is
       some £4-5 million.

       Case for a special payment to South Yorkshire

       11. Special payments have previously been made in cases of
       exceptional and unforeseen expenditure, where the efficiency of
       the force would be threatened if no assistance were given.    The
       Hillsborough expenditure would certainly have been unforeseen and
       is well in excess of a lp rate product for the area (the
       threshold which was applied in the miners' strike) which would be
       £1.3 million. The costs would be between 5-6% of the Authority's
       total budget of £85m and, even net of police grant, would erode
       their balances, which at the end of 1988-89 stood at around £2
       million.

       12. If a special payment were made on miners' strike terms, the
       police authority would receive police grant on normal terms (51%)
       u^til the total costs reached the product of a lp rate (£1.3
       million). The Home Office would then contribute 90% (51% police
       grant; 39% special grant).     The maximum contribution for the
       Police Authority would be the product of a 3/4p rate (£0.975
       million) . Once it had paid that amount, the Home Office would
       pay 100%. So if the total costs are £4-5 million the Home Office
       would pay £3-4 million.  (Illustrative figures are shown at
       Annex B .)

       Discussions with Treasury

   13. We have discussed this issue with the Treasury at official
   level.   Their preliminary view was that the costs ought to fall
   initially on South Yorkshire, but they acknowledged that there
   might be a     case for aspecial grant.    They   queried however
   whether the   terms of the    miners' strikepaymentwere applicable:
   in the case of the hurricane damage in 1987, assistance was
   provided to local authorities on a less generous scale. We made
   the point that single service police authorities in particular
   were less well-equipped than councils to absorb excessive and
   unforeseen expenditure and said that we would be advising that a
   payment on miners' strike lines would be appropriate.         The
   Treasury were clear that, on grounds of principle, they would not
   favour a payment direct to West Midlands.
   Issues at stake

   14. In our     view there are important    issues of principle at
   stake, with implications for funding of policing generally.    It
   is accepted that the costs should not fall on West Midlands. But
   if payments    were made directly from    central funds to West
   Midlands it would imply that the investigation was being
   conducted solely at the behest of and for the benefit of central
   government.  Since that is not the case - the investigation was
   initiated by South Yorkshire and is dealing with matters which
E.R.
       are primarily the concern of South Yorkshire Police - a direct
       payment could leave us open to similar claims on any occasion
       when an investigation was being conducted by an outside force and
       there could be said to be a national interest in the outcome.
       This could apply to any incident of a major scale where possible
       allegations of police misconduct were involved (eg Wapping).
       15. Difficulties have already been experienced in a case
       involving allegations of wrongful conviction (Guildford and
       Woolwich bombings) and the lesson drawn that any approach needs
       to be carefully routed via the original investigating force. In
       the present case, it was South Yorkshire as the force originally
       involved which made the approach to West Midlands. West Midlands
       Police Authority have argued, however, that because of the
       involvement of HM Inspector of Constabulary in the negotiations
       with West Midlands, and because of the decision to make the
       results of the investigation available to the Taylor enquiry,
       South Yorkshire are not even parties to the agreement and that
       therefore payment should be made direct to West Midlands. There
       would be very wide implications for funding of enquiries of this
       sort if we accepted that position.
       Recommendations

       16. We recommend that, for the reasons given in paragraphs 14
       and 15 above, the costs of the Hillsborough investigation should
       fall initially to South Yorkshire Police. South Yorkshire should
       be offered a special payment to help meet the costs, following
       the formula used in the miners1 strike as described in paragraph
       12 above.

       17.   A draft letter to the Chief Secretary is attached.


                                             %
                                           N A NAGLER
E.R.
                                                                ANNEX A




       The planning and the operational decisions of South Yorkshire
       Police officers will form a major aspect of the enquiry to be
       held into the events which led to the tragedy at the Sheffield
       Wednesday football ground on 15 April.

       The Chief   Constable Mr Peter Wright judges it essential that the
       gathering   and assessment of evidence in relation to these matters
       should be    carried out by officers from another Force.     He has
       therefore    asked Mr Geoffrey Dear, Chief Constable of West
       Midlands,   to nominate a senior officer to lead the enquiry.
E.R.
                                                                   Annex B



       Application of miners' strike formula for assistance to South
       Yorkshire's estimated costs for Hillsborough investigation

                                Home Office      Police Authority

       First £1.3 million         £0.663m            £0.637m)
        (product of lp rate)       (51%)              (49%) )
                                                            ) = £0.9 75m
                                                               )
       Next £3.38 million         £3.042m            £0.338m)
                                   (90%)              (10 %)   )
       Total Expenditure         £3.705m            £0.975m
                                   (79%)              (21%)


       When total costs reach £4.68 million, the Police Authority
       contribution reaches £0.975 million. Thereafter all additional
       costs would fall to the Home Office.

          total expenditure reaches £5 million the Home Office would pay
       £4.025 million (80%) and the Police authority nothing more than
       the £0.975 million (20%).




       D-MAJOR.SS
                                                       FILE NUMBER

DRAFT LETTER


ADDRESSEE'S REFERENCE


  TO                                  ENCLOSURES           COPIES TO BE SENT TO




       Rt Hon John Major MP                                Prime Minister
       Chief Secretary                                     S of S for Environment
       Treasury                                            Copy recipients of
                                                            submission
                                                           Mr Nagler




        (FULL POSTAL ADDRESS)                         (FULL ADDRESSES, IF NECESSARY)

                        LETTER DRAFTED FOR SIGNATURE B Y   H      .......................................
                                                           s of S
                                                               (NAME OF SIGNATORY)




                         HILLSBOROUGH: COSTS OF INVESTIGATION BY WEST MIDLANDS

                         My officials have been discussing with yours the policing
                         costs of this investigation and the arrangements which we
                         would like to make, by way of a special payment, to help
                         South Yorkshire Police Authority to assist in meeting the
                         costs.


                         2.   West Midlands Police, initially at the invitation of
                         the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, is conducting an
                         investigation into the policing aspects of the
                         Hillsborough disaster. When it was decided that Lord
                         Justice Taylor's enquiry should be established, it was
                         agreed that the information obtained by the West Midlands
                         Police should be placed at the disposal of that enquiry.




        H.O. EST. 112
S536
                                                                                          35688 9.85 XNW
Both the West Midlands and the South Yorkshire police
authorities have now asked that the additional costs of
the police investigations should be met directly by
central government.


3.   It is clearly right that the additional costs should
not fall on West Midlands Police Authority, which has no
direct interest in the outcome of the investigation. I
have therefore given an assurance, in my replies to
Members of Parliament concerned about the matter, that
wherever the additional costs might fall, they would not
fall to the West Midlands.


4.   I believe that it is right in principle that the
costs should fall initially to South Yorkshire Police
Authority. The investigation was initiated by the Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire and is concerned primarily
with matters of policing in South Yorkshire.


 5.   South Yorkshire have not yet accepted this point.
'they have argued that the investigations are being
dictated primarily by the needs of the Taylor Inquiry and
have ceased to be directed towards the needs of their
 force. There is some validity in this argument, although
I do not accept South Yorkshire's conclusion. It is
clear that as a result of the decision to make the
results of the police investigations directly available
to the Taylor enquiry, which was obviously a sensible
arrangement, there is an element in the investigation
which is, for the sake of convenience, being conducted
 for the benefit of that enquiry. Police officers are
obtaining information about design and safety of sports
grounds for the enquiry, and by taking witness statements
 from those who may be giving evidence for the enquiry are
effectively providing a service which would normally be
undertaken by Treasury Solicitors.


6.   The additional costs of the investigation were
initially estimated to be running at £1.7 million per
month. This covered both the direct overtime worked by
the 350 or so officers involved and the consequential
overtime worked in West Midlands to cover for their
absence. It also includes accommodation costs,
transport, subsistence and the like. There may be
further costs associated with the investigation, such as
use of computer facilities and helplines, which may add
to the costs. We understand that the investigation is
now being scaled down; even so West Midland Police
Authority's tentative estimate of the total additional
costs is around £4-5 million.


7.   Because of the scale and scope of the police
investigation, I am satisfied that the likely costs could
not be absorbed within South Yorkshire Police Authority's
budget without serious detriment to the efficiency of the
force. The costs could not have been foreseen when the
Authority set its budget and are likely to place a
serious strain upon it. The Authority's gross budget is
some £85 million and they had balances at the end of
1988-89 of around £2 million. They need to keep some of
that for other possible contingencies such as public
disorder or a criminal investigation.


8.   I would like to make South Yorkshire an early offer
of a special payment, in the hope of persuading them to
agree to meet the initial costs of the investigation and
thus relieve West Midlands, which is extremely concerned
about the drain on its own policing resources and the
absence of any agreed arrangement for reimbursing its
costs. There is a risk that matters could come to a head
at an early stage. A further complication is that the
Chief Constable of West Midlands has told us that his
understanding has always been that he was conducting the
investigation solely on behalf of Lord Justice Taylor.
This may be in part a confusion which arose because when
he was initially approached by HM Chief Inspector of
Constabulary the possibility was raised that he might be
an assessor for the Taylor enquiry as well as conducting
the investigation (although it was then decided to
separate the two roles). Whatever the reasons, it would
be very difficult to find ourselves involved in any
public dispute over the events which led up to the
investigation.


9.   We hope that the South Yorkshire Police Authority
can be persuaded to accept responsibility. I believe
that our best hope of achieving this is to make an early
offer of a special payment recognising both the financial
burden which this places on South Yorkshire and the
extent to which the investigation serves the purposes of
Lord Justice Taylor's enquiry.


10. Turning to the possible terms of the special
payment, I believe that it should be based on the formula
used in the miners' strike, and subsequently in the case
of the demonstrations at RAF Molesworth, namely that for
costs above a threshold equivalent to the product of a
penny rate for the area (ie around £1.3 million), we
should meet 90% of the costs (or 39% in addition to the
usual police grant) and that we should place a ceiling on
the South Yorkshire Police Authority's overall
contribution, equivalent to a 3/4p rate product for the
area (approximately £1 million). The ceiling could be
reached if the costs were to reach around £4.7 million.

11. I believe that it would be very difficult to justify
being less generous than in the miners' dispute in this
particular instance.


12. Robin Ferrers is meeting the South Yorkshire Police
Authority on 20 June. It is imperative that we should be
able to say how the Government proposes that the costs
should be met, and how West Midlands Police Authority is
to be reimbursed, at the earliest possible date and we
certainly need to be in a position to make a clear and
reasonable offer at that meeting. I should therefore be
very grateful for an early reply.
13. I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister and
Nicholas Ridley.




D-STORR.NAG
