                                                                RA/0016/1058


                                     ^.3 ,7.^

                THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND SCIENCE
                 ELIZABETH HOUSE YORK ROAD LO N D O N SEI 7PH
                            TELEPHONE 071-934 9000

                              ROBERT ATKINS      mp

                               M inister fo r Sport




David Amess Esq.,MP,
House of Commons
LONDON
SW1A OAA




Thank you for your letter of 19 November enclosing a copy of
one from the Chairman of West Ham United F C about the club's
proposals to redevelop its ground.

This looks an imaginative scheme by the club and I am pleased
that they are taking such positive steps to ensure they meet the
Taylor deadline for all seating at their ground. I note that they
hope to finance the bulk of the development through the sale of
debenture bonds to supporters and I understand there has already
been a substantial degree of interest. It seems to me that in
order to be successful a bond issue of this nature must offer
real benefits to supporters. I understand that West Ham intend to
offer a range of benefits, apart from the right to buy a season
ticket, including closer liaison between bond holders, through
nominated representatives, and the management at the club. I
welcome any moves which being clubs and their supporters closer
together.




ROBERT ATKINS
                                         FROM: T A Ellingford
                                                  SARD
                                          DATE: 4 December 1991

1. Mr Baden
2. PS/Mr Atkins

WEST HAM UNITED FC: ALL SEATER STADIUM

1. West Ham United FC have recently announced proposals to
redevelop their ground to an all seater stadium. New two-tier
stands are to be built behind each of the goals and a remaining
area of terracing converted to seating. Work is planned to start
at the end of the current season and to be completed by the start
of the 1994-95 season.
2. The cost of the redevelopment is £15.5m and the club want to
finance the bulk of this expenditure by the sale of debenture
bonds to supporters. Bond holders will receive a number of
benefits the chief of which will be the right to buy a season
ticket. The bonds £re priced at £500, £750 and £975 and the
target is to sellfl9,000 which will contribute £15.1 m towards
the cost. The club will fund the remainder from its own
resources. The club has considered and neglected other methods of
financing, such as bank borrowing and a share issue. The bonds
are just about to go on sale and the club is reported to have had
expressions of interest from around 10,000 supporters. It is not
clear what the club will do if the target of 19,000 sales is not
met. They have just submitted an application to the Football
Trust for 'major projects' grant assistance and this will
obviously assist in meeting any shortfall.
3. A reply to Mr Amess is attached



T A ELLINGFORD




                                                                  1
