90
 K H .1.15/FAXMESS.DP                                                  cc       MrWebb


 Mr Baden, SARi>/DES - BY FAX
 Mr Hopley, F8
 Mr Reid

 INSTITUTE OF LEISURE AND AMENITY MANAGEMENT (ILAM) CONFERENCE

      TncHhit-p of Leisure and Amenity                           Management        (ILAM)     are
 organising a conference on behalf of the                                                     and
 the Football League on stadia and                                                             at

     B ? ™ ^ g h S m o n ^ ' a n l 28 January and will■  **
     representing the management and boards of the clubs xn tne an
     and 2nd Divisions.
     initially,      ILAM approached the Minister for Sport to^ give the
     opening address for                                 bthey w e?e reco-ended to ask
     Lori Ferrers13 Our Minister“initially ^'accepted subject to the
     usSal conditions and soon had to » ith«rawH^ “ "se ^                ”°nt
     Dressinq Parliamentary business commxtments. However, ILAM we
     S J I d with their arrangements and Lord Ferrers has b e e - l ^ d
     in the conference programme with ®          minute slot          (Norman
     a^rirpqs     Other sessions xnclude the Local Aucnor y               _ ~
                  Liverpool City Council),
     WT& T n ^ t - o r s ) . Fire Safety (Trevor Newton, ACFO rot s j;
     Rpsrue) Police Deployment Manning Leeds (ACC Malcolm \.^u.,r ge ana
     C h K f ^ p t Stoles''end Cmdr at villa ParK),                v x e ^ t
     Profile                                                                    HtlfordV Notjs


     Manager) and the Football Trust (Peter Lee).



      27thS'*e H ^ V a s ^ t h e r ^ f o r ^ b e ^ ^ r e c o m m e n d e d 6 that^au f i ^ invitation
      does notHemer?t b r e w i n g his Previous engagements. However g iven
      the lateness of the hour a senior HC' ° ££ioial hc\Svlsion
      a substitute. This is Mr Miles the Head of G2

      While it is far from certain that ILAM will accept a H0
      to open their conference we shall not too..for severa^ days^by
      which time there will be even less tim® ^ r:     9 r J P please ask



      lilts fiis s iiK il
      Division (ext 3650) as early
      Wednesday 22 January.
                                                      as   possxble       and    defxnxtely       oy


       I apologise for the undue haste but we have had no time to
       consider this matter ourselves.



                                                                   D A PETERS
                                From      A R Baden
                                          SARD C
                                Date      20 January 1992
                                Copy      Hr Vaughan
                                          Hr Ellingford

PS/Mr Atkins
                    MISCELLANEOUS FOOTBALL HATTERS
1. The purpose of this minute is to bring the Minister up to
date on a number of developments concerning implementation of the
Taylor report, all-seating and the FLA.
Adjournment Debate on Implementation of Tavlor: 24 January

2. George Howarth MP has asked for an adj ournment debate on the
implementation of Taylor for this Friday, 24 January at 2.30pm.
Peter Lloyd will be giving the Government response. We are
providing briefing     on the    Football League implementation
questionnaire, the position on access by potential Premier League
clubs to RPD monies and on Football Trust grants so far to assist
in the implementation of Taylor.

All-seating for other sports
3.  The Minister will note from John Patten's written answer of
16 January that there is to be no departure from the voluntary
approach to all-seating at Rugby League and Rugby Union grounds.

Issue of Licences
4. The Home Office intends to commence Section 9 of the Football
Spectators Act 1989 by early summer. This will create an offence
of admitting spectators to watch a designated football match at a
ground not covered by a licence issued by the FLA. The Home
Office propose to amend the designation order to ensure that it
covers the Premier League as well as the Football League and to
reduce the scope of the order so that certain categories of match
at present which would otherwise require a licence are to be
excluded. Under the new proposals in addition to the Football and
Premier Leagues it would only apply to full, "b", under 21 or
schoolboy internationals played at sports grounds designated
under the 1975 act, matches organised by UEFA at a designated
sports ground and matches involving the Berwick Rangers first
team at their home ground. We see no difficulties with these
amendments^
5.   The Home Office are currently agreeing the format of the
licence applications which are to be issued shortly together with
a request for each club to complete a business plan by the end of
April. The FLA are consulting the Football League and the
Football Trust on the format of these business plans. Assuming
that the business plans are satisfactory the FLA will then issue
licences by the end of this coining close season. The Home Office
is to introduce an order under Section 11 to direct the FLA to
include conditions in licences as respect seating. The FLA will
then be able to require seating conditions in its licences and
thereby have an effective means of implementing all-seating.
These arrangements have yet, however, to be agreed by the
management board of the FLA and the Home Secretary. We have
encouraged the Home Office to enable the FLA to press ahead with
the early introduction of licences on the grounds that any
further delay might be interpreted by clubs as a weakening in the
Government's resolve to introduce all-seating. The Minister has
previously made clear his views on this to Earl Ferrers.




A R BADEN
Rm 3.63
Ext 6371




                                                                    2
