                          Entry Procedures at Clubs


Luton Town

Luton Town have two sets of turnstiles. At the outer ring of turnstiles
supporters have to enter their membership card into the reader to gain
admission to the concourse. They then pay their cash admission at the inner
turnstiles, which feed directly onto the terraces.

Invalid cards etc. are therefore encountered at the outer set of turnstiles.
The system at Luton is simply that if a person, on entering his card, is
unable to get the "green light", then a steward will direct him/her to an
enquiry office adjacent to the outer turnstiles (but, still on the outside).
If the card is faulty and needs replacing, the club will issue a temporary
card valid for one match and arrange for a replacement to be sent to the
 amber's home address. If, on the other hand, the card appears on the banned,
list, the club notifies the local police.                                    ,
                                                                              I


Bill Tanlins, the club secretary, tells me that they only get about 2 faulty
cards per match, although it was a much higher figure in the past, before they
revamped the system.

Derby County

Derby County have very few problems with invalid/faulty cards. They issue
individual "keys" to each member. If a member reports his "key" as lost or
stolen, the club strikes that key frcm the register and issues a new one. If
for some reason the key does not work, the member has to go to the club office
to sort out the problem.

 Oxford United

 Oxford United let their invalid/faulty cards through the turnstiles, but the
 gateman hands the card to a steward and the steward takes the member to an
 enquiry centre inside the ground. They accept that the banned supporter could
 run away once in the ground, but the steward would have the card and it could,
 therefore, only happen once. They experience very few problems.

 Reading

 Reading also have very few problems. If a member's card does bring about a
 "red light" at the turnstile, he is not let in - he has to go to the club
 office where an enquiry is made.

 Tottenham Hotspur

 Tottenham do not experience too many problems. They have a supervisor behind
 every turnstile (additional to the gateman) and if a red light comes up, a
 code number is indicated to the supervisor which tells him the reason for the
 red light.

 The way the club deals with these cases depends on the situation outside the
 turnstile.  If there is not a large queue, they may ask the person to go to
 the office to sort out the problem. If, however, there is a number of people
 pressing to get in, they may have to let the person in and the supervisor take
 him to the enquiry room. The card would be retained by the supervisor while
 the enquiry is carried out.
