Mr EllingfOrd
SARD

URBAN AID FOR IMPROVEMENTS TO FOOTBALL GROUNDS - FOOTBALL LEAGURE
SEMINAR

1. We discussed the letter from Mr Dent of the Football League
and you explained that the possibility of inner city grant-aid
to help    rebuild/improve   stadia   as part    of the    Taylor
implementation had been mentioned by Mr Moynihan at a recent
meeting with the League. I also gather that copies of a booklet
about such grant-aid were sent to the clubs although the Football
League itself appeared to be unaware of this.

2. We are well aware of the need for a positive response to
approaches from the Football League for information on grant
assistance - the problem is that inner city programme money is
directed to specific areas for specific purposes - individual
club prbposals would have to be considered against the relevant
criteria to qualify for grant-aid. The programme also goes far
wider than DoE programmes alone. Moreover inner city funding is
only one of a range of options including the social fund or other
grant-aid   administered   within   DoE   or   other   government
departments (please see Mrs Mulcahy's note attached).

3. For these reasons, I have suggested in the attached draft that
if they would like someone to attend the seminar to cover this
specific area, Mr Ash would be available to cover the overall
Action for Cities programme but on the basis that this is not the
whole story.




MRS L M OLIVER
ACCU
P3/023A Ext 0710

12 July 1990

cc Mr Laufer ACCU
   Mr As?h ICPU
   Mrs Mulcahy ACCU
Mrs Oliver


FOOTBALL LEAGUE


1    As discussed, I had a word with Chris Warley of the Football
League - he is the official who prepared the letter for David
Dent's signature - to get some background information.

2   Basically the Taylor Report requires the football clubs to
have all-seater stadiums by either 1994 or 1999 depending upon
which division the clubs are in. Many of the grounds are old and
located in inconvenient built up areas: they need constant costly
repairs in addition to the work that will have to be carried out
because of the Taylor Report.      This may not be economically
viable and a number of clubs - about 20 - are thinking about
selling their current sites and relocating to other areas -
generally on the outskirts of towns where the parking facilities
are much better.   The League has received a number of enquiries
from the clubs on grant assistance available to help them to
relocate - this I think sparked Mr Dent's enquiry. In addition
other clubs may decide to stay put and they are also seeking
information on grants which may be available to them to improve
the facilities.

3 Mr Warley mentioned that the League had been in touch with DTI
who had advised them to get in touch with Strathclyde University
which holds information on its AIMS database on grant assistance
available from all sources. They have received a report but his
concern was that the various clubs might not be able to wade
through it all (! !) and that it was much better to get the
information from an expert. He did say that he was aware that
grant assistance may be tied to other criteria ie employment
opportunities or benefits to the community but I received the
impression that at club level they were really interested in
grants to help them relocate or carry out the necessary work. He
was unable to identify the 'blue book' that the clubs had
reportedly received.

4 On the basis of my conversation with Mr Warley I really do
think that the information they want goes much wider than inner
city programmes - although these are relevant and we would have
an input because clubs which are located in the 57 designated
areas may be come up with projects which could qualify for
assistance (Jonothan Teckxnan's minute refers). On the question
of cross-Whitehall coordination I do not think that we can speak
with authority about OGD's programmes.    I suspect that as with
UP any request for support from a league team would be considered
on it merits. In the circumstances I am not sure that we should
offer to field someone to speak at the seminar. Perhaps we can
discuss where we should go from here.




ACCU                             MS ANNE MULCAHY
P2/118                           10 July 1990      ,    ,
DRAFT CONTRIBUTION TO REPLY TO MR DENT, SECRETARY, FOOTBAL LEAGUE
LIMITED

1. I know that the League is also interested in the availability
of grant assistance towards upgrading or improving club
facilities. There is of course a wide range of grant programmes,
operated by different Government Departments, which meet specific
objectives and have their own criteria against which individual
proposals are considered. For example, under the Action for
Cities initiative, there are several programmes, some of which
are DoE's responsibility and others which fall to other
Departments.   I am not sure whether you have already seen the
atached booklet - People in Cities - but this sets out what those
programmes cover and gives a useful table and contact points at
the end.

2. I am not sure how many representatives you are expecting at
the seminar from DoE but [ ] will be attending from the planning
side. If you felt that it would be helpful to have someone
present from the Action for Cities side as well, Mr Ash in our
Inner Cities Policy Unit would be available on that day. However,
I should stress that each Action for Cities programme has its own
rules and criteria and, while we would be happy to point people
in the right direction for more information about these, given
the wide range of the subject, we could not give definite answers
ori whether grant-aid might be available in any partiocular case.
