                             CONFIDENTIAL




PS/Secretary of State
                                                                  >h

LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INQUIRY - INTERIM REPORT


I understand that you are likely to receive a copy of Lord Justice
Taylor's interim report, under cover of a letter from the Home
Secretary this evening. The report and the Government's response to it
are to be discussed at an interdepartmental official meeting at
11.30am tomorrow and at a Ministerial meeting chaired by the Home
Secretary at 5.00pm.

I am afraid that one result of this arrangement is that I shall have
to offer briefing in two parts. What follows is based on a draft which
I have been shown today (which I think will be close to the final
version) and has not been discussed with the Home Office. I will put
up a further note tomorrow after the interdepartmental official
meeting; you have arranged an oral briefing for 4.15pm tomorrow. The
timing for consideration of the report has been compressed by two main
factors: Lord Justice Taylor's last-minute tinkerings with the report,
which are still continuing today; and the Home Secretary's desire to
publish the report on Friday, if at all possible. The helpful aspect
from a narrow DOE point of view is that Departmental responsibility
for the matters covered in the report is almost entirely for the Home
Office. The following notes deal separately with the Report and the
recommendations.

THE REPORT

The report is written in a very readable style and I would commend it
to Ministers, when they have time. Part III, the Conclusions, offers a
relatively brief summary. The main points are:

(1)   Senior police officers are criticised for: inadequate planning
before the match; lack of leadership on the day; and evasiveness in
their evidence to the Inquiry. Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, the
officer in charge of the match, comes in for the heaviest criticism.
Superintendent Marshall, who gave the order to open the gate that led
to the crushing, is not criticised for that decision.

(2)    The City Council, which took over responsibility for the Safety
Certificate from South Yorkshire County Council,         in 1986,    is
criticised for: failing to update the Safety Certificate issued in
1979, to take account of structural changes to the ground in 1981 and
1985; for failure to follow the Home Office "Green Guide" (on safety
at sports grounds) on the width of perimeter gates and other crucial
issues; and for its inadequate administrative arrangements for
monitoring safety at the ground.

(3)    Sheffield Wednesday Football Club is also criticised, but less
severely, for lack of adequate safety precautions at the Leppings Lane
end of the ground (where the disaster happened), and for its share in
the confusion of responsibilities for managing the crowd, between its
staff and the police.
                               CONFIDENTIAL


(4)   The Football Association, which chose Hillsborough for the
match, despite Liverpool's objections, is criticised mildly for doing
so. But the judge does not believe the choice of venue to be
responsible for the disaster.

(5)   The supporters - the judge does not accept that there was a
"conspiracy" amongst Liverpool supporters to arrive late and force
their way in. Nor does he consider that drunkenness and misbehaviour
were significant in causing the disaster or during it.

(6)   First aid and emergency services - the judge finds no fault in
their response on the day.


RECOMMENDATIONS

A significant number of the recommendations are for implementation
"before the 1989/90 season starts". Since the season is due to start
on 19 August, this leaves very little time but the recommendations are
almost entirely concerned with the management of spectators rather
than with structural changes to grounds. If the clubs, the local
authorities and the police were to put in a great deal of effort, they
might be able to achieve many of the recommendations within the
timetable, though formal changes to the Safety Certificates (on which
there are a number of recommendations) require the local authorities
to consult the police, the fire and building authorities.
The recommendations cover:


       - better controls on maximum numbers on terraces which are
       divided into "pens" and, where appropriate, lower maxima than
       at present;

          more policing      and/or   stewarding   to   monitor   possible
       overcrowding;

       - better marking and signposting of gates, access routes etc;
       - a check on the soundness of existing crush barriers;

       - *all gates to the pitch in perimeter fencing to be kept open;
       - a review of safety certificates;

       - a review of turnstiles and the rate of access through them;
       - tickets to provide better information;

      - improved police procedures and clear lines of responsibility
      within the police and between police and club;

       - new arrangements for co-ordinating emergency services;
       - better First Aid and medical provision.
                               CONFIDENTIAL


The only recommendation on this list that I would query is the one
marked *, given the possibility that hooligans could use a permanently
open gate to gain access to the pitch. At the time of writing I am
not certain that this will be included in the report which you receive
^    evening. The other recommendations seem eminently reasonable; one
would hope that those involving reviews of existing arrangements had
already been met at most grounds since Hillsborough.
The report does not mention:


       - the question of resuming alcohol sales at football grounds
       (unacceptable to us; the subject of speculation in the Sunday
       Times);                                                     J

       - the national membership scheme. This will be covered in the
       final report;

       - the question of a central authority to monitor local safety
       authorities - for which we have now provided in the Football
       Spectators Bill. This again will be an issue for the final
       report. My own view is that the performance of Sheffield City
       Council greatly strengthens the case for the FLA to have this
       role, but we should be wary of anticipating the Judge.


CONCLUSION

My apologies for such a lengthy note. I will hope to be briefer
tomorrow. In summary, I see no reason why the Government should not
accept the report and urge those to whom the recommendations are
addressed to do everything possible to meet them as quickly as
possible. The report is to remain confidential until it is published.




NEIL KINGHAN
SARD


1 August 1989


cc:   PS/Mr Moynihan
      PS/Sir T Heiser
      Mr Own
      Mr McDonald
      Miss Caines        minute only
      Mrs Weinberg
      Mr Newsom
      Mr Smith
