u s .3.21/dentf1.peb



From:    P E Bolton                                  cc   Miss Nicholson
         G2 Division                                      Mr Turney
         X3322                                            Mr Goddard
         21 March 199 0                                   Mr Mower
                                                          Mr Taylor




Ms Dent


THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE


You     asked   for   advice   on   the   attached    letter   from   the   Chief
 Executive of the Football League.


 A simple encouraging acknowledgement is all that is required.
 I attach a draft for the Home Secretary's signature.                  Though a
 Private Secretary reply would not be altogether inappropriate,
 it would be seen as a sign of encouragement if the Home Secretary
 responded personally to this positive move on the part of the two
 football authorities.




                                                      P E. BOLTON
DRAFT LETTER


Arthur Sandford Esq
Chief Executive
The Football League Limited
Lytham St Annes
Lancashire
FY8 1JG



Copies to: S of S for Environment
           Chancellor of the Exchequer




                               FOR SIGNATURE BY THE HOME SECRETARY




      Thank you for your letter of 15 March in which you informed
      me that the Football League and the Football Association
      have agreed to adopt Lord Justice Taylor's recommendation
      for the establishment of an Advisory Design Council.


      This     is a very positive step   and I was delighted to see
      that the two organisations have acted so quickly.
                                                                                                               'Njv c’
                                                                                                                              fW? iV i cU-P
                                                                                                                              (iVi' . !


                                                                       0 t / !VDED
                                                                                                                              v " W    r .     i W   A   / O     ZJ~
                                                                                                                                                               — 1


                                                                                                                               'Aj \ j '   -


                                     T H E F O O T B A L L LE A G U E L IM IT E D
Ly cham St. An n e s . L a n cas hir e. FY8 I |C. T e l e p h o n e 0253 729421. T e le x 67675. Fax 0253 724786.              Secrecary I. D. De n t
                                                                                                                                                                 [     ifafc
                     C h ie t E x e c u t iv e : A. S a n d f o r d   T e l e p h o n e : 0602 508720   Fac sim ile : 0602 50862


15th March 1990

R t . Hon David Waddington M.P.
Home Secretary
The Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London
SW1H 9AT




Dear Home Secretary,

Following a joint meeting between the Football Association and
the Football League, I was asked to write to you to let you
know that these two bodies have agreed to adopt the proposal
from Lord Justice Taylor in his enquiry into the Hillsborough
disaster for the establishment of an Advisory Design Council.
A meeting at official level has been held prior to yesterday's
meeting and I enclose for your information, a copy of a note
of that meeting.   You'will see that Professor Maunder is
being approached for advice on the establishment of the
Council which it is hoped will be in place at a very early
date.

I am sure that you will welcome the initiative of the Football
Association and the Football League in demonstrating our early
adoption of this recommendation from Lord Justice Taylor.




 ARTHUR SANDFORD
 Chief -executive




 c.c. Secretary of State for the Environment
      Chancellor of the Exchequer

                                  Please r e p ly to: C it y H ouse. M a i d M aria n Way. N o t t in g h a m N C I oBH
                    TAYLOR IMPLEMENTATION COMMITTEE


Report of        meeting with The Football   i S 3 c c u ; i c "   or.   ? n c i a v
2nd March,     .990 to discuss the setting     of an Advisory Desic:
Counc i l .




Present:      A. Sandrord and J .D . Dent (Football. Leacrue i
              R.H.G. Kelly and A.R. Titcombe (Football Associate
              W.H. Carter (Geo. Corderov s C o .)




     The Final Taylor Report recommended that "The Football
Association  and  tne   Football  League  should   establish an
Advisory Design Council whose functions should be:

      (a)     to conduct and marshal research into the
              improvement and design of football stadia;

      (b)     to disseminate regularly such information
              and expertise as they acquire in this field
              to members of the Football League and, on
              request, to other football and^sports clubs
              in England, Wales and Scotland."'

     Mr. Kelly confirmed that the Football Association, Like
the Football League, were committed to this recommendation and
agreed that steps be taken to ensure that the Advisory  Desicrn
Council be set up with the minimum of d e l a v .

     It was accepted that the Council would be a technical bcdv
whose main terms of reference would be to      oroauce a design
guide for the benefit of all clubs   whether buiidi nc new stadia
or improving existing ones.   It would act as a vehicle for co­
ordinating information.   After discussing the truest ion it was
felt there would be no conflict with safety.

     Whilst there would obviously be reoresentation on the
Council rrom the various professional bodies, e.g. architects,
structural engineers etc,, it was decided to seek advice from
Professor Leonard Maunder (Chairman of the Technical working
Party set up to review the technical aspects of the Guide to
Safety at Sports   Grounds) before making any aoorcaches.  Mr.
Carter was deputed to discuss matters with Professor Maunder
with a view to arranging a meeting.   He was also authorised to
discuss the chairmanship of the Design Council.
Cont i n u e d / 2

   . I: 1 was   feit   that   representation   from clubs  mav  be
desirable    (possibly   a   stadium  manager)   and Mr.  Sandford
outlmea    the   initiatives   being undertaken by z h e  Football
League to obtain information from clu b s .

     It was agreed that the aim should be to have the Council
in piace by 1st May, 1990.




                                                       J.D. Dent.
