                                                                  lO .




PS/Mr Moynihan

TIMES ARTICLE: STUART JONES 30 JANUARY
We spoke about the draft letter for the Minister to send to the
Editor of the Times commenting on the Stuart Jones article in
today's edition. I attach a revised draft.




David McDonald
Sport and Recreation Division

30 January 1990

cc   PS/Secretary of State
     Mr Owen
     Mr Kinghan
     Mr Lee
     Mr Newsom
     Mr Rock
     Mr Baden




McDl2.min
DRAFT LETTER TO THE EDITOR OF THE TIMES

Today       I read with       interest your balanced editorial                         "English
Soccer       Squalor",        in     which      you        correctly          say     that     the
"Government's concern is with public safety and public order".
I    was,    therefore,            surprised         to read      in   the     same       edition
Mr Stuart Jones'           assertion         that          the    Government          had     been
"inexcusably apathetic".


The safety and protection of spectators and of those whose lives
are affected by football matches has been at the forefront of the
Government's concerns for many years. We have worked with the
football authorities to implement measures to that end.


In   1987     we   agreed       a package        of measures           with the        football
authorities which included the preparation of local plans in
consultation with the local police and the local authority about
how best      to handle        football matches,                 the use of         all     ticket
arrangements, the use of closed circuit television surveillance
of grounds,        the promotion of family enclosures and voluntary
membership         schemes.         We   are    now working            with    the     football
authorities,         the      police     and         the     Italian      authorities           on
preparation for the World Cup Finals this summer.


In   addition       the    Government          has     legislated        on a       number     of
occasions in the interests of safety and public order
       to control the sale and consumption of alcohol
       to clarify and strengthen existing legislation on public
      order
       to introduce a new offence of hooliganism
      to introduce exclusion orders
      to implement major safety recommendations in the Popplewell
      Report
      to enable the courts to prevent convicted hooligans from
      travelling to matches abroad.


We have also established a National Football Intelligence Unit
to co-ordinate police action against football hooligans at home
and abroad. This is not a record of apathy but the Government
cannot cure all of football's problems for it. The essential
message of Lord Justice Taylor's Report is that football must at
last face up to its own responsibilities. I endorse that message.
