        NOTE OF THE SECOND MEETING OF THE LIAISON GROUP
      at 2 pm on 6 November 1990 in Room P3/027A 2 Marsham Street


Present

Mr Sandford                         Mr Vaughan (Chair) SARD, DOE
   Football League (FL)               Mr Baden             "     "
Mr Crawford         "                Mr Bolton       Home Office
                                                        II    II
Mr Lee                                Mr Mould
                                                        II    II
   Football Trust (FT)                Ms Esplin
                                                        II    II
Mr Dunkley                            Ms Sharp
   Football Licensing
       Authority (FLA)

Introduction

Apologies were received from Mr Kelly, Football Association (FA).
The Treasury had confirmed its willingness to be represented when
appropriate. It was agreed that DOE and Home Office would rotate
the chair of the group, which might be referred to as the
Football Liaison Group.

Item 1 - Timetable and strategy for implementation of Taylor
recommendations on all-seating

Recruitment of inspectors for the FLA was underway. Following a
period of induction and training the inspectors should be
functioning by early spring 1991, visiting grounds, discussing
with interested parties and advising the FLA. There appeared to
be   some  misunderstanding   about  the   responsibilities  of
inspectors. It was the FLA which was responsible for issuing
licences, taking into account advice from the local inspector.
This operation would begin as soon as practicable.

There was no change in the government policy to continue to
foolow Taylor recommendations 1-4 in respect of deadlines for all
seated stadia. However, the Home Secretary could make directions
on seating to be included in licences for particular grounds only
after consultation with the FLA and the local authorities. The
revised Green Guide did not state that standing is inherently
unsafe. The Home Secretary was conscious of the need to avoid
nugatory expenditure where there was a realistic expectation of
a move to a new stadium, but expected clubs to make firm and
proper plans. The FLA was very concerned about the consequences
of extended speculation and one of its main priorities was to
develop and promulgate an informed view by the end of this year.
The FLA Chairman was meeting Lord Justice Taylor next week. Mr
Sandford explained that he would find it helpful if the position
on First and Second Division clubs was clarified as soon as
possible.

Mr Sandford had been in correspondence with the Treasury about
the F L 's wish for an early indication of whether the reduction
in the pools levy might be extended beyond five years. The
Treasury had indicated that it would make an early decision, but
needed to be assured that the sport was itself providing new
money. Mr Sandford would make proposals for a system to monitor
expenditure and progress, and discuss with the FL management
committee the use of the levy on transfer and television fees for
ground improvements. Practical improvements would be demonstrated
by 1992-93. The Treasury will consult DOE and the Home Office on
monitoring arrangements.

Item 2 - DOE Planning Policy Guidance

The draft guidance note, issued on 16 October for consultation
by  15 January 1991,     encouraged local authorities to be
sympathetic to redevelopment but stated that football stadia are
inappropriate for the Green Belt. The FL was seeking views from
clubs.

Item 3 - Green Guide

The new Guide was due to be published later this month. It
incorporated the relevant Taylor recommendations and should
contain no surprises for clubs and local authorities. There would
be some resource implications for clubs, but the impact would not
be   serious   if  action   had  already   been   taken   on  the
recommendations. The main changes were a strengthened management
safety policy; expanded ingress section, including the use of
turnstiles to calculate occupancy; a section on disabled
facilities; revamped crush barrier strength test; control on
entry and exit to subdivisions; and an expanded medical and first
aid section. Mr Sandford explained that the FL would shortly
issue a report on medical facilities drawn up by medical experts.
The possibility of developing a qualification for ground safety
officers was discussed.

Item 4 - Police charges

The FL had met the Home Office, local authority Associations and
ACPO to discuss the Home Office Circular which seeks to move
towards full charges for police inside football grounds. Lord
Justice Taylor's call for realistic charges was generally
interpreted as intending the full economic cost. Discussions on
unit costings would continue and would have regard to the FL's
concerns. ACPO had developed a method similar to the National
Audit Office's proposal, but Mr Sandford was concerned to ensure
that costings were fair and consistent. There had been a level
of subsidy in the past, but clubs were complaining of being
squeezed at both ends. The FT's policy of contributing to police
charges was under review.

Item 5 - Bid for World Cup and European Championship

The FL and the FA had agreed to establish a joint working group
to look into the feasibility of making a bid to host the World
Cup. The UK would need an all-seated stadium accommodating 80,000
spectators (Wembley) and eight 40,000 seated stadia. Four 40,000
seated stadia and Wembley would be required to host the European
Championship. Few clubs would achieve this level of seated
accommodation without the support that a bid would generate. A
decision would be reached by next Easter.
Item 6 - Any other business

i ) Home Affairs Committee on policing hooliganism: Lord Ferrers
and the FLA would each give evidence on 28 November. The football
authorities would appear on 12 November, and the police on 14
November. The FT has made no submission but has provided
extensive information.

ii) Advisory Design Council: It was agreed that contact with the
Council would continue through the usual channels. A Council
representative could be invited to join the Liaison Group if a
relevant item was under discussion.

Date of Next Meeting

The next meeting would take place at 11 am on Tuesday 5 February
1991 at the Home Office, Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1.
/



                 SECOND MEETING OF THE DOE LIAISON GROUP
                 TO BE HELD AT 2.00PM ON 6 NOVEMBER 1990
                    IN ROOM P3/027A - 2 MARSHAM STREET

                                  AGENDA

    i.    Timetable   and  strategy   for   implementation   of   Taylor
          recommendations on all-seating.

    ii.   DOE Planning Policy Guidance.

    iii. Green Guide.

    iv.   Police Charges.
    v.    Bid for World Cup and European Championship.

    vi.   Any other business.
