                                                     .




Permanent Secretary

HOUSING AND CONSTRUCTION: IMMEDIATE ISSUES FOR THE SECRETARY OF
STATE

     You asked for an annotated list of issues which the
Secretary of State would need to consider before he goes on leave
next Thursday.    There is a mixed bag on housing and sport
(nothing immediate on construction).

Public Expenditure Survey.   Mr. Fletcher will be providing a
separate brief, but it will be important for the Secretary of
State to form a view quickly on where we stand so that we have
some indication of the line we might pursue with Treasury
officials.
     Expenditure on housing has been low in relation to needs for
many years now, and the baseline had slumped to unsustainable
levels. We made some advance last year, but the housing supply
position is overall still worse than it has been for many years.
This shows in, for example, the homelessness statistics.      Mr.
Ridley has consistently taken the line that the best negotiating
stance in the PES bilaterals was to put in a low bid and stick
to our guns. That is what happened this time. But Mr. Major's
Parthian shot suggests that the Treasury are looking for further
large cuts from our bid.

     The main priorities in the housing bid are:

          a homelessness package specifically directed towards
          bringing down the numbers of families in temporary
          accommodation in the stress areas of the south-east
          (this may be acceptable to Treasury colleagues);

          an increase in new building by the Housing Corporation.

The latter may be vulnerable. But the bid that was put forward,
after some downward pressure on officials' ambitions by Mr.
Ridley, does no more than slow the deterioration in the balance
between need for and supply of subsidised housing so that the
current shortage of about 250,000 dwellings will grow to about
300,000 by the mid-1990s and then stabilise at that level.

Homelessness.    You have already mentioned that the Secretary of
State would like to discuss where we now stand.          We have
agreement from E (LF) to publish a review at about the end of
August, but there are still policy issues to be settled which
arise from the Committee's decision that there should be no
legislation.   Mr. Watson will be putting forward a copy of the
current draft of the review with a covering submission discussing
the remaining issues.

Broadland.   This is a minor issue in policy terms, but one that
could be presentationally nasty.     Broadland District Council,
Conservative controlled, has conducted a ballot of its tenants
to seek their consent to the disposal of the entire council
housing stock (a similar arrangement to the successful divestment
by Sevenoaks District Council). The Council secured a "yes" vote
by 52% to 48% with a high turnout.     But lawyers now inform us
that the basis on which the ballot was conducted was illegal, and
that Ministers will not be able to consent to disposal.       Mr.
Young will be putting forward advice.

Homes insulation scheme. We have been enmeshed in a wrangle with
the Department of Energy about inconsistencies between their
policy of securing energy conservation in the housing stock and
our new improvement grant legislation which is entirely based on
the ability of applicants for grant to meet costs themselves.
This had looked as though it was going to flare up into a
Secretary of State level interchange.     It remains to be seen
whether the new Secretary of State for Energy takes the same view
as his predecessor.    We will need to take the Secretary of
State's mind so that we know what line to adopt if the issue
comes to a head later in the summer.

Football: Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry.    Lord Justice Taylor
will be producing his interim report (on the Hillsborough
disaster) next week. We will receive an advance copy on Tuesday
or Wednesday.     There will be no immediate action for the
Secretary of State, but this issue is a hot potato politically,
and he will want advance warning of the contents of the interim
report before he goes on holiday. Mr. Kinghan will put forward
a note as soon as we receive our advance copy.




P F OWEN
26 July 1989


cc   PS/Mr. Howard
     PS/Mr. Chope
     M r . Fletcher
     Mr. McDonald-''
     Mr. Watson
     M r . Wroe
     Mr. Young
     Mr. Dunabin
