                        PRESS ASSOCIATION STORY P R I N T




         Returns             0 3 j09     04-02-32

SOCCER Report
GIVE US MORE MONEY PLEAD LEAGUE
 By Peter Went. Press Association Soccer Editor
 The Football League today called for greater financial support from the
Government after a private report showed that the clubs are collectively
up to £130 million in debt.
 Although the League will contest certain statistics in the survey - it
was based on replies from 61 of the 93 clubs - they are prepared to use it
push their case for an increased cut of the pools betting duty.
 The Government has already released £100 million over five years to help
clubs implement the recommendations contained in the Taylor Report.
 Clearly, however, that will not be enough if the all-seater rule
remains.
 "The figure of £130 million is very emotive," said League assistant
secretary Andy Williamson. "A significant, proportion of that money -
probably more than £50 million - will be in the first division.
 "Clubs lower down are far less exposed but the size of operations
still makes it a difficult problem.
 "It underlines why the deadline for implementation of Taylor will be
impossible to meet unless financial assistance from Government, is
extended."
 Ironically, the report, produced by Dr Simon Pitt, formerly of the London
Business School, is published on the day when representatives of the FA,
Football League and Premier League meet for further talks in London to
thrash out the g a m e -s future.
 The top clubs want to break away at the end of this season to form their
own money-spinning set-up, leaving the rest of the clubs exposed to an even
greater threat of financial ruin.
 Pitt suggests that a dozen clubs are facing extinction and Williamson
confirmed that half a dozen are receiving cash assistance from the
Professional Footballers' Association. Those payments are
underwritten by the Football League's central fund and arededucted from
future hand-out s .
 Williamson accepted: "There is a significant, accumulated debt, but
there always has been in the modern era, possibly since the removal of the
maximum wage.
 "Reports are published year after year. The problem is they are
sometimes based on very sketchy evidence and conclusions can be
cons iderab1y a w r y ."
 The Pitt report, claims that transfer fees in the First Division have risen
by 323% in 11 years and that players' wages went up by an average 2 1 0 % in the
top flight during a seven-year period in the 1380s.
 Williamson, however, contests the figure that suggests turnstile support
has fallen by 28%.
 "We are back to where we were at the start of the eighties,'' he said.
"Gates are going up for a sixth season running and receipts have held up
wel 1 ."
 He accepted: "Expenditure has gone through the roof. But football is now
far more commercially aware and doing much better in that area."
 Williamson points out that no club has gone out of business through
bankruptcy since Accrington Stanley in 1962. There have;, however, been too
many close calls for comfort!
 end bb




(Reopens)
 Tom Pendry, chairman of the All-Part'/ Parliamentary Football Committee,
wrote to Chancellor Norman Lament today demanding an early decision on
whether pool betting duty money would be provided beyond the initial five
year term.
 He said; "When he was Chancellor, John Major wrote to me and promised an
early decision on the granting of this desperately needed money to football.
"In sending a copy of my letter to the Prime Minister, I hope John Major will
remind the Chancellor of this pledge, so that I can have an early reply to
this request."
 In the letter Mr Pendry notes Sports Minister Robert Atkins' recent
announcement, that he would support grants to Football League clubs until
the end of this season.
 "You will be aware, however, that this still leaves the fundamental
issue of financial assistance for football, once the Premier League is
in operation,unresolved," he writes.
 "You will be aware that recent reports and surveys have provided
mounting evidence of the financial crisis that is facing many clubs,
seeking to implement the Taylor Report and in the face of soaring police
costs.
 "in this situation, further uncertainty surrounding the football
pool betting duty can only be damaging and dangerous."
 end ms




                 Story printed at   :-   14:45   on 04-FEB-92
