                Avr. 1    'JIU                   _   5   pf 3 1990 l a '" ^




Mr Reid                                  cc    Mr Mower
                                              -Mr Dolton-*---
                                               Mr Luetchford




SPRING EDITION OF CIVIL PROTECTION

We had a word on the telephone about the final Taylor Report
and you agreed with me that it should be featured in the next
edition of Civil Protection.

2. I attach a factual draft. If you wish, as I suspect you
will, to amend it for style, I would be grateful if you would
clear your text with Mr Bolton as I am away from the office on
NATO business all next week.




                                         A H TURNEY
                                         1 February 1990


Fire and Emergency Planning Department
THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

The Final Report of Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry



The final report of Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry into the

Hillsborough Stadium disaster was published on 29 January.

Unlike the Interim report, which dealt solely with the

circumstances of the disaster itself, the final report is a

wide ranging review of the state of British football leading

to a number of specific recommendations intended to improve

crowd behaviour, public order and safety.    The report also

contains Lord Justice Taylor's views on the viability of

proposed arrangements for a national Football Membership

Scheme.



The report



Part 1 of the report is an overview of British football.

Chapter 1 paints a sad picture of the state of professional

football.    It criticises clubs for complacency about safety

and facilities for fans and considers the extent to which

these poor conditions have contributed to bad behaviour.

Chapter 2 concludes that the future must be in the direction

of all seated accommodation at football grounds and massive

improvements in standards and facilities for spectators both

on grounds of safety and of encouraging improved crowd

behaviour.   Lord Justice Taylor points to ways in which the

football industry can finance these improvements itself but

mentions, without recommendations, one or two aspects of

taxation which the Government will at least need to consider.
Part II



Chapters 3 and 4 of the report are concerned with detailed

matters relating to spectator safety, building on the

recommendations of the Interim report.   Many of them are

uncontroversial and can be dealt with without primary

legislation.   There is one obvious exception: Taylor proposes

the setting up of an independent body to supervise the

responsibilities of local authorities for safety at sports

grounds which goes beyond the powers available to the proposed

Football Licensing Authority to be set up under section 13 of

the Football Spectators Act 1989.   The proposal is that the

supervisory responsibilities should be extended to sports

other than football (some grounds at which rugby union, rugby

league and cricket are played would be subject to the Taylor

recommendations) as well as to indoor sports facilities which

are currently dealt with by district authorities under

entertainments legislation.



Part III



This part of the report is concerned with crowd control and

hooliganism.   It contains recommendations addressed to the

police, proposals for some new offences (throwing missiles,

obscene or racist chanting, and going on to the pitch without

lawful reason) and for other possible measures against

hooliganism.
Part IV



In part IV of his report, Lord Justice Taylor provides a

detailed analysis of the possible effects of the national

Football Membership Scheme based on his examination of the

specifications contained in the invitations to tender issued

by the football authorities to possible contractors.    He

concludes that he has grave doubts about the feasibility of a

Scheme based on the invitation and serious misgivings about

its likely impact on safety.



The Government's response



The Government's initial response to the report was given by

the Home Secretary, Mr David Waddington, in a statement in the

House of Commons on the day the report was published.    He made

it clear that the Government accepted the report's analysis

that the main responsibility for improving conditions at

football grounds and encouraging better behaviour by fans fell

to the football industry itself.    He accepted the report's

main recommendation that there should be an enforced move

towards all seated accommodation.   Taylor recommended that

there should be no standing spectators at matches defined

under UEFA regulations as high risk matches from the beginning

of the 1993/4 season (this includes all UEFA final and semi­

final ties; final tournament matches of the European football

championship; when visiting team supporters exceed 10% of

stadium capacity or more than 3,000 persons; when the full

capacity stadium is expected of more than 50,000 spectators or
when a match is likely to attract a large number of foreign

visitors or supporters.)    For first and second division

matches, and those of the Scottish premier league, Taylor

recommends a reduction of 20% in standing capacity before the

beginning of the next football season and further reductions

of 20% to secure the abolition of standing accommodation by

the beginning of the 1994/1995 season.    For third and fourth

division matches he recommends reductions of 10% to secure all

seated accommodation by 1999.    To bring this about the

Government intends to create the new Football Licensing

Authority and direct it to implement the Taylor

recommendations in the terms and conditions of licences.     The

new Authority will also supervise the local authority

responsibilities for safety at sports grounds as recommended

by Taylor.



The Government has also accepted the wide range of technical

recommendations contained in the Taylor report on safety,

including the removal of spikes from perimeter fences and

reducing the maximum height of fences to 2.2 metres, and has

agreed, as a matter of urgency, to undertake a revision of the

"Green Guide".    This is a publication issued jointly by the

Home Office and the Scottish Education Department on safety in

sports grounds.    The Guide was first produced by a technical

working group at the time of Lord Wheatley's Inquiry into

crowd safety at sports grounds in 1972.     It has stood the test

of time well.     It has been amended on a number of occasions in

the light of experience.     It has no statutory force but it is

widely recognised that if its recommendations had been
complied with at Hillsborough then the accident could not have

happened.



Lord Justice Taylor has built on his recommendations in the

Interim report on police planning including the nomination of

a Chief Officer (ie an officer of ACPO rank) for football

liaison, and effective pre-match briefing and operational

orders.     He makes specific recommendations for police control

room facilities, and for adequate means of communication,

including CCTV and the provision of one radio channel reserved

for police match commanders.



Emergency services



The final report repeats the recommendations of the Interim

report on the coordination of emergency services, pre-match

briefing and on arrangements for the arrival of the emergency

vehicles.     There are some minor but nevertheless significant

changes to his recommendations on first aid, medical

facilities and ambulances including a relaxation of his

earlier recommendation on the need for a doctor to be present

in the case of smaller matches, and permitting the use of non­

ambulance authority ambulances with the approval of the

ambulance authority.     A new recommendation, which the

Government has said will need further discussion, is that

there should be a "major incident equipment vehicle" designed

and equipped to deal with up to 50 casualties deployed in

addition to other ambulance attendance at a match where a

crowd in excess of 25,000 is expected.
Offences and penalties



The Home Secretary has said that he will give urgent attention

to the recommendations for new offences and to other

recommendations made by Taylor, for example to the wider use

of attendance centres to those convicted of football related

offences.



The Taylor recommendations have been widely reported in the

press and they were discussed in the three hour debate in the

House of Commons on Tuesday 30 January which had been sought

by the opposition.   The main areas of concern appear to be the

effect of the requirements for the removal of standing

accommodation for third and fourth division clubs - but the

Government has pointed out that the Taylor recommendation does

not require them to provide more seated accommodation than the

number of spectators which they can reasonably expect to

attend.



Concern has also been expressed about the possible effect of

the recommendations on other sports, in particular rugby union

and rugby league and cricket.   In this instance the Government

has indicated that since new legislation would undoubtedly be

necessary to extend all seated accommodation by law to sports

other than football, it will discuss the position with the

sports authorities concerned before judging whether the Taylor

proposals are appropriate to other sports.
