                                            II   _




                 Peter Owen
Deputy Secretary Housing and Construction
         Department of the Environment




     ^                     Uu,




                          'V r o
                              I.   cj\ b ~ ^ Y V \r*-A   '


                             2 _ , <\a x ^                   \(>^xr i      -        y

PS/Mr. Moynihan                    f    \-\w- 0|'Kc!           V-   *V</       C—


PRESENTATION TO LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:         17 OCTOBER
1.   As Mr. Moynihan knows, Lord Justice Taylor has invited DOE
officials to discuss the national membership scheme with him and
his assessors on 17 October. He does not want a further paper
from us to supplement the one we have already provided on the
proposals for a national membership scheme (at Flag A). I shall
lead our team, with David McDonald, Neil Kinghan and Peter Lee
in support.
2.   I intend to open the discussions with some introductory
remarks along the following lines.
Genesis of the Membership Scheme
          Measures have been taken in recent years to reduce
          hooliganism by police action and segregation and
          surveillance within grounds, but hooliganism persists.

          The Government judged that an effective and appropriate
          further sanction to apply would be to limit the ability
          of hooligans to attend football matches. In practical
          terms, that meant controlling access to grounds by some
          form of identification document that could be withdrawn
          if the holder's behaviour was unacceptable.
          It was initially envisaged that such a scheme should
          be introduced progressively and on a voluntary basis.
          Agreement between the Government and the football
          authorities on a partial membership scheme was reached
          in February 1987.    But progress was very slow - in
          particular because neither the clubs nor the football
          authorities were fully committed to the concept.

          The Government therefore decided to proceed to a
          statutory scheme, and a working party under the
          GKaiTfflanship-of the Minister for Sport was set up to
          discuss with the police and football authorities how
          such a scheme should operate.

          The recommendations of the working party were reflected
          in the Football Spectators Bill introduced in January



              ________ r      le will be drawn up by a Football
          Membership Authority . but must be approved by the
          Secretary of State. Ministers take the view that any
          acceptable scheme must meet certain central require-
          ments.

     •    Only a comprehensive scheme avoids the risk of the
          displacement of hooligans to matches outside the
          scheme;  the scheme will therefore apply to all the
          matches of Football League clubs.            “  '
          To limit the possibilities of entry to the ground under
          false pretences, there will be few exemptions from        ( T <y
          membership. Only disabled persons in dedicated^areas
          and accompanied children under 10 in family enclosures
          - both readily identifiable groups - are excluded.
          It will be essential to use appropriate technology to
          minimise queuing delays and enable rapid identifica­
          tion of unauthorised spectators. It is intended that
          this should be achieved by a machine-readable card
          which will also carry a photograph to aid visual
          identification.       .: ..______ '

Amendments to the Bill (following the Hillsborough disaster

          The Bill was amended to enable Parliament to have two
          opportunities to debate the scheme after Lord Justice
          Taylor1s Final Report. in order to ensure that due                r.
          regard'is had to any relevant conclusions.                a suL™yf a
                                                                    (
          The Bill was also amended to provide, subject to
          Parliamentary approval, for a Football Licensing
          Authority (separate from the FMA) to be set up to                      rci
          supervise the discharge of local authority functions      "              \
          under the Safety of Sports Grounds ActT. TfteTTEAT will       V          )
          also advise the Secretary of State on seating at
          football grounds.

Introduction of Scheme
          The Government have undertaken that the scheme will not
          be put into operation before they are satisfied that
          the technology will operate effectively.
     •    The target for implementation is the early months of
          the 1990/91 season.
3.   I think that this is plenty - it does not do to seem over­
anxious when talking to judges! I will of course report back on
any clues we get about the way his mind is moving.
                                                                        Ul v.      _




P F OWEN
6 October 1989

cc   PS/Secretary of State
     M r . McDonald
     M r . Kinghan
     M r . Lee
                                         artm ent of the En
                                     D epartm                vironment
                                                         c n vifo nm
                                                            P3/169
                                     Room
                                     2 M arsham Street London 3W1 P Z~-3
                                                                                0nr.nd
                                                                                  504
                                     Tiiex 22221    Direct Line 01 -275
                                                   S.vi::rboard   01-276   7 77 0

                                                              GT' J 276




12 J u n e   1989


R M Vihallsy Esq
Secretary to the Inquiry
  into the Hillsborough Stadium
  Disaster
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London SW1H 9AT




HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

Further to my' letter of 25 May, I enclose a paper prepared by
this Department on the Government's proposals for a national
membership scheme for football spectators.

The first part of the paper summarises the background to the
introduction of the Football Spectators Bill and is accompanied
by supporting material which may be       helpful to  Lord Justice
Taylor. The second part draws attention to the statement made by
the Secretary of State for the Environment on the launch of the
Bill and to speeches made by Government .spokesmen in the House of
Lords during the Bill's passage so far, ;which seem to be of _
particular interest to Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry.

Our understanding is that Lord. Justice Taylor may wish ..to. Look at;,
the technology which suppliers have offered to provide for the
national membership scheme. If the Department can be of any help
in arranging a demonstration, we will be happy to do so.

 I also enclose a note on the Council of Europe Convention on
 Spectator Violence, with accompanying    papers. No other country
 operates a national membership scheme     of the kind proposed ^in
 this country but if there is any information which Lord Justxca
 Taylor would like about experience in other countries, we would
 be happy t6 arrange the appropriate contacts. An official of this
 Department,  Mr Peter.. Lee,  is the Chairman of      the Standing
 Committee established by the Convention.




 NEIL KINGHAN
 Sport and Recreation Division
J»



     t


t                        THE N A T I O N A L M E M B E R S H I P SCHEME


                         INTRODUCTION

                         I. This paper is concerned with the Government's proposals tor a
                         national" membership scheme, as provided for in Part I of the
                         Football Spectators Bill now in Parliament. It summarises tne
                         background"to the decision to introduce the Football Spectators
                         Bill and draws attention to Ministers' statements on the reasons
                         why the Government believes the scheme to be necessary to counter
                         hooliganism associated with football. Separate evidence from tne
                         Home Office provides information about: the continuing problGms
                         of crowd control associated with football matches; other relevant
                         legislation; and the policing of football.


                         NATIONAL MEMBERSHIP SCHEME - BACKGROUND

                         2. In January 1986 the Committee of Inquiry into Crowd Safety and
                         Control" at Sports Ground's chaired by Mr Justice popplewell
                         recommended that:
                                 L
                                     "Consideration should continue to be given to some form,of
                                     membership scheme for Football League clubs in England and
                                     Wales."


                         Partial membership schemes for individual League clubs were among
                         the meastrreH” agreed Between the Government and the football
                         authorities   in February   1987.  Copies ,of the press    notice
                         announcing the package of measures are 'attached. The agreed
f'K
                         objective was that all clubs should introduce schemes covering at
                         least 50% of each ground's capacity by the beginning of the
                         1987/88 season. It was also agreed that the Football League would,
                         commission a study by independent consultants on the scope, c o s t s .
                         and benefits/disadvantages of a reciprocal membership scheme
                         embracing all 92 League clubs.    .

     V-ivlUi   3. The - Minister for Sport 's report -to ■the Union of European
                Football Associations (UEFA), i .1 June 1988., at the end of the
                1987/88 season, entitled "Progress on Measures to Combat Football
     s       '^Hooliganism",     (attached)   recorded   that   progress   on  the
            i introduction of partial membership schemes had been slow; only 16
 T w           clubs had met the target of 50% ground capacity agreed “ in
-    luTi/uj/i February 1987. A consultants' study on reciprocal membership had
                been commissioned, as agreed, and received by the Football League
   I            in July
               in    July 1987;
                           1987; tthere   had  been   no  further   action  on the
- Uy*          consultants/.; Study.
                           4. The Minister for Sport's report to UEFA listed a number of
          t /.- ' c\f.     serious incidents' of hooliganism ,;at, ,    and*.^around. ..footbalJ— matches
 -                        during the 1987/88 domestic''season. These were ■■followed by the
                           scenes of disorder involving English supporters during the
            ^ i          E u r o p e a n . Championships in West .Germany in June 1988. On         6 July
         '"I^             1988, the/ P rime. Minister •m e t •the ;football, autharl.ties. tea. .di.scus3
         u               , the- need £or. firrther/.aotion^: \      • ..                     -   ..
5. Copies of the joint statement issued after the 6 July meeting
are attached. The Government pressed the football authorities to
introduce a national membership scheme to control access to
Football League matches. The football authorities did not believe
that such a scheme could be introduced on a voluntary basis and
the Government said that it would bring forward proposals for
legislation to give statutory backing to a national membership
scheme. It was agreed that a working party under the chairmanship
of the Minister for Sport, consisting of representatives of the
football authorities, the Government and the police, would be set
up to look at the details of the scheme.
6. The Minister for Sport's working party published its report on
9 November 1988. Copies of the report and of the DOE press
notices issued at the same time are attached. The report sets out
the working party's views on what the main principles of the
national membership scheme should be and contains a series of
recommendations for the football authorities and the Government.


THE FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL
7. The Football Spectators Bill was introduced in the House of
Lords on 16 January 1989. Copies of the Bill as introduced and as
amended to date in the House of Lords are attached. The main
provisions of the Bill are in two parts. Part I provides, a
statutory framework for a national membership scheme for football
spectators. Part II gives the courts powers to impose restriction
orders on convicted hooligans to prevent them from travelling to
English matches abroad; Part II is explained in the Home Office
evidence.
8. The contents of the Bill and the Government's reasons for
introducing it are summarised in two press notices issued on
publication (attached). Among the main points made by the
Secretary of State for the Environment in..launching the Bill were
the following:

       "We welcome the measures which the clubs and the police
       have taken to deal.,with hooligans inside football grounds.
       But their effect has been to keep the lid on the problem,
       not to cure it. At too many matches,' violence remains just
       below the surface. Rival supporters have to be kept apart
       by physical barriers and by the employment of large
       numbers of police."
       "Outside football grounds, the behaviour of rival groups
       of supporters makes life intolerable both for law-abiding
       football supporters and for those who live or trade nearby
       or wish to travel by train on the same day as a football
       match."
        "The Bill proposes that? everyone.:wko attends a designated
        football match in England and Wales should be. a, roember of
        the national membership scheme, or otherwise authorised by
        the scheme,.and that designated matches should be played
        only xm: licen sed rfo o lS ja & l- grannds^TlM set; a ^ ^ ^ n v d L cted -
        of a relevant offence will be disqualified from membership
        of the .scheme and the. scheme ^ts^lf. ..will allow for the
        Football Membership Authority to ban others who. misbehave
        at football matches."                                       ,      -
      "For the first time, there will be an effective and
      comprehensive procedure to keep hooligans away from
      football matches. Of course there will be attempts to
      abuse the system but if the scheme is effective, those
      attempts will fail. We believe that it offers the real
      prospect of ending football hooliganism both inside and
      outside grounds. If hooligans know that they will not be
      allowed in to football matches, they will have no
      incentive to travel to them. The link between football and
      hooliganism will be broken and football will cease to be a
      focus for violence."


9. The Government remains committed to the introduction of a
national membership scheme for the reasons given by the Secretary
of State when the Bill was introduced and by Ministers during its
passage through the House of Lords (see below). The continuing
problem of hooliganism associated with football has been
highlighted since the Hillsborough disaster by a number of
incidents at the end of the 1988/89 domestic season. The
Government believes that the national membership scheme is
essential as a means of ensuring that hooligans can be excluded
from football grounds in the future.
10. There has been a pause in the proceedings of the Football
Spectators Bill since the Hillsborough disaster but it will
resume its passage with Third Reading in the House of Lords on
Friday   16 June.   The Opposition have tabled a        "reasoned
amendment", regretting that the Government has decided to proceed
with the Bill in advance of Lord Justice Taylor's report. Lord
Justice Taylor may be interested to see Lord Hesketh's speech in
response to the Opposition's amendment.
11. Ministers are aware of the range of issues presented by the
Hillsborough disaster but nevertheless take the view that the
case for the national membership scheme has not been altered by
the disaster. They have always made it clear that the key issue
in setting the timetable for the introduction of the scheme is
the need to be satisfied about the availability of the right
technology. Suppliers have claimed that there need be no delays
at turnstiles - as. a result of the scheme and that checking
membershipr cards can foe carried out in the same time as. it
presently takes to check season tickets or pay for tickets. The
Government will not, however, approve the implementation of the
scheme until it is satisfied that it will work effectively and
efficiently.
12. The Football Spectators Bill, has been debated in the House of
Lords on the following dates:


                                           Official Report
       Second Reading     2 Eehruary       Vol 503 No.29

       Committee          20 February      Vol 504    NO's 38 & 39
                          7 March          Vol 504    No's 47 & 48
                          14 March .       Vol. 505   No's 51 & 52.
       Report             10 April.        Vol 506 No's 63 & 64
                          13 April         Vol 506 Nor66.
13. A number of speeches by Government spokesmen              may   be
particularly of interest to Lord Justice Taylor.

Second Reading            2 February

- Lord Caithness (opening the debate)            Cols 1217-1222
- Lord Hesketh (replying to the debate)          Cols 1298-1305

Committee

First Day                 20 February
- Lord Hesketh (on phasing the scheme and technology)
                                               Cols 413-416
Second Day                7 March
- Lord Hesketh (on exemptions from the scheme)
                                                 Cols 1393-1395
Third Day                 14 March
- Lord Hesketh (on the preparation of the scheme)
                                               Cols 88-90
- Lord Hesketh (on the licensing of football grounds under the
  Bill)                                      Cols 139-141

- Lord Ferrers (on the possibility that the scheme's computers
  might break down)                         Cols    194-5  and
                                            198-201

Report

First Day                 10 April
- Lord Hesketh (on phasing)                      Cols 14-15

- Lord Hesketh (on exemptions*)                  Cols 69-71
                                                        i/i
PS/Mr. Moynihan                                k


PRESENTATION TO LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR:   17 OCTOBER
1.   As Mr. Moynihan knows, Lord Justice Taylor has invited DOE
officials to discuss the national membership scheme with him and
his assessors on 17 October. He does not want a further paper
from us to supplement the one we have already provided on the
proposals for a national membership'scheme (at Flag A). I shall
lead our team, with David McDonald, Neil Kinghan and Peter Lee
in support.
2.   I intend to open the discussions with some introductory
remarks along the following lines.
Genesis of the Membership Scheme
     •    Measures have been taken in recent years to reduce
           hooliganism by police action and segregation and
           surveillance within grounds, but hooliganism persists.
     •    The Government judged that an effective and appropriate
           further sanction to apply would be to limit the ability
           of hooligans to attend football matches. In practical
           terms, that meant controlling access to grounds by some
           form of identification document that could be withdrawn
           if the holder's behaviour was unacceptable.
     •    It was initially envisaged that such a scheme should
           be introduced progressively and on a voluntary basis.
           Agreement between the Government and the football
           authorities on a partial membership scheme was reached
           in February 1987.    But progress was very slow - in
           particular because neither the clubs nor the football
           authorities were fully committed to the concept.

      •   The Government therefore decided to proceed to a
          statutory scheme, and a working party under the
          chairmanship of the Minister for Sport was set up to
          discuss with the police and football authorities how
          such a scheme should operate.
           The recommendations of the working party were reflected
           in the Football Spectators Bill introduced in January
           1989.
Central Features of the Scheme
      •    The membership scheme will be drawn up by a Football
           Membership Authority, but must be approved by the
           Secretary of State. Ministers take the view that any
           acceptable scheme must meet certain central require­
           ments .
           Only a comprehensive scheme avoids the risk of the
           displacement of hooligans to matches outside the
              scheme;  the scheme will therefore apply to all the
              matches of Football League clubs.
      •       To limit the possibilities of entry to the ground under
              false pretences, there will be few exemptions from
              membership. Only disabled persons in dedicated areas
              and accompanied children under 10 in family enclosures
              - both readily identifiable groups - are excluded.
      •       It will be essential to u s e 'appropriate technology to
              minimise queuing delays and enable rapid identifica­
              tion of unauthorised spectators. It is intended
              this should be achieved by a machine-readable card
              which will also carry a photograph to aid visual
              identification.
Amendments to the Bill following the Hillsborough disaster
      •       The Bill was amended to enable Parliament to have two
              opportunities to debate the scheme after Lord Justice
              Taylor's Final Report, in order to ensure that due
              regard is had to any relevant conclusions.
              The Bill was also amended to provide, subject to
              Parliamentary approval, for a Football Licensing
              Authority (separate from the FMA) to be set up to
              supervise the discharge of local authority functions
              under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act. The FLA will
              also advise the Secretary of State on seating at
              football grounds.

Introduction of Scheme
          •    The Government have undertaken that the scheme will not
               be put into operation before they are satisfied that
               the technology will operate effectively.
          •    The target for implementation is the early months of
               the 1990/91 season.
3.   I think that this is plenty - it doe's not do to seem over­
anxious when talking to judges I I will of course report back on
any clues we get about the way his mind is moving.

 n

 P F OWEN
 6 October 1989
 cc       PS/Secretary of State
          Mr. McDonald
          Mr. Kinghan
          Mr. Lee—''
Mr Owen

PRESENTATION TO LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR: 17 OCTOBER

Following our discussion about the handling of your presenta­
tion to Lord Justice Taylor, I attach a draft minute for you
to send to the Minister. You may also wish to send it to the
Secretary of State.




David McDonald
Sport and Recreation Division
5 October 1989


cc    Mr   Kinghan
      Mr   Lee
      Mr   Baden
      Mr   Smith
