                                                                                                                                                     ©


                                                               0 ^WDED ■'S®4


                                THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED
Lytham St. Annes, Lancashire, FY8 1JG. T e le p h o n e 0253 729421. T elex 67675. Fax 0253 724786                         Secretary ). D. D e n t



2/7983                                                                                                   25th October,                   1989



A. Brown, Esq.,
Home Office,
Room 9 20,
50, Queen Anne's Gate,
LONDON,
SW14    9AT.



Dear Mr. Brown,

     I enclose herewith a copy of my reply to Councillor H.
Chase, Chair of the Liverpool City Council Hillsborough Working
Party, as requested.

                                                    Yours sincerely,




                                                        J.D. Dent,
                                                      ^ Secretary .




                All correspondence to be add re ssed to T h e Secretary. Registered Office as abo ve. Registered in England 80612
 2/7973                                          23rd October, 1989



Councillor H. Chase,
Chair,
Hillsborough Working Party,
Chief Executives Office,
Room 5,
Municipal Buildings,
Dale S t r e e t ,
LIVERPOOL,
L69    2DH.



Dear Councillor Chase,

             Ret   Coventry City F.C. v. Everton F.C.
                    Saturday, 19th August, 1989

     Further to previous correspondence on the above subject,
haying now had the opportunity of studying all the reports on
this matter I am of the opinion that the action taken to date is
sufficient.

     It would appear that the arrangements made by the Club,     in
conjunction with the Local Authority and the police, for the
safety and control of spectators at the above match were in
keeping with what was demanded of them.

     It has been accepted that the arrangements for selling the
stand tickets at the ground were not the best but equally, it
was unfortunate that so many Everton supporters arriving l a t e ,
when faced with delay, became unco-operative and abusive to
those trying to assist them.

     The Club has taken immediate steps to rectify this
situation by installing a ticket office for visiting supporters
close to the visitor's turnstiles and additionally, have erected
barriers outside the stiles to ensure that there is no crushing
caused by the late arrival of spectators.

     The problems encountered in the seated areas inside the
ground appear to have been largely due to the introduction of
the new system of numbering seats in this area, hitherto
spectators had been able to sit anywhere.

                                                        Cont/2
Cont/2


     This, coupled with the late influx of fans and the
imminence of the kick-off, undoubtedly led to the confusion.

      A g a i n , the Club have taken steps to ensure that spectators
are    not inconvenienced in the future.

     I am sure you will appreciate that the first match of any
season is always a problem for both supporters and those
responsible for controlling the ground, due to the changes in
-icketing arrangements, prices, and ground improvements that
take place during the close season.  This season this has been
more so in view of the need for Clubs to comply with the
recommendations contained in the Interim Report of Lord Justice
Taylor.

     I am sure that there was no threat to the safety of any
spectator at this game, I am confident that had this been the
case the senior police officer on duty at the ground would have
taken the appropriate action.

     The safety and comfort of spectators is the prime concern
of all involved in the staging and control of matches.   I can
re-assure those supporters who accepted ycur invitation to voic
their concerns that their comments have net been treated
lightly.

                           Ycurs sincerely,




                              J.D. Dent,
                              Secretary.
