                                                                            sn
                                    Department of the Environment
                                    Room
                                    2 Marsham Street London SW1P 3EB
                                    Telex 22221    Direct Line 01-276
                                                  Switchboard 01-276 3000
                                                            GTN 276




D. Mould Esq.
Home Office
Room 937
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London
SWlH 9HT                                                 14 March 1990




MEETING OF 14 FEBRUARY 1990 RE ISSUES ARISING FROM THE
HILLSBOROUGH ENQUIRY FINAL REPORT


Thank you for your letter of 6 March with your helpful
corrections to paragraphs 3 and 4. I am sorry if there has been
any misunderstanding and I am therefore enclosing an addendum
slip which takes account of your comments.    I would be grateful
if you could pass on copies to Mr. Bolten and Mr. Archer.

Yours sincerely,




A.R. BADEN
Sport and Recreation Division
Rm P3/165
Extn 0675




fc A                                               ^
ADDENDUM TO MINUTES OF MEETING WITH HOME OFFICE HELD ON
14 FEBRUARY TO DISCUSS THE FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY


Paragraph 3 should read:

3.   The DOE still had a continuing interest in the FLA.      This
included:

     (i ) the financial implications for football clubs of Lord
     Justice Taylor's recommendations, including the funding of
     all-seater stadia.    While the Home Office would take the
     lead on implementing these recommendations, the DOE would
     still be responsible for the policy for funding of sport,
     including safety measures at football grounds;

     (ii)    any proposals for requiring all-seater accommodation
     at other sports grounds, e.g. rugby league, rugby union and
     cricket grounds.    The Home Office confirmed that they would
     consult    the   representative   reporting    bodies  before
     considering    introducing   primary    legislation.      The
     willingness of these bodies to move voluntarily to all/more
     seated accommodation is something which might influence
     their approach;

     (iii)   any proposals for extending the safety remit of the
     FLA to other grounds.    The Home Office position remained
     that in this area too they would not introduce primary
     legislation without first consulting the representative
     sporting organisations.   They would also consider whether,
     in the meantime, the Authority's responsibilities should be
     extended on a voluntary basis.

4.   Policy responsibility for football hooliganism was a matter
to be kept under review jointly by the Home Office and DOE. The
Home Office had responsibility for all the anti-hooligan measures
in Lord Justice Taylor's final report while the DOE was taking
the lead in co-ordinating UK preparations for the World Cup and
would of course take the lead on any further work on a national
football membership scheme.
