  VO? ( 3                                                                   14-0

                                                               SPORTS
                                                               COUNCIL
The Sports Council
                                                      16 Upper Woburn Place
                                                      London WC1H OQP
                                                      Tel: 01-3881277
                                                      Fax: 01-383 5740
                                                      Telex: 27830 SPORTCG
                                                      Chairman: Peter G. Yarranton
                                                      Vice Chairman:
                                                      Professor J Allan Patmore B.Litt MA
                                                      Director General: David Pickup




                                        12th March,   1990


   Peter L e e , E s q . ,
    SA R D ,
    Room P . 3162,
    2 Marsham Street,
    LONDON SW1P 3 E P .



    Dear Peter,

    Sports Stadia after Hillsborough Seminar - 29th March 1990


    As requested by Derek Casey, I enclose some extra
    brochures of the Stadia Conference which we are organising
    with the R.I.B.A.




    Technical Unit for Sport




     ends.
            THE ROYAL INSTITUTE OF
              BRITISH ARCHITECTS
        66 Portland Place ■ London W1N 4AD


The Sports Council and The Royal Institute of British Architects
            in association with The Football Trust
               and supported by Leisure News

                                                                   R IB A S
                                            The Owen Luder Consultancy




       The Taylor Report on the Hillsborough Stadium disaster has set out recommendations which
       will inevitably lead to urgent action being taken on Sports Stadia of all sizes. This time the
       lessons must not only be learnt, but the remedies put into practice. A dramatic reappraisal of
       football stadia to meet today’s requirements for comfort and safety is now needed.
       This seminar brings together leading figures in football and stadia design and management. It
       examines the practical implications of the Taylor Report and what can be learnt from success­
       ful examples of stadia redevelopment in the UK and world wide.
       For all involved in football stadia design and management this day is an essential starting point
       in the reappraisal of Sports Stadia After Hillsborough.
                                                    09.30 Kick Off                                       ■'
                          :                                              :
                     y : ^ ’:^Pe^rG ^rs^n,:6h0m ian,The;Sp6rts€ouncil

       The nature of the probfem: management; crowd-control; safety! and;facilities. The interim
       report. The final report^ Th^ long term implications-for football itadiaj management and the
       sport. The social artd financial implications.
       Speaker; Richard Faulkner

       The background to the development of soccer in th f UK. The structure arid prganisatioh:6f the;
       sport. The financial background, past, present and future. The three levels. The need for
       changes in facilities and attitudes at all levels. Sponsorship, TV and commercial activities.
       Speaker: Ted Croker

       Crowd control inside and outside stadia. Planning grounds M i^makeWif1arom atic: Safety
       features. Responsibility for installation and inspection of entrances, exits, safety barriers etc.
       Speaker: to be confirmed
.v "
       The development of football
       accidents, The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975. The implications of the Taylor Report. The
       comparisons with overseas.
       Speaker: Simon Inglis


                                          Jdistan^CTterte^N^iM#icl fti^idifpitches.Build|rtg Control
       Speaker: Geraint John


       ;   •          -             . •   ' •-•••                    .       .   ■.■ ■ ■   ■ ■   ■■■■■
                                                                                    ' -S tiff'''




  The transformation of Wembley. The need to maximise the use of expensive capital invest­
  ment in fixed assets. Compatible uses, comfort and safety, all seater stadia, car parking,
  access, management skills, promotion-image.
  Speaker: Alan Coppin

  Football clubs are confronted by major expenditure on their existing property in order to meet
  future standards in comfort and safety. Providing a solution which satisfies the aspirations of
  spectators and which complies with the financial arrangements of a club is crucial to the
  success of a development. The background to the Ibrox Park development will be presented.
  Speaker: Sam Thorburn


  Development of football stadia in the Netherlands. Understanding the spectator and designing
  safe and comfortable stadia for them, whether hooligan, company executive or just plain
  football supporter. Understanding the Client and designing commercially viable stadia for the
  empire builder, wheeler dealer or egomaniac.
  Speaker: Rod Sheard


  car parking. The family approach. Illustrations of recent stadia.
  Speaker: Mike Holleman
                         -   ■■   ,

  New all seater stadia in Italy for the 1990 World Cup. Design, location, planning, engineering,
  architecture. The stadia which reflects the excitement of the game.
  Speaker: Enrico Carbone


  and discussion from the audience.




 Richard Faulkner                       Deputy Chairman, The Football Trust
 Ted Croker, CBE                        Honorary Vice-President, The Football Association
 Simon Inglis                           Author, “Football Grounds of Great Britain" and
                                         “Football Grounds of Europe”
   Geraint John                         Chief Architect, The Sports Council
   Malcolm Judd, FRICS                  Planning Consultant, Partner, Lawson Price
   AianCoppin                           Managing Director, Wembley pic
   Sam Thorburn                         Partner, Thorburn Associates
   Rod Sheard, RIBA                     Lobb Partnership
./ Mike Holleman:                     )i:r[3 irB ^ fiS 0 rtiF & iiity D m ^ n ;:& rpupl
                                         Heery Architects & Engineers
 Enrico Carbone                         Chief Architect, Comitato Olimpico Nazionale Italiano
 Rogan Taylor                           Past Chairman, The Football Supporters Association
                                       ,€tjrrent]Bes^rdh»t:fh$SirNQrm ahC^f0$r^him ,:
                                                                                                                                                   ;




                                                                                                            Fee (inclusive of lunch, refreshments
                                                                                                            and documentation) '
                                                                                                            For RIBA Members
or photocopy) is required'for,each    pirm                                                                  £165.00   4   VAT £24.75 -

                                                                                                            Membetshif;wp                mmmm
                                                                                                                                   » » » * » MW?
                                                                                                            For Non-Members

                                                                                                            lengioseacheqii^lft     .
Telephone: 01-2S1 5885                                                                                      mWdpayabie:t6'RlsM'Wffls?S

Cancellations: A 50% charge will be


No refunds               thereafter   Signature
RIBAS'VATReg; No, 232351f p t :       The information given on this form may be held on computer   90A/10
  The Sports Council and The Royal Institute of British Architects
              in association with The Football Trust
                 and supported by Leisure News



        &

                  I f laifNeirs

            Organised by RIBA Services Ltd

Date:       Thursday 29th March 1990

Venue: The Royal Institute of British Architects
       66 Portland Place, London W1N 4AD

Cost:       The seminar fee is £165.00 plus VAT (RIBA Members)
            and £215.00 plus VAT (Non-members). This includes
            lunch, refreshments and documentation. A 50% charge
            will be levied on all cancellations received in writing
            before 16th March 1990. No refunds can be made
            thereafter.



     It may be/tecessarvjo change the programme or speakers due
          /drcumstanefes beyond the control of the organisers. /
