                                                                                                                               (3
     s . 6 .7/fla4.peb
                                                                                                  HOME OFFICE
                                                                                          Queen Anne's Gate London SW1H 9 AT
                                                                                                 Direct line:CR 1213 3 3 2 2
                                                                                                Switchboard:(77l-273 3000



Our reference:                                                                                   8   June 1990
Your reference:




        Graham Kelly Esq
        Chief Executive
        The Football A ssoc iation




    I am enclosing for your information a copy of a letter sent by
    Lord Ferrers, the Minister of State at the Home Office to
    Mr Sandford the Chief Executive of the Football Association.

     I am also enclosing a related Press Notice.

                                                                                               Yours sincerely




                                                                                               P E BOLTON
                                                                                               (Fire and Emergency
                                                                                               Planning Department)



     Encs


                  Kh<ro       bf     .


                       V)    lkn\ ifa.
                             k C c.
                                         kiJh>       (( K A
                                                         st    )



         h u i\ i^ r A      OvaaAM imui                   £’<njTV>*\A        ^

         'T> M > T ia a       U aa
         )k*\A                                   S       * t>,
          "T"
            iVVAAAJ.                                  M ,(\A 17-   • O . & A ' V   '/■)



          fAA     fas'Act' A r J                 (p (I    ,
NEWS RELEASE                        5 0 Queen Anne's Gate London SW1 H 9AT
                                    (Night line 0 7 1 - 2 7 3 4 5 9 5 )
 8   June 1990                      Contact Number:        Q7 1   273   4640


                    FOOTBALL GROUND IMPROVEMENTS:
                      CLUBS URGED TO TAKE ACTION

 The Government has today made it clear that it does not expect / . "
 football clubs to use delay in the setting up of the football/ ((iX'/uir*
 authority as an excuse for not making improvements to f o o t b a l l
 grounds as recommended by Lord Justice Taylor.   In a letter to Mr
 Arthur Sandford, the Chief Executive of the Football League, Lord
 Ferrers, Minister of State at the Home Office, said:

 "I can understand that the football authorities will wish to
 discuss a range of issues with the Football Licensing Authority as
 soon as possible.        It would be quite wrong to consider that the
 football clubs must wait for the FLA to be set up before making
 the improvements to their grounds proposed by Lord Justice Taylor.
 T he      Government's    view  has  always  been  that  the   primary
 responsibility         for   responding  to  Lord  Justice   Taylor's
 recommendations on all seated accommodation rests with the clubs
 t h e m s e l v e s ."

 In his letter Lord Ferrers explains that the Government hopes to
 announce the membership of the new Football Licensing Authority
 very soon but he does not expect the football licensing scheme to
 become operational for several months.   He does however give an
 indication of how he expects the new authority to operate.     He
 says:

 "The FLA will    itself have no powers     to require all seated
 accommodation unless the Home Secretary makes a direction in
 respect of a particular football ground.       When the licensing
 scheme is in operation, we shall be looking to the FLA to examine
 the plans which clubs have made and to advise us on the progress
 which is being made by the clubs towards all seated accommodation.
 Only in those cases where progress is unsatisfactory should it be
 necessary to resort to a formal direction.   We hope these will be
 few. "

 Lord Ferrers also indicates that the Governments will not be
 expecting  clubs   to  stick  rigidly to Lord   Taylor's  proposed
 reductions of 2 0 % (for first and second division clubs) and 1 0 %
 (for third and fourth division clubs) of standing accommodation
 each year, provided satisfactory progress is being made to meet
 the final target dates of 1994 and 1999 respectively.
Lord Ferrers makes it clear that there is no question of the
Government backing down on Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations
on all seated accommodation,    but he points out that the 10%
reductions were proposed regardless of the amount of seated
accommodation already provided at grounds. In his letter he says:

 We accept that though there may be a need to place some priority
on the funds which are available we also recognise that it might
suit some clubs to make major changes to their grounds which will
exceed the Taylor recommendations but which cannot be achieved in
a single season.  We also want clubs to make use of the available
money to improve their accommodation, not simply to make piecemeal
changes,  particularly  if they are unlikely to contribute to
improvements in safety or public order."
            i
But he makes it clear that it will not be open to a club to avoid
reducing standing accommodation for no reason other than that it
has plans for major development at some ill-defined date in the
future.
