                                                    cc Mr Turney
                                                       Mr Goddard FS
                                                       Mr Bolton >
                                                     — Hs*       y*2-

1.   Mr Haslam, PRB
2.   Mr Chilcot


TAYLOR REPORT: PUBLICATION


You suggested that I prepare a short draft reply to Mr Eastwood's
letter of 7 August to the Home Secretary and pass it to Mr Haslam
to consider the more general question of advance disclosure of
reports to (eg) the Police Federation.


My draft reply and submission are attached, with a tentative
section on advance disclosure in square brackets.   You were
inclined to be sympathetic to the Federation's concerns.     I
should be grateful if Mr Haslam could amend the draft as he
thinks appropriate.




                                             F J SMITH
                                             F8 Division
14 August 1989
Draft - for signature bv Mr Chilcot            cc Ms   Adams
                                                  Mr   Turney
                                                  Mr   Mower (o/r)
                                                  Mr   Bolton
                                                  Mr   Goddard
                                                  Mr   Haslam
Mr Storr


TAYLOR REPORT: PUBLICATION


You asked for advice on the attached letter of 7 August from
Alan Eastwood, Chairman of the Police Federation, to the Home
Secretary.   A draft reply is also attached.


Mr Eastwood had a reasonable wish to obtain early sight of
Sir Peter's report.   However, in this instance advance disclosure
to the Federation would have been contrary to Ministers' wishes.
Mr Eastwood must have misunderstood my explanation over
arrangements for disclosure as I was well aware of the
availability fo copies for the press from 9.30 am.


[I have heard that] Mr Eastwood spoke very responsibly on
television on news interviews on 4 August and the Home Secretary
may wish to refer to that, as in the final paragraph of the
draft.




                                               J A CHILCOT
Thank you for your letter of 7 August about publication
arrangements for Lord Justice Taylor's interim report on the
Hillsborough stadium disaster.


The decision collectively by Government Ministers on this
occasion was that advance copies of the report should be made
available only to those represented at the enquiry, those
directly criticised in the report^and, as is customary, to the
press.    It was not intended that!others would receive copies
before publication at 11 am on Friday 4 August.               The
Superintendents' Association and ACPO were also tied to this
arrangement.         I am sorry for the misunderstanding that seems to
have arisen.


[Mr Haslam? p recognise the difficulty you identify of very
prompt questions being asked of you and-others by the press, and
I confess to some sympathy «or?youropoint of view.                  Nevertheless,
where it is -decided not to make advance copies of a report
available it follows that immediately after publication you will
have to explain to the press that you have not yet had time to
examine the^document.         That is certainly a possible awkwardness
we should bear in mind together ^rittojother considerations over
timing.]


Might I alsQ say that I am'igisate^Mafor the measured and
              J?'   Sv.                   , ... .. V
sympathetic |Doaments y o u s i i a ^ ^ i ^ f ^ Q e ^ i a , in interviews about
the report. *. Thank you.
