                                                    HOME OFFIujl
                                            Queen A nne’s Gate London        9AT
                                                    Direct line: 01-273
                                                  Switchboard: 01-273 3000



Our reference:
Your reference:
                                                        18 September 1991

   J Vaughan Esq
   Department of Education and Science
   Sport and Recreation Division
   Elizabeth House
   York Road
   London SE1 7PH




                  sT 'o h m* - 1


   Thank you for your letter of 10 September with comments on the
   draft letter which I intended to send to Mr Kelly restating our
   position on the Premier League.

   As I explained when I spoke to Tony Baden's Secretary last
   Thursday, at the time of writing I was unaware that the FLA had
   already covered developments on this front in a letter to all
   Football League Clubs dated 1 August (copy enclosed).

   I also enclose a copy of John de Quidt's letter of 4 September,
   which sets out the background.   In the light of this letter I
   decided against sending mine - I am sorry that you were put to
   unnecessary trouble.

    I look forward to seeing you at the FA on the 25th.




                                                R J MILES

                                                (Fire and Emergency
                                                Planning Department)


    cc       Mr Baden
             Mr de Quidt (w/o enclosures)
                                                      v
«Football Licensing Authority
    Chairman: Mr Norman Jacobs
    27 Harcourt House
    19 Cavendish Square
    London W lM 9AD
    Tel: 071-491 7191
    Fax: 071-491 1882



      R J Miles Esq
      G2 Division
      Home Office
      50 Queen Anne's Gate
      LONDON SW1H 9AT                               4 September 1991




r      TIMETABLE FOR GOING ALL-SEATER - SECOND DIVISION GROUNDS

       Thank you for your letter of 30 August inviting comments on your
       draft letter to Graham Kelly of the Football Association.
       I hope you will forgive me if I express reservations about the
       advisability of writing just now to reiterate yet again the
       government's commitment to the 1994 deadline for second division
       clubs.        As you may know, Peter Bolton wrote to the football
       authorities on 11 July reaffirming the government's commitment
       to the Taylor timetable in response to the report of the House
       of Commons Home Affairs Select Committee; the Authority also
       wrote on 1 August (as attached) clearly rejecting the Football
       Association's proposal for an extended deadline for second
       division clubs. A further letter in little more than six weeks
       f o r m s ing on this issue might give rise to paranoia. It might
       also give the impression that the Home- Office and the Authority
       are competing to issue statements.

       May I respectfully suggest, therefore, that you refrain from
       writing to Graham Kelly for the moment. I am hoping to see him
       shortly; I will happily ensure that he has got the message.




                                                     J R K DE QUIDT
                                                     Chief Executive
Football Licensing Authority
Chairman: Mr Norman Jacobs
27 Harcourt House
19 Cavendish Square
London WlM 9AD
Tel: 071-491 7191
Fax: 071-4911882


   The Secretary
   All Football League Clubs                   4 1 August 1991




   FOOTBALL SPECTATORS ACT 1989 - LICENSING

   I am writing to give you early notice of the Football Licensing
   Authority's intentions regarding the implementation of Section 10
   of the Football Spectators Act 1989 under which the Authority
   will be granting licences for the admission of spectators to
   grounds to watch designated football matches.      The Authority
   anticipates that the licensing scheme will be brought into force
   in time for the start of the 1992/93 football season.

   A primary _purpose of the licence is to implement the
   recommendations   in Lord Justice Taylor's Report on the
   Hillsborough disaster that all Football League first and second
   division grounds become all-seater by the start of the 1994/95
   season and all third and fourth division grounds become all-
   seater by the start of 1999/2000 season. In its recent response
   to the House of Commons Home Affairs Committee report on policing
   football hooliganism, the Government indicated that it was not
   convinced that any re-examination of its proposals on all-seater
   accommodation was necessary. In other words, the 1994 deadline
   for clubs in the ^ top two divisions, however they may be
   constituted or defined at that time, remains firm as does the
   1999 deadline for the two lower divisions. The- Authority will
   ensure this under the licence scheme.

   The Authority envisages waiving the 1994 requirement only for
   clubs promoted into the second division at or after the end of
   the forthcoming season: these will be required to go all-seater
   by the start of the fourth season following their promotion or
   1999, whichever is the earlier.

   As you know Lord Justice Taylor recommended that, as from
   August 1990, clubs should steadily reduce their standing capacity
   by 20% each year in the first and second divisions and by 10%
   each year in the third and fourth divisions. The Government has
   indicated that these reductions should not be enforced rigidly
   since the phasing of the work required to convert grounds to all—
   seater will not necessarily follow such a mathematical formula.
Nevertheless, the Taylor formula should be used as a yardstick
of progress.

The Authority supports this view. Thus; while the Authority does
not anticipate incorporating the specific reductions recommended
by Lord Justice Taylor into its 1992 and 1993 licences, it will
nevertheless be looking for substantial reductions in standing
capacity in the run up to 1994 and 1999. Any significant falling
behind the programme set by Lord Justice Taylor will have to be
justified.
                                                       4



In this connection, the Authority gives notice that it is minded
to link the granting of all licences in 1992 to a requirement
that clubs submit full particulars of their proposals for
converting their grounds to all-seater by the appropriate Taylor
deadline. These particulars should set out both the steps to be
taken and the timescale for achieving this. If these proposals
are satisfactory, clubs will be expected to adhere to them.
Clubs, especially any in the first and second divisions, who have
not already formulated detailed proposals for converting their
grounds to all-seater, or who anticipate having difficulty
meeting the appropriate deadline are strongly advised that it
would be in their best interest to draw this to the attention of
the Authority as soon as possible.      They should not await a
formal request from the Authority.

I am copying this to the Secretaries of all Football League clubs
plus ^Berwick Rangers FC, the Stadium Managers of Wembley and
Cardiff Arms Park and, for information, to the Stadium Manager
of Twickenham and the Chief Executives of the Football League and
Football Association.




                                              J R K DE QUIDT
                                              Chief Executive
