                                                                              <5
                                                  2 8 S F ^ 1.983   ' 0ia3>

Mr D J Mould
G2 Division                                        cc Mr R Ginman
                                                   Ch Supt J Gauke



re:-     HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - Home Office evidence
            (Directorate of Telecommunications)

The Hillsborough incident whilst having many similarities with
the Bradford (Popplewell inquiry)    from a communications view
point there are differences which are important. At the time of
the Bradford fire the police were using Burndept BE470 radios.
These sets have now been superseded by ones that have superior
performance.

POPPLEWELL
As a result of the Bradford Football ground fire the Directorate
undertook work on two aspects of UHF hand held radios:-
       1.   The University of South Wales was sponsored to
       investigate acoustic shrouding of the microphone and
       loudspeaker of the Burndept BE470 hand held radio.
       The aim being to reduce the amount of crowd noise
       reaching the microphone by close coupling the speakers
       voice tract with a soft rubber moulded extension to
       the radio. The device performed a similar role when
       held to the ear in shutting out the crowd noise.
       The device was not well received by those police
       officers asked to evaluate it due to the risk of
       injury to the user if jostled by the crowd. This type
       of approach would not be practical for the more modern
       types of set which have remote microphone/loudspeakers
       usually mounted on the lapel of the uniform jacket.


       2.    Racal were contracted to investigate the design
       of the Burndept set with a view to improving its
       performance. A number of minor changes were proposed
       but these were not implemented as the decision had
       been taken to replace the Burndept BE470 sets with
       more modern designs which already incorporated the
       improvements   identified by Racal.       Racal also
       suggested the use of a noise cancelling microphone.
       A noise cancelling microphone has been made available
       but the ergonomics are not compatible with police
       usage at football matches.
It is evident that the use of talk-through contributed to the
poor quality of the radio communications and that whilst the
high levels of background noise may have degraded the
intelligibility of the messages crowd noise may not be the prime
cause of the potential problem.
               <x




HILLSBOROUGH
Without access to the interim report, voice tapes and transcript
of their contents the following comment can only be based on
conjecture.
The communications at the Hillsborough football ground appear to
have been on talk-through right from the outset. It is probable
that it was overloading of the channel with several officers
trying to transmit their calls at the same time that caused what
would appear as an equipment malfunction        leading to the
replacement of the base station.    Removal of the talk-through
facility would have gone some way to easing the problem in so
far as the control room would at least have had use of the out
going communications.
     TALK-THROUGH ON HALF DUPLEX RADIO SCHEMES

     The radio scheme at Hillsborough used separate radio
     frequencies for transmitting and receiving messages to
     and from the UHF hand held sets.     Only one pair of
     frequencies were in use for the local control of the
     policing effort in and around the ground. This means
     that all messages would have to share the channel and
     that it is essential that those waiting to use the
     system   can   hear when    the   last  caller   stops
     transmitting. With the talk-through facility in use
     all the calls from the hand held sets as well as being
     presented in the control room are rebroadcast to all
     the hand held sets.         In theory provided the
     rebroadcast signals can be heard then individual
     officers are able to judge if they are free to speak
     or if they will only destroy a call that is taking
     place and it is this feature that is the danger of
     talk-through.   The reason for not using talk-through
     is because of the likelihood that with increasing
     crowd noise some officers will be unable to hear if
     the channel is busy and will try to use their radios.
     Should another call be taking place then they will
     almost certainly destroy the other message as well as
     fail to capture the scheme.    The destruction of one
     call by another would lead other officers to try the
     channel in the mistaken belief that the channel were
     not busy.      This situation would then be self
     perpetuating until officers gave up trying to use the
     channel.   High levels of crowd noise would make it
     very difficult for officers to tell if the channel
     were in use which is why the controller is normally
     able to remove talk-through to gain control of the
     scheme by ordering all officers to cease trying to
     transmit and thereby requesting messages from each
     officer in turn.


P M Tomlinson
Directorate of Telecommunications
Horseferry House
London                                        27 September 1989
