h s .7.15/popper.peb


                                                        3322




       FEP/89 35/48/106                  15 July 1991
       SLP/JT



S L Popper Esq.,LL.B,B MED.Sci,BM,BS,MRCGP
HM Coroner
South Yorkshire (West District)
Medico-Legal Centre
Watery Street
SHEFFIELD     S3 7ET




Dear Mr Popper

I have been asked to reply to your recent letter to the Home
Secretary concerning several issues which arose out of the
inquests into the deaths at the Hillsborough Stadium disaster.
I apologise for the delay in replying to you.

The Home Secretary has noted your observations and is grateful
to have received them. I would like to comment on each of your
suggestions individually.

Schedule A of your letter recommends the establishment of a
national licensing authority to replace local authorities as the
certification body under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975
(the 1975 Act).   One of the principles of the 1975 Act is that
the conditions of a safety certificate for a designated sports
ground are determined by the local authority.        However, in
determining the conditions of a safety certificate we expect the
local authority to comply with the guidelines set out in the
Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (The Green Guide).           In
addition, departmental guidance has been issued to local
authorities advising them on what particular things should be
looked at during a ground inspection.    Consequently there will
already be some degree of uniformity in all safety certificates.

Lord Justice Taylor recommended in his Final report on the
Hillsborough stadium disaster, that there should be a national
inspectorate and review body to supervise the local authorities'
responsibilities under the 1975 Act.        Under the Football
Spectators Act 1989 the Football Licensing Authority (FLA) was
created.  As from 3 June 1991 the FLA has had the function of
reviewing the exercise by local authorities of their functions
under the 1975 Act in relation to sports grounds at which
designated football matches are played.

In schedule B of your letter you raise the issue of the role of
the police at football matches and whether they should be
carrying out tasks that are more appropriate to stewards. As you
suggest the role of the police is to preserve the peace, uphold
the law and prevent the commission of criminal offences.
Football has unfortunately become the focus of a minority of
hooligans who see the game as an opportunity to confront rival
groups of fans.   As long as this potential for violence and
disorder continues, the police will have a role to play in
preventing serious public disorder at matches.

Where the police have become engaged in duties more fitted to
stewards it is because the level and standard of stewarding at
Football Clubs is inadequate.    Justice Popplewell and Lord
Justice Taylor both criticised the standard of stewarding,
commenting that stewards are often insufficiently young, fit,
trained and rewarded.

The responsibility for the safety of spectators lies at all times
with the ground management. This includes the responsibility for
providing effective stewarding.    The Government considers that
better stewarding is the key to reducing the current dependence
on the police.   As well as being more appropriate to have club
employees rather than policemen conducting stewarding tasks, such
a change would help to reduce the considerable burden on police
resources.   The Government is therefore encouraging Football
Clubs to recruit fit young stewards and to train them
effectively.   One of the areas which is being explored is the
possibility of a national standard for approved training courses.
The Home Secretary has asked officials at the Home Office to meet
with the Football League, the Football Trust and the Association
of Chief Police Officers to see how best this might be taken
forward.

It is too early to predict the extent to which the improvement
in stewarding will enable the police presence inside football
grounds to be reduced, but we hope it will have a sufficient
impact. The commitment of the clubs themselves will be crucial
to the success of the initiative. We hope that they will become
more enthusiastic than they have been hitherto about providing
effective stewarding.

Schedule C of your letter has been noted and we are grateful for
your helpful and constructive comments on the relationship
between inquests and public inquiries into major disasters. You
are correct in your understanding that officials are exploring
the issues arising from the overlap between these two forms of
inquiry. Consideration of these matters is at a relatively early
stage and I understand that coroners such as yourself, who have
held inquests into deaths arising from recent disasters will, by
now, have already received a letter from the Chairman of the
Working Group seeking views on the problems and possible
solutions.   The comments you have made in the light of your
experience in conducting the Hillsborough inquest will be passed
to the Working Group for their consideration.

Once again I would like to thank you for your suggestions and
apologise for the delay in replying to you.

                                         Yours sincerely



                                         P E BOLTON
                                         (Fire and Emergency
                                         Planning Department)
