                                          A/U
                                            V
INQUIRY INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH
0     STADIUM DISASTER




            With the Compliments of
           the Secretary to the Inquiry




50 Q ueen Anne’s Gate
London SW1H 9AT
Mr Pratt
D Division




HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY


We spoke about the submission from the Football Association and
Football League to Lord Justice Taylor and in particular on their
plea for adjustment to the pool betting tax so that it generates
more money for football.  I attach extracts from the submission
from che FA and FL (paragraphs 5.21 to 5.26).   It would be very
helpful, as you suggest, to have a discussion with you and Mr
Honour about this before the FA and FL come in to see Lord
Justice Taylor on 21 November.   It may be that, having heard what
they have to say, he would like a discussion with you himself
about it thereafter.  Certainly, if he feels that the football
authorities have a case, I know that he will want to ask the
Treasury for their views direct.   I am copying this note, and the
accompanying papers, to Neil Kinghan in the Sport and Recreation
Division of the DOE (who is briefing us on points as Lord Justice
Taylor considers them) with the invitation to him either to
comment or to join us if we have a discussion here, on the basis
of which I can brief Lord Justice Taylor.




                                        R M WHALLEY
                                   Secretary to the Inquiry


10 November 1989
I



    5. 20. This nucleus of all-seater stadia would also provide a
    pool from which The FA could draw the venues for FA Cup
    Semi-Finals.

    Flnance

    5. 21. The Football Association has already made a direct
    investment in the installation of seating and the general
    improvement of facilities at Wembley Stadium.  It has made a
    direct payment of £1,100,000.  The Football Association and The
    Football League have made further contributions to the increase
    in the proportion of seating at the stadium by foregoing
    revenue from the new seating in respect of matches under the
    control of both bodies played at the stadium.  The provision of
    a nucleus of all-seater stadia; the requirement by law for all
    grounds to have a minimum percentage of seats; the need to
    encourage clubs to build new grounds (see paragraph 9. 6. ,
    below), all will require a massive further injection of cash.
    We understand that it will be expected of us that we make every
    attempt to find this revenue from our own resources.

    Sponsorship

    5. 22.  Sponsorship is one obvious area in which we can seek
    extra revenue.    The game as a whole depends for its survival on
    the £17, 500, 000 per year it currently receives from sponsors.
    The FA's aim will be to supplement this with an acceptable
    sponsorship of its most valuable commodity, the FA Cup
    competition.    The Football Association has already set in
    motion a search for a sponsor, with a proposal that offers the
    prospective company a unique opportunity to be identified not
    only with a competition of world standing, but also with an
    initiative that can result in the World Cup's coming to England
    in the not-too-distant future.    The sponsor will be invited to
    pay an annual sum as is usual in such agreements.    He will also
    be asked to provide a lump-sum figure of substantial
    proportions in the form of an interest-free loan.    This sum
    would form the basis of a fund to assist clubs with the
    installation of seating and the improvement of facilities.

    The Football Trust and The Football Grounds Improvement Trust

    5. 23. The Football Trust is funded by a donation by the three
    major pools companies (Littlewoods, Vernons and Zetters) from




                                  -   17   -
!




    V..




          the Spotting-The-Ball Competition, at the rate of 21% of
          turnover, i. e. over £9, 000, 000 a year. The Trustees are
          empowered to use their funds to promote measures for the
          control or suppression of hooliganism; to assist clubs to meet
          obligations under the 1975 Act; to improve ground facilities;
          and for any other purpose beneficial to football.    The Football
          Trust allocates just over half its income to The Football
          Grounds Improvement Trust for the purpose of assisting
          expenditure by Football League clubs on ground safety and
          improvements.   An explanation of the role of these bodies is
          appended.   (Annex H)

          5. 24. As we have indicated above, (paragraph 5. 14. ), there are
          benefits to be gained by the clubs if the recommended levels of
          seating are made mandatory by making them a condition of the
          issue of a Safety Certificate.  Under its Trust Deed, The
          Football Grounds Improvement Trust is able to make grants of up
          to 75% of the total cost available to clubs carrying out work
          as a necessary condition of their being given a Safety
          Certificate under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act.

          Reduction in Pool Betting Tax

          5. 25. Given our willingness to seek from our own and other
          existing resources a substantial part of the finances necessary
          to implement the changes and improvements we have identified,
          we believe that there is a strong case for the Government to
          make a contribution b y reducing the tax on football pool
          betting from its current level of 42.5%. At present, the tax
          yields around £280,000,000 per year.    There is an agreement
          between the Pool Promoters Association and The Football League
          by which 2/5ths of any money saved by them as a result of a
          reduction in the pool betting tax would go to The Football
          League for ground improvements.   Another 2/5ths would go to
          help other sports and the remaining l/5th would be devoted to
          the campaign to bring the 1996 Olympic Games to Britain.    The
          Government would assist football greatly by making a relatively
          small proportion of the the tax levied on pool betting
          available to the game to assist in effecting the improvements
          we have discussed.   A reduction to 40% would, for example,
          yield some £16,000,000.   This could be passed on to football in
          one of two ways.   The Government could continue to tax pool
          betting at the current level, but make a donation to football
          equivalent to 2. 5% of taxable turnover, or it could reduce the




                                          -   18   -
i




    tax rate to 40% on the strict understanding that the agreement
    referred to above were amended to allow football to derive the
    entire benefit from the money thus saved by the pools
    companies.

    At present, football derives no benefit whatsoever from the
    £280, 000,000 or so each year that the Government takes in pool
    betting tax.   The contrast with horse racing is stark.
    Football pools are taxed at 42.5%.    There is no tax on
    on-course horse race betting.   The tax on off-course gambling
    is 8%.   There is, however, by statutory instrument, a levy on
    off-course betting separate from the tax.    The Home Secretary
    laid down the present Horserace Betting Levy Scheme on the 1st
    April, 1989.   Under the scheme, the levy is set at 0.86% of
    turnover.   At today's betting levels, this levy will yield
    approximately £34,500,000 per year.    The football industry is,
    therefore, at a disadvantage to horse racing on two counts.
    First, the tax on football pool betting is so high that the
    pool promoters are limited in the amount they can realistically
    make available to football in the form of the payment of
    royalties for the use of football fixtures.    The royalty paid
    at the moment is around 2.35% of after-tax revenue, which
    yields about £5,000,000 per year.    A lower level of tax would
    undoubtedly enable football and the pools to agree upon a
    higher royalty percentage.   Second, a levy is made on horse
    race betting, over and above the tax, specifically for the
    purpose of promoting the industry that creates the public
    interest that, in turn, produces the betting tax revenue for
    the Government.   Football receives nothing, despite the fact
    that it fulfils precisely the same function.

    The Chester Report of 1968 recommended the establishment of a
    Football Levy at the rate of 1% of the pools' companies taxable
    turnover.  A minority report recommended 2%.  The Rothschild
    Commission on gambling recommended in 1977 a reduction in the
    pool betting tax from the then level of 40% to 37%, also for
    the purpose of establishing a Levy Board.  We, however, are not
    proposing the creation of a Football Levy Board.  We believe
    that The Football Trust/Football Grounds Improvement Trust
    already act as a suitable vehicle with proven track record and
    would be the ideal recipient of any money given to the game
    from a reduction in the pool betting tax or from any other
    source prepared to provide grants or interest-free loans.




                                 -   19   -
Capital Allowances

5. 26.  Much criticism is levelled at football for what is seen
by many as wasteful spending on transfer fees.   This criticism
ignores the basic fact that transfer fees are a "circulating
fund" that enables smaller clubs to derive much needed income
by investing in young players and realising the investment by
selling on the asset to one of the bigger clubs.   For example,
in the summer of 1988 Tottenham Hotspur bought Paul Stewart
from Manchester City for £1,700,000.   Manchester City then
purchased Brian Gayle from Wimbledon for £325,000, Andy Dibble
from Luton Town for £250,000 and David Oldfield from the same
club for £650,000.   Luton and Wimbledon then went on to buy
other players for smaller sums, and so on.   All of the transfer
fees added together might make ten times the original figure of
£1. 7 million.

The success of a club on the field of play is the major
consideration for most supporters.    A team that is winning
attracts more spectators than when it is not performing so
well.  The attendance figures quoted above for Glasgow Rangers
matches (paragraph 5. 5. ) indicate what can be achieved when a
club is playing well and at the same time gives its public good
facilities.   Glasgow Rangers have invested as heavily as any
club in the transfer market in recent times.    Clubs must,
therefore, look to their playing strength as well as to the
comfort and safety of their grounds.    No club shies away from
expenditure on essential safety work.    Each club does, however,
have to decide for itself the appropriate balance between its
spending on players and on the improvement of facilities.    The
present system gives strong fiscal inducements to clubs to
spend on players rather than on improvements.    Capital
allowances are usually unavailable to clubs for ground
improvements.   The case of Brown (Inspector of Taxes) v Burnley
FC (1980) STC. 424 (Annex I) established that expenditure on a
new stand to replace an old one did not qualify as a repair,
nor did it qualify for plant and machinery allowances.    Safety
work is only allowable if it is carried out as a condition of
the issue of a Safety Certificate.    Transfer fees, on the other
hand, are treated as revenue expenditure.    The Government would
automatically stimulate greater expenditure on improved
facilities if it were to give capital allowances for all such
projects.




                              -   20   -
