                                           /^VKr S A t jTh 7
                                                       Reference




1. Mr Roberts
2. PS/Secretary of State


HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER: REQUEST FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE


1. This submission provides advice on the handling of the formal request from
Liverpool City Council and others (flag A) for financial support towards the
cost of social service support to people affected by the Hillsborough
disaster.

2. The request is addressed to the Health Secretary but copied to our
Secretary of State and the Social Services Secretary. We have established
with D.H officials that neither DH nor DSS has power to offer financial
assistance to local authorities.  Nor does DOE, although we have made payments
on the basis of the Appropriation Acts where the burden of dealing with an
emergency would be excessive - the Bellwin scheme.

Assistance Requested

3•   The Government is asked to contribute towards:

        a)  a regional unit to provide a core of common services including a
        helpline, co-ordination of counselling services, a database, training,
        staff support, and "management of media contacts and publicity" -
        estimated cost £350,000 p.a. for three years

       b) steps to strengthen staffing within each of the local authorities
       involved, in order to help individuals and their families - estimated
       cost £1 million p.a. for three years.

The Secretary of State has already said that he is unimpressed by the case
that Liverpool have put forward (flag B ) .

The "Bellwin Scheme"

4. The key principle is that the primary responsibility for dealing with
emergencies rests with local authorities, who have powers to spend money for
such purposes under s.138 of the Local Government Act 1972. Local authorities
normally include an amount in their budgets in respect of such contingencies.
The Bellwin scheme is a model scheme agreed with the Local Authority
Associations in 1983- Under the scheme the Government provides special
financial assistance to local authorities to help with additional expenditure
on immediate works, where otherwise the cost would be excessive.
                                                                             f I

                                                                         /   '   ^ '
Applicability of the Bellwin Scheme

5.  A decision on the applicability of the Bellwin Scheme to Liverpool's
request hinges on two questions: how much of the cost relates to work within
the scope of Bellwin, and does it exceed what authorities could reasonably be
expected to bear.  It is not immediately obvious that the bulk of the work
satisfies the Bellwin criterion of immediacy (particularly, given that the
work is to extend over three years), - or additionality.  In the case of t h e
                                                        Reference




 most recent use of the scheme, following the Great Storm, the threshold for
 counties (and for metropolitan districts had they been involved) was set at
 the product of a l.Op rate.  If we did not update the threshold, this would
 mean thresholds of:

                Liverpool      £   633,293
                St Helens      £ 228,471
                Sefton         £   364,600
                Knowsley       £   205,806
                Lancashire     £1,508,362
                Cheshire       £1,452,123

 Unless, therefore, Ministers were minded to set a substantially lower
 threshold than in 1987 (something Treasury would be unlikely to concede)   it
 would seem most unlikely that eligible expenditure would exceed that which
 the authorities might reasonably be expected to have budgeted for.

 Handling

 6.   DH officials have agreed that their Secretary of State should reply to
 Liverpool s request. Attached at flag C is a copy of the letter they propose
 to send: o u r _contribution is highlighted. Our aim has been to avoid giving a
 wholly negative reply, and the adverse reaction that would entail, but at the
 same time let the authorities work out for themselves that the chances of
 grant under the Bellwin scheme are remote.    Is the Secretary of State content
 with this approach and with the draft letter?




Z A K0WALCZYK
FLG1
N5/U
Ext 3136

23 May 1989




cc: PS/Mr Gummer
    PS/Mrs Bottomley
    PS/Permanent Secretary
    Mr Bradley (MTF)
    Mr Osborn
    Mr Fletcher
    Mr Summerton
    Mrs Phillips
   ■Mr Kinghan
    Mr Morrison (MTF)
    Mr P A Lee




DOC845AU
                                                                 ANNEX   C


POH/1659/153


DRAFT REPLY FOR SECRETARY OF STATE FOR HEALTH TO SEND TO KEVA COOMBES, LEADER
OF LIVERPOOL COUNCIL


Thank you for your letter of 6 May about additional financial support for
direct service provision and for the Regional Unit you propose to establish to
provide and co-ordinate continuing care in the aftermath of the Hillsborough
tragedy.


The Department's Social Service Inspectorate have kept me informed of the
action taken by the local social services departments together in the wake of
the tragedy and I know that the Chief Inspector has written personally to all
the Social Services Directors to congratulate them and their staff on their
most impressive response.   By this letter I would like to express my own
appreciation for the magnificent response by all the Social Services
departments involved.


I am afraid however that on matters of funding my Department has no power to
make additional resources available to local authorities for this purpose.
However, I understand from Nicholas Ridley, Secretary of State for the
Environment, that under a model scheme designed to deal with extraordinary
costs arising from emergencies (the Bellwin Scheme), the Government has
provided special financial assistance to local authorities in certain
circumstances.


The Bellwin Scheme was drawn up after discussions with the Local Authority
Associations and provides for assistance towards the immediate and additional
costs of dealing with an emergency once expenditure exceeds a threshold beyond
which local authorities would normally be expected to budget for. In the case
of the last use of the scheme, following the great storm of 1 9 8 7 , that
threshold was (for counties and metropolitan districts) set at the exclusive
product of l.Op rate.
If you consider that you have a case for assistance of this kind, Nicholas
Ridley is prepared to consider a detailed and fully costed application.    I
know that he will keep me informed of events.


The Government has of course, as you mention, already made a contribution of
£500,000 to the disaster fund to help those most closely affected by the
disaster.




docl927pb
