ITALY: ANTI HOOLIGANISM MEASURES
1.     In an attempt to discourage hooliganism, the Italian
Football Federation, FIGC, has taken steps to make clubs
responsible for the behaviour of their supporters.
2.     Most football violence in Italy is attributed to the
extremist members of otherwise respectable and well organised
supporters clubs.    FIGC has ruled that clubs must officially
recognise supporters' clubs who undertake to fulfil the following
requirements:-
(a)   to issue to their members a card with a photograph, having
      first confirmed their identity by means of legal documents;
(b)   to forbid names, emblems, symbols or publications inciting
      violence, racial or territorial discrimination or resembling
      the badges of political or military organisations;
(c)   to keep photographs of their members and to send a list of
      such to the club;
(d)   to compile, and keep until the end of the season a list of
      those members who take part in trips organised by them;
(e)   to send to the club a specimen of any periodical or
      publication distributed by- them.
3.     Under the scheme clubs
(a)  will be held responsible for the display in the ground of
     banners, notices, symbols, emblems, etc., inciting violence
     or racial or territorial discrimination;
(b) must immediately discontinue any contact with groups of
   . supporters responsible for violence except when other
     members of the group have significantly assisted in the
     identification of those responsible;
(c) is required to warn the public of the prescribed sanctions
     in the event of the committing of acts of violence by
     supporters including those outside the stadium;
(d) is responsible for the statements and behaviour of its
     directors, members and season ticket holders which might in
     any way contribute to acts of violence. The responsibility
     of the club extends to individual directors, members or
     season ticket holders.’
4.    In cases of violation by clubs of these rules there is the
sanction of a fine of up to Lire 25 million or in the case of (d)
Lire 50 million (£         or £        ) or in the case of more
senior or repeated offences, ground closure. Directors, members
of season ticket holders who break the rules can be reprimanded,
tried or disqualified.
5.     Clubs are responsible tor acts of violence committed
before, during, after or because of a match by one or more of
their supporters.    The sanction of a fine plus a warning is
applicable. In more serious cases or where the club has already
been warned in addition to the fine the ground can also be
closed. When a club has already been warned several times the
sanction is the closure of the ground for not less then two days.
It may be ordered that matches be played at neutral grounds
behind closed doors.     Sanctions are increased when acts are
committed by supporters belonging to organised groups recognised
by the club. Sanctions are reduced if the club can demonstrate
that they helped in the task of identifying troublemakers.
