                                                              i"V    H & J lc A

                              -2CCT1S39             O m        tlrQ&dkJfr          .j

                                                                                  B R ITIS H EMBASSY.

                                                                                                   ROME

                                                                                  ^Telephone 475.5441

                                                   u_2_..                     i   F a c s im ile   No, 010396
                                                       19 SEP 1989                                     4741i l

           DATE:   15.9.1989

                                                               J j £ d


             MESSAGE TO:
                             Peter Palmer
                             Consular Department
                             F.C.O.




             MESSAGE FROMv
                             JR. Godfrey
                              Rome




             NUMBER OF PAGES TO FOLLOW:

                    ...... _r.11

                                                                                                                -,v-«


              SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS: SPO!RTING FA<ZILi^Je CTATORS AM TRAN-
             REGULATIONS FOR SAFETY AND CONTROL OF 1 SPEiCTATORS.. . nFrSEE
             SMITTING ROUGH TRANSLATION OF MINISTRY OF INTERIOR DECREE                                             •i.
             OF 25 AUGUST (OFFICIAL GAZETTE N O . 206 OF 4.9.89) PLEASE
             ENSURE IT IS SEEN BY LORD JUSTINS TAYLOR S OFFICE.

                                   C?

                         < 5 0          Ac-C -                           ■Ur<?|lr ,4-                 Q-Ct&CZ
                                                    7^-
                                                                                                                or
Q y a.p'   A t           \( q C Iyy yv p dr t-vY
                       ROUGH       TRANSLATION



      by M i n i s t e r of the I n t e r i o r 25 August 1989 ("Official Gazatte"
D e c re e
No. 206 of 4 September 1989).                              ,         ^    •

SECURITY REGULATIONS FOR THE CONSTRUCTION AMD USE OF SPORTS FACILITIES



ARTICLE 1


F ie ld of a p p l i c a t i o n

The sports facilities subject to these regulations, hereinafter referred

to as "facilities", are those-sports ^facilities in which the presence of

spectators, players and officials, in a number greater than 100, is en-
                                         f

visaged; for facilities in which the presence of not more than 100 persons

is envisaged the- regulations in Article 19 below will apply.

ARTICLE 2

Definitions

A sports facility is the area, covered or open-air, "covered or open-air

facilities1', in which sporting activities (disciplines), regulated by

rules approved by the national sporting federations governed by the

Italian National Olympic Committee, are practised.


Facilities with covered stands are also considered to be open-air if they

are completely without cover over the area where the sporting activity         -

takes place.

Reference is made to the rules and the general definitions in the

Ministerial Decree of 30 November 1983.


ARTICLE 3

Locotion

The location of the facility must be such as to allow the approach and

manoevering of emergency vehicles and the possibility of crowd egress to

adjacent areas.

In particular, access and manoevring areas for emergency vehicles must

meet the following requirements :

Free h e i g h t   : not lc98       than 4 metr es
^J^dth : not less than 3.5 metres

    Slope : not more than 10%

    Load capacity : for vehicles of a gross weight of not less than 20 tonnes.



    Access roads for the public must have an overall width equal to half that

    of the total width of the exits of the facilities, if access is possible

    in both directions, or equal to the total width of the exits if access is

    possible in only one direction.

    Otherwise,    uncovered spaces must be provided, of an area sufficient to

    contain spectators, within a radius of 50 from the exits, supposing a

     crowd density of one person per square metra.
                                     *

     Covered facilities may be situated in other buildings in which activities

     subject to the fire precaution regulations under sub paragraphs 64, 83,.84,

     85, 86, 87, 89, 90, 91, 92, 94 and 95 of the ministerial decree of 16 February 1982

     take place, whereas they may not be situated in buildings where activities

     covered by the other sub paragraphs of the ministerial decree under reference

     take place,                                      .. ...........

     Separations from the areas in which activities subject to the abovementioned

;    sub paragraphs of the ministerial decree of 16 February 1982 must use structures

|    c o n f o r m i n g t a R E I 90; communications being allowed through smoke-proof ,filters .

     as defined in the ministerial decree of 30 November 1983.


     The regulations in force for the specific activities covered by the sub

      paragraphs of the ministerial decree of J6 February 1983 under reference,

      remain valid.

      Covered facilities must not be situated more than one floor below ground

      level and in any case not more than 7.5 metres below ground.


      ARTICLE 4
                                                                                               %


      Area of the facility
                                                                                      the
      The area for the construction of a {acllity, as well as comlying with r.<,uir.m«>t„

      of the pre ce din g article,         be chosen in such a way that the roads g u ar .n o.

      rapid « » *     egreits;   particular,   the area must allow the provision, near or
 within the facility, of one or more car parks calculated on the basis

     existing regulations and the overall capacity of the facility.


 The minimum overall size of the parking area must conform to the

  building regulations in force and, in any case, not be less than one

  square metre for every spectator.

  Service vehicles provided with appropriate authorisation are not included

  in the calculation of the parking area.

  ARTICLE 5

  Structures and Materials

  As far as the fire-resistant characteristics of structures, materials atld fittings

  are concerned, refer to the specific standards of the Ministry of the Interior
        »
                                        f   .       .       .   .   .   .       .   .   .   .

  concerning premises intended for public performances.

  The use of inflatable structures is not allowed except as laid down in

  Article 19.

  As far as the dimensions of the structure are concerned* refer .to the                                                    .

  specific standards issued by the Ministry of Public Works.                                        -~-

  ARTICLE 6

  Electrical and technological installations.

  Electrical installations must be carried out according to Law No. 186

  b£ 1 March 1968.

  For technological installations (heating, air conditioning, etc) refer to                                                     .   V.\*
               1                                .       ■               .....

  the specific standards of the Ministry of the Interior.                                                                           rt

  ARTICLE 7

spiCapacity                                                                                                         v‘"-
                       \
  A) Spectators’ area.

  The capacity (maximum hypothetical crowd) of the spectators' area is

  obtained by dividing the gradient of the tiers, in linear metres, by 0.48.

  For open-air facilities with a capacity of more than 10,000 spectators at

  football games and for covered ones with a capacity of more than 4,000

  spectators, standing is not allowed. These facilities must have only numbered seats

 not less than 0.45 metres wide.

 The capacity, determined as set out above, is calculated on those who are

  authorised       to enter   the   facility,           for w h o m ap p ro p r i a t e     areas w i t h n u m b e r e d
l589-0y-ib        63: U5     E-ITiSH dlbfiSSY                        0£j3 o 4,-418,;=.               P. 04

     fl


    Seats must be set aside.


    8) P l a y i n g area.


    The c a p a c i t y of the p l a y i n g area is g o v e r n e d by the a c t i vi t y e nv i sa ged

   and is der i v ed fr om the n u m b e r of p l a ye r s and officia ls.

   ARTICLE 8

   Sections

   Open-air facilities with spectators numbering more than 10,000 and covered

   ones with spectators numbering more than 4,000'must have the areas provided '

   for spectators divided into sections.

   The capacity of each section must not be more than 20,000 spectators for

   for an open-air facility prid 4,000 tor a covered one.

   For open-air facilities, when used for football matches, at least one section

 • of appropriate size must be set aside for supporters of the visiting’team.

   Each section must have services and independent exit routes clearly indicated

  by signs conforming to Presidential Decree No 524 of 8 June 1982 and must be

  separated from those adjacent using non-inflammable material not less than 2.2

  metres high capable of withstanding a horizontal force of not less than 80 kgs/                                               ’

  metre applied at 2.2 metres. Communication between sections through doors made

  of non-inflammable material is allowed.
                                                                                    ■       ...        .         '.v-.-r-
                                                   -       -                  ■ ;       •                    -              4   -


■ For the afore-mentioned open-air facilities the spectators’ area must be separated' "

  trom the playing area by a ditch at least 2.5 metres wide and deep, or. else

 with separations/partitions as laid down in "the "preceding paragraph.

 In each section the above separations must have at least two passagevavs, giving

 on to the playing area, furnished with locks which, in case of necessity, may

 be opened on the orders of the public security authorities.

 Every passage way must be at least 2.4 metres in width.

 Where there are ditch«s, there may be provision for technical solutions involving

 the use     Of   simple mechanisms allowing the crossing of the ditches                          in   case of
 necessity.                                                                                   »

ARTICLE 9

S y s t e m o fexi t routes


The s y s t e m of exit routes        for the area set aside              for sp ect a t or s mu st be

I n d ep e nd en t of   that of   the p l a y in g area.       The   sep ar at i on must c o n f o r m to
^ ^ r o v i s i o n s laid down in Article 8 above* Communication between the

   aforementioned exit route systems is allowed by means of metal doors.

   The overall width of the exits must be such as to allow an outflow of

   not more than 250 people for open-air facilities and 50 for covered

   facilities independent of the spectator capacity.

   The width of each exit must not be less than two modules.

   The        stairs and ramps
   for the outflow of spectators from the stands must have the same overall

   width as the exits.

    In determining the width of the exit routes the entrance doorways should

    be t£ken into account* provided they are fitted with locks opening also
                               *•
    (onto) towards the outside.

    As regards the 'locks allowed, refer to the instructions of the Ministry                              _

    of the Interior for premises intended for public performances.


    Steps                       must be rectangular in form, must have a regular rise and depth of

    respectively not more than 17cms(rise) arid 30 cms (depth).

    The flights of stairs must be straight and have not less than three steps

                               ..-t-... rjiL.—
    a t XU   UL>L   U lU A C   H ia tt   j . J -J .   I


    The landings must be of the same width as the stairs* neither widened nor
                                                                                              . ..   ':
   ' reduced* .

    It is advisable for the landings to be circular linkways of a

    constant radial width equal to that of the staircase.

    No projection or recess should exist in the walls of the staircases

    below a height of 2 metres from                       footlevel.

    All staircases must be provided                       with handrails projecting       not more

    than the amount allowed.                                                          -
    The end of each handrail must be connected to the wall itself,
    The combining of two staircases                       into one isallowed,provided         it

    has a width equal to the sum of                       both.                                           .
    For staircases of a width of more than 3 metres the provincial polic

    commission may prescribe a central handrail.
    For covered facilities the maximum width of the exit route for the
    spectator1s area must not be more than 40 metres, or 50 metres if
           lyay-b’y -ib       k«:uY       a.-a i ibM tritiHbor                                     w z ? o 4Y4iBJb             K.tsy
       »
Z' x
(

    Here           is a suitable installation £or the extraction of smoke

          controlled by a fire-detecting system.
          The number of e x i t s for spectators must not in any case be less
          than two for each section or for each facility not divided into.

           sections.
           ARTICLE 10                                                                             ........
           Internal Layout
^          The exit staircases for spectators must not .be ..less than 1.2

    ^ metres in width and serve not more than...20 seats                                                             per   row and

           per side.
           Each 15 tiers for seated accomodation must have a gangway parallel

            to the        t i e r s ,   themselves not less than 1.2 metres m                                              width.

            Such gangways need not be provided if the steps leading from the

            spectator area                g i v e   straight on to t h e - M i n exit stairway.

            The tiers for seated accomodation.must have a depth of n

            than 0.6 metres ana a rise of between 0.4 and 0.6 metres.
  - - -     The flights of the exit                      s   t   a   i   r   c   a   s   e   s   for spectators must be in a

            straight line.
            The steps o f . e a c h : flight m u s t h a v e a c o n s t a n t rise a n d depth o f

             not more than 20cms trise> :and .ot l e ^                                                                                 .. ..

             tively.
y T I C L E LI

Ticket Offices

For each open-air facility the ticket offices must be installed not

less than 10 metres from   the entrances in constructions independent

of che structure of the facility.

ARTICLE 12

Toilet facilities

The toilet installations roust consist of a lavatory bowl, three urinals

 and two washbasins for the men and two lavatory bowls and two washbasins

 for the ladies.

 Toilftt facilities must be provided in the proportion of one for every

 500 men and one for every 1,000 women for facilities with a capacity of

 less than 30,000 spectators and in the proportion of one fo r every.1 tO-pO

 men and one for every 1,000 women for capacities exceeding 30,000 spectator©.


 ARTICLE 13                                •

 Changing rooms

 The changing rooms must not be less than 30 square metres in size, excluding

  services and annexed to a set of toilet facilities consisting of at least

  six showers, two washbasins, two lavatory, bowls and two urinals.

 Each changing room jwust serve at the most 16 players* have at least 150 lux

  of light in the ceiling, natural aeration equal to an eighth of the surface

  of the room or mechanical aeration with a capacity of at least 25 cubic

  metres per person per hour.


  Not less than two changing rooms must be provided.

  A changing room for each sex must be provided for the referees, of a

 minimum size of 10 square metres excluding services, annexed to a set o f ...

  toilet facilities consisting of at least two showers, a washbasin and a toilet

  bowl.


  The changing rooms must be inaccessible to the spectators even as regards

  the routes which lead to the outside of the facility and to the playing
^Tor    open-all facilities, with a capacity of more chan 5,000 spectators,

    on the occasion of a football match, a parking apace, reserved tor service vehicles

    and tho vehicles of the players and referees must be                 p r o v i d e d ,   situated inside

    the enclosure, linked directly to the changing rooms and inaccessible to the


    spectators.

    ARTICLE 14

    First Aid

    In facilities with a capacity of more than 30.000 sp.ctator. a first aid

     post must be provided for each section.

     In facilities „ith a capacity of less than 30,000 spectators the first aid

     post may be used for other'purposes compatible from the point of viev of

     hygiene,

     A first aid post, reserved for chat purpose, m u s f i n any case be provided

     exclusively    for the playing area.

    ■ The first aid post must be linked directly to th* roads outside the facility.


      ARTICLE 15

      StorerooinB
      One or more rooms, communicating with the playing area, must be provided

    - for the scoring of sports equipment.

       Storage for other, combustible materials must be located in separate rooms

       built to REI 90, any communication must be by doors built to R~I 90,

       with a self-closing device.

       It is in any case forbidden to store inflammable substances,                           e x c e p t   in limited.

       quantities for hyger.ic or sanitary purposes.


       ARTICLE 16

       M easures for the control of spectators

T      iri facilities   with   a capacity of more than 30»000 spectators a closed-circuit

       television Installation must be provided which allows the observation,from an

       appropriately arranged and supervised room, of the spectator’,, area and rba                                       ,<

       relative access points to the facility, viLh video recording.

                    hr.r the ri^hr    t:0 im P 0Se the a d o p t i o n   o£ the m e a s u r e s in
         police commission on premises intended for public performances.

^ ^ T b e public security authorities, on the occasion of events thought to be
         a risk to law and order may arrange for the erection of barriers outside
                        enable                                     ,< c.
         the facility to ^ proper screening, forming into queues and stricter control

         of the spectators.

         AKTTCl.E ]7

         External wsIIb

^        Open-air facilities with a capacity of more t h an -5,000 spectators must have

         an external wall constructed of non-combustible material of a height of not

         less than 2,5 metres^capable of withstanding a horizontal force of not lees

         than 80 kg/metre applied to the highest point.
             »
                                     *
         The wall must be provided with passageways leading to the exits from the

         facility.

         Each passageway,which must have a width at least equal to that of the corr­

         esponding exit, may be provided with gates which must remain open during the

--       event.                          --... -......
                                         .




         The subdivision into sections under Article 8 and in Article 9, in so far as

         the independence of the exit routes from the spectators* area and playing area

         is concerned, must be maintained in the same way as far as the aforementioned

    ■v   -external wall.

         ARTICLE 18

         Pire-fighting installations-

         Open-air facilities with a capacity of more than 5,000 spectators and closed

         ones with a capacity of more chan 1,000 spectators must be provided with fire­

          fighting installations with sufficient hydrants sited so as to allow intervention

         at any point in the facility-

         ARTICLE 19

         Special arrangements for facilities with a capacity of not more than 100 persona

         in all (spectators, players and officials')                                      »

         Information about the total number of persons the facility can hold must be

         included in a statement made under the responsibility of the promoter of the

         activity.

         The facilities must be provided with iiot less than two exits, of which at least
   must be of not less than two modules In width; the second exit may be

of a width not less than 0.8 metres.

The measures set out in Articles 5, 6 and 15 of these regulations must be

observed.

For facilities with a capacity of not more than 50 persons, the use of

inflatable structures is allowed, provided they are made of material having

fire-resistant characteristics in conformity with the Ministry of the Interior's

regulations for premises intended for public performances (Article 4 of the

ministerial decree of 6 July 1983).

Sufficient supports must be provided in order to prevent the risk of sudden

deflation in case of loss of pressure.

For the hygenic and sanitary arrangements, refer to those laid down by the

competent authorities.

ARTICLE 20

Swimming pools and racecourses

For the spectators' area the measures contained in the preceeding articles apply

also to swimming pools and racecourses.

Tor the aforementioned activities the other measures set out in Circular No. 16

of 15 February 1951 apply, except as indicated in the next paragraph.

Article 110 of the aforementioned Circular No.16 is amended u s follows;

"The life-savin-gservS.ce must be vGdrried out by at least two life                -

guards of the required competence from the Italian Swimming Fed­

eration or else holding certificates of competence in life saving

at sea issued by a clttb authorised by the Ministry of the Merchant
Navy".
ARTICLE 21
Right of derogation

Whenever, because of particular circumstances, it is not possible
to apply any of the measures set out in this decree, the Ministry of

the Interior, having heard the Commission on Sporting Facilities,
(C.I.S.) of the Italian National Olympic Committee            (C.O.N.I.)     in
accordance with Royal Decree-Law No. 302 of 2 February 193Q and sub­
sequent amendments, has the right to allow specific permanent or
             ^^lporary derogations in cases in which/ by adopting alternative

             measures, a level of security for the facility is assured which ......

             is equal to that which would result from the full application of

             these regulations.
             A technical director from the central organisation of the national

             fire brigade-shall be a member of the Commission mentioned in the

             proceeding paragraph.            '             :

         ^   The application:, for -derogation^, accompanied by the- views -of - the
             provincial.commission' on:, premises- used for public performances,
             must be f o r w a r d e d to the provincial committee of the C.O.N.I.

             who will be~responsible for forwarding it, with their own views,

              to the Commission”'metxtioneda inrthee preceeding paragraphs.

              ARTICLE-222
              Trans itory:Regal at ions
              Existing sporting facilities must conform to Articles 5,6,7,8,11,13
              (penultimate and last paragraphs),14,15,18 and 19 above before 30

         ._ '"April 1990.
             ■ The 'requirements of Article 16 must be conformed with from the

              moment this Decrcc comes into force.
f\       '    por exits of existing facilities with a capacity of not more than

              100 persons a specific width of 0.9 metres is allowed.

              For facilities existing on 10 December 198 4, the regulations contained

     .        in Law No. 818 of 7 December 1984 and the subsequent amendments and
                                ■'             ■   :   .4   .             •

^!^#ip»e:levantJ:effective ^Decrees., remain valid.

r -. 'ARTICLE 23 '
y^ P | 3sS;)
           Final• Arrangements..
             ifsfor- sporting facilities covered by Article 1 above, Articles 95,96,
                ,98,99,100,101,102,103 and 110 of Ministry of the Interior circular
              No. 16 of 15 February 1951 are replaced by the present regulations^.

              The arrangements contained in Law No. 118 of 30 March 1971 and the
              rules in Presidential Decree No. 384 of 27 April 1978 regarding the

              elimination of architectural barriers remain in force.
