HIIiLSBOROUGH INQUIRY
                  notes__fQr_Hie-Boae—

              ted by Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor with assessors:
Inquiry conducted by bx. non ^
        Brian Johnson QPM, Chief Constable of Lancashire

        Professor Leonard M a u n d e ^ ^               “ 0| f0^ S ? ? e ° u p o n Tyne
             Engineering at tne unx

                                                 •t    iooq-
                                            a semi-final of the PA
 The incident took place on                       m n ghorouah.
 cup between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest
 Stadium, (Sheffie!d__Wedn£Sd3y s ground) .     _


  „    people died and over 400 received hospital treatment.

  The enforcing authority under the ^Safety of sports^

  1975    wSheffield City Council from 1 April
              a   s


  the south Yorkshire; county Council. )


   Genqral rerr -n-» to 1-.he                    .             Invaluable analysis of
   „elcome the thoroughness o                           ^      ^       ^           .f
      the events of the aay                                        1n the report because of
      tragedy.  (Cannot say wel°°” ® requires by law further enquiries.)
      criticism of the police which requires oy

                                                         action by central Government
      It does not call -          -      "   i         r   authorities concerned with

       safety ^ m c a t e s , by clubs, and by the emergency services,

       particularly the police.

       Circulars issued by the Home office and the
                  x-x.    +-r> Whom the recommendations are q u
       “    t r t h i r s ^ f d e m e n t i , items where relevant.

                                                     t»7 <= cViaii need to wait for the
       This is an interim response.                  We shall
Judge's mors considered recommendation which we receive the final

report.

                         and the lag                 _                  onto h±s
 If a private occupier invites                             ^       responsibility to

 make^arrangements to'ensure their safety.                 Football clubs are no
 different from other occupiers in this respect.

                    onf- has reinforced those basic responsibilities by
                           certificates for the larger sports grounds and
  by setting out safety standards in the Green Gu i e.

; ■The report does not;reveal:any shprtccings either in the law or
  in the recommended standards.

              -        , • -t-h^t there were shortcomings both in th
   What: it ;does reveal is that there w              at tho :; :■
   physical ■'irrar.genents for securing crow             ^ ^    (w!..ich
  ' H i l l s b o r o u g h ground which had been2presen       ^         authority) .
  ^r e f l e t                                                                     i ’
   It'also points to severe                                        incident on the day.
   police handled the crowd and reacted




            tragedy were not new.       The dangers of overcrowding both
            outside and inside football grounds was identifie                  in
            Wheatley1s i n ^ i r y into crowd safety in sports grounds
             1972.     There had been other reports before that.

             Lord Wheatleys i n ^ i r y led to the publication of what is
             now generally known as the "Green Guide".


             The Green Guide is published by the H o , < ^ « 1“
                 Scottish Office and it sets out the e n t e r
    safety at sports grounds.

    The system of safety certificates for sports grounds was
    introduced by the Safety of sports Grounds Act 1975.


Pi-rhlic Order and Public Safety
There needs to be a balance between public order and public
safety.   There is obviously potential conflict between measures
to control hooliganism and crowd disorder (which usually means
confining the crowd behind barriers or within pens) and those
which are necessary to ensure that they can get out if, as in
this case, there was gross overcrowding or, as at Bradford, if

there is a fire.

If the Green Guide is followed properly, that balance is

maintained.

 in this case the report suggests that not only was the guide not
 followed, but the police failed to recognise that what they were
 handling had developed from a public order problem into a public

 safety problem.


 The Police
 in the first instance the implications of this report have to be
  considered by the chief Constable and the South Yorkshire Police
  Authority.   If there are questions of criminal or disciplinary
  proceedings then the Director of Public Prosecutions and the
  Police Complaints Authority will also be involved.


  It would be wrong for me to discuss the future of individual
  police officers at this stage.   It must be remembered that I have
  to consider appeals under the police disciplinary procedure.


  Resource implications
  There are clearly some resource implications and these m     the
main will fall on the clubs.   For those whose safety arrangements
are already satisfactory the resource implications should not be
too great.

The report asks local authorities to take immediate steps to
re-examine grounds against the Green Guide criteria.       That may
mean reordering their immediate priorities, but in the long term
it should not add significantly to their workload.


The conduct of the fans
What we conclude from the report is that even if some fans
misbehaved or had too much to drink, in general the conduct of
the fans was no better and no worse than should have been
expected.                                         ,•   .

The crowd's behaviour seems to me to have been largely .
predictable. What was lacking was the arrangements to ensure
 that they could gain entry to the ground in good time and that
 individual pens were not overcrowded.


 Specific recommendations in the report


 T?^r;mmnendation 2b - the 15% reduction in terrace capacity
 The proposed 15% reduction in the capacity of terraces while
 arbitrary is sensible, certainly as an interim measure.       Some
 clubs may claim that it will have resource implications by
 restricting gate money.   The restriction is in fact quite limited
 and can be regarded as a prudent temporary measure while the
 inquiry gives further thought to the methods of calculating crowd
 densities in the "Green Guide".   Because it applies to individual
 pens, it will only affect total ground capacity when all pens are
  full, - something which in practice occurs mainly at major
 matches towards the end of the season.
Basommendat.ioTi 4 ‘ filling and monitoring terraces
Fully support the idea that there should be unambiguous agreement
between the clubs and the police about who is responsible for
What but against the basic duty of the clubs towards those they
invite onto the premises.

Recommendation «

The report suggests that leavihg open gates in perimeter fences
should not lead automatically to pitch invasions.   I hope this is
  e case.   Hope that fans will exert some influence on their more
irresponsible colleagues to see that it does not happen.

General on recommp.nHafi Ano

Accept that practically gome -recommendations may be difficult to
implement wholly in two short weeks, but exhort all concerned to
aim to achieve all that is recommended.
