                                                   Annex to
                                                   Press Release



               THE FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY


The Football Licensing Authority (FLA) is an independent public
body set up by statute (Section 8 of the Football Spectators Act
1989) in response to demands for stricter safety controls at
football matches.    It will license grounds used by football
league and international teams and thereby also implement the
government's requirements for all-seated stadia.    The FLA will
review the discharge by local authorities of relevant functions
under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.

The Authority is tasked to ensure that standards ofsafety,   the
level of amenities for spectators (where relevantto crowd
behaviour and safety) and clubs' arrangements for preventing and
dealing with crowd disorder and offences are satisfactory.

Licences
Licences will be required for grounds to which spectators may be
admitted to watch designated football matches.          The Home
Secretary has made an order under Section 1 of the 1989 Act that
designated matches comprise those played by football league clubs
and international teams at football league grounds or other
sports grounds designated under The Safety of Sports Grounds Act
1975 .
Section 9 of the 1989 Act makes it an offence to admit spectators
to unlicensed premises.   It will be brought into force when the
Authority is ready to issue licences. Once in force, it will be
an offence to admit spectators to a designated match without a
licence or to contravene the terms and conditions of a licence.
The Authority will devise the licensing scheme and the terms and
conditions contained in a licence.
TheAct requires that in granting, amending, refusing or revoking
alicence the FLA shall have regard to:

      (a) whether equipment provided, procedures used and other
      arrangements enforced at the premises    are such as are
      reasonably required to prevent the commission or minimise
      the effects of offences at designated     football matches
 ✓    (section 10(12)(c) of the Act); and
      (b)   such other considerations as the Secretary of State
      determines from time to time and notifies the licensing
      authority (section 10(12)(d)).
b fc hi   ' 'a 1   1 -4 :   K ‘Jl-1   n u ilt   '.'h r   l   t   y u




    The FLA has powers under the Act to refuse to grant a licence,
    to vary the conditions of a licence or to revoke or suspend a
    licence. The Act provides opportunities for the licence holder
    to make representation against decisions by the licens g
    authority, but there is no specific avenue of appeal.

     Review of safety certification by local authorities

     Section 13 of the 1989 Act will, when brought into force, enable
     the Authority to keep under review the discharge by local
     authorities of their functions under the Safety of Sports Grounds
     Act 1975 in relation to sports grounds at which designated
     football matches are played.    Section 13(2) of the Act enables
     the licensing authority to require, by notice, a local authority
     to include in any safety certificates such terms and conditions
     as are specified in the notice. Before exercising these powers
     the licensing authority is required to consult the local
     authority, the Chief Officer of Police and either the fxre
     authority or the building authority as appropriate.




     ✓




                                                                       2
THE FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY



Members of Board



The Chairman, Mr Norman Jacobs, was appointed in July 1990- He
was formerly a solicitor with many interests in sport.    These
include being a member of the Sports Council, a steward of the
British Boxing Board of Control and a member of the MCC.


Six members were appointed in August 1990:
Mr Albert Brannon cbe FiFireE, formerly HM    Inspector of Fire
Services and before that Chief Officer of     the Cheshire Fire
Brigade.
Mr Keith Bridge m a IPFA CBIM, from localgovernment whose
appointments included Chief Executive, Humberside County Council,
member of the West Yorkshire Residuary Body, President of the
Chartered Institute    of Public Finance and Accountancy      and
Director (Corporate Finance) of UBS Phillips & Drew.

Mr Ron Broome OBE QPM, formerly Chief Constable of the Avon and
Somerset Constabulary.
Mr Trevor Brooking MBE, former West Ham and England footballer,
a member of the Sports Council and Chairman of the Eastern
Regional Sports Council.
 Mr Simon Inglis. journalist and author, includingstandard  works
    the football grounds of Great Britain and Europe and amember
 of the Football Stadia Advisory Design Council.

       Margaret Law BSc FlFireE MSFSE MSFPE, fire engineer,
 formerly Technical Director of Arup Research and Development and
 Chairman of the Society of Fire Safety Engineers.


 Following the appointment of a temporary chief executive, Gordon
 Dunkley, in September a new chief executive will take up post on
 1 March.   He is Mr John de Ouidt, on secondment from the Home
 Office where he latterly served in the Prison Service and who was
 formerly secretary to the Calcutt Committee on Privacy.
                               DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL HERITAGE


                                 SPORT AND RECREATION DIVISION
                                      SANCTUARY BUILDINGS
                                       GREAT SMITH STREET
                                         LONDON SW1P 3BT

                                         FAX NO:              071 925 6934

                                          URGENT FAX MESSAGE


TO:

ORGANISATION:             fforiE .7                    -       G'2  -




FAX NO:                        3 ^ q -


FROM:     / o rt      £ :L l i ^ Q fy & D

TEL:      3o&a ~ £3 s'?                                                    ROOM NO:

DATE:       / 2 S * f     2.                                               TIME: / o -

COPIES TO:         _____________




SUBJECT:            J fiiu a l    - P$

NO OF PAGES (INCLUDING THIS ONE) :                                      jj _

MESSAGE:




                   fa-C                  /% £   e tM a - c J jz J                 b   yti?
