                             From;. T   he   P   ri vat e   S   ecretary
                                                                                    ( 5 ^ 7 FE8 1991         jsoD O
                           C .C . (T )r P c JSfti                                       28fe8usiv-ulT
                                 fin*-                                              H   ome   O   ffic e

                                                                                   Q U E E N AN NE'S GA TE
                                  O 'U ' ^ G t J a A y O
                                                                                   L O N D O N SYV1H 9AT
                       t^ U /^ Ji. ftin iig
                                  /Vlr
                                                                           2Q February 1991




           A-cS'
v^.

  aboSt the HfomVi°ff letter of 14 February to the Home Secretary
  hooliganism      Affairs Committee Inquiry into policing football

  w S J n i - ' Sec1r4etary ^ m°st grateful for your interest in these
  h?E £ *                     xegrets that pressure on his diary prevents
  his being able to meet you at present.

          off. ^ als resP?nsible for policy on the policing of
  in nfp V fh n pleased to meet you and some of your colleagues
     the Football Supporters Association.    Perhaps you would
  a0SonveniInt0drte0 d d a r d S secretary on 071 273 3218 to arrange

  It would-be helpful if you could provide Mr Goddard with a list
 of
 ? those attending
                 9 fh" meeting.
                             WiSh You
                                   t0 diSGUSS
                                       may alsoand with
                                                 wish to ^send
                                                           e namJs
                                                               him
 which were     r®sp°nses to the Home Affairs Committee Report
 Secretary?     ^        enclosed with your letter to the Home




                                                                   PAUL PUGH
                                                                               \



 Craig Brewin Esq
 Chairman
 The Football Supporters Association
 32 Churston Gardens
 New Southgate
 London N11 2NL
50-2.JS
                                  fu                  u    ^



                                               is              A ,
                                                                   lift'
From:       J L Goddard                     cc        Mr   Pickering
            F8 Division                               Mr   Boys Smith
            Ext. 3314                               — Mr   flnlton
                                                      Mr   Hopley
            25 February 1991




Mr Pugh


HAC INQUIRY INTO POLICING FOOTBALL HOOLIGANISM: LETTER FROM
THE FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS ASSOCIATION

You asked for advice on the letter of 14 February to the Home
Secretary from Craig Brewin, Chairman of the Football
Supporters Association in which he requests a meeting to
discuss the HAC Report along with ’’other issues related to
public safety at football matches”.

2.   Representatives of the Football Supporters Association
and the National Federation of Football Supporters Clubs met
Lord Ferrers on 30 March 1990 and covered considerable ground.
We doubt there would be much advantage in offering a further
Ministerial meeting but the Home Secretary might like to
suggest that a meeting with officials would be appropriate.

3.      I attach a draft Private Secretary letter to this effect.




                                  I   L. GODDARD


                                 J L GODDARD
51-2.JS


DRAFT
PS HOME SECRETARY TO SEND TO CRAIG BREWIN ESQ

Chairman
The Football Supporters Association




Thank you for your letter of 14 February to the Home Secretary
about the Home Affairs Committee Inquiry into policing
football hooliganism.

The Home Secretary is most grateful for your interest in these
important matters but regrets that pressure on his diary
prevents his being able to meet you at present.

However, officials responsible for policy on the policing of
football would be pleased to meet you and some of your
colleagues in the Football Supporters Association. Perhaps
you would contact Mr John Goddard's secretary on 071 273 3218
to arrange a convenient date.

It would be helpful if you could provide Mr Goddard with a
list of specific topics you would wish to discuss and with the
names of those attending the meeting. You may also wish to
send him a copy of your responses to the Home Affairs
Committee Report which were not, in fact, enclosed with your
letter to the Home Secretary.
