                                                           'O ^ A V >

                              THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED
                                                  Chief Executive: A. Sandford

          City House, Maid Marian Way, Nottingham, NG1 6BH. Telephone 0602 508720. Facsimile 0602 508621

                       Following an order of Mr. Justice Ferris on 20th August 1991
Mr. Arthur Sandford and Mr. Ian Watt were appointed Joint Receivers and Managers of The Football League.

    AS/1201                                                                                          16th September 1991


    Mr. J. Vaughan
    The Department of Education & Science
    Elizabeth House
    York Road
    London
    SE1 7PH




    Dear jJohn,

    Many thanks for your letter of the 29th August.   I am grateful
    to you for taking the trouble to set the position out so fully.

    I am sure that you will include the necessary provisions in
    general legislation as soon as the opportunity presents itself
    - though I know the problems on that score. We will therefore,
    in the interim, see if we can interest one or more M P 1s to
    introduce Private Members Bills.

    Yours sincerely,


                       GLM s*\£L.‘V

    ARTHUR^ANDFORD

r   Joint Receiver & Manager




                          R egistered Office: Lytham St. Annes, Lancs., FY8 1JG   R egistered in England 80612
                    THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION & SCIENCE
                    ELIZABETH HOUSE YORK ROAD LONDON SEI7PH
                SWITCHBOARD 071-934 9000 FAX 071-934 9082 GTN No. 3914




Arthur Sandford
Chief Executive                                                       August 1991
The Football League Limited                                       '
City House
Maid Marian Way
Nottingham
NG1 5BH
                                                                                    \




At the meeting with the Minister on 19 June to discuss the Premier
League you also raised the questions of the latest position on the
proposed ticket touting offence for football and the renewal of
exemption orders for the sale of alcohol at football grounds, we have
since taken both of these matters up with the Home Office.

On ticket touting it was not possible to include such an offence in
Sir John Wheeler's Private Members Bill because the House authorities
ruled that this was not permissible given the scope of that Bill. It
has also been decided not to introduce a Criminal Law Bill in the next
session of Parliament. However the Government remains committed to
introducing legislation as soon as Parliamentary time permits this to
be done.

Regarding exemption orders for alcohol sales the Home Office have
recognised the force of our representations about the inconvenience
caused to clubs by having to go back to the magistrates courts every
five months to seek renewal of these orders. I understand that in
practice renewals are granted fairly readily by the courts which
suggests that there might not be too strong a case against extending
the period to twelve months. However legislation to amend section 4(1)
of the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol Etc) Act would be necessary
to effect such a change and, as with ticket touting, we run up against
the problem of a suitable legislative vehicle and the availability of
Parliamentary time.

In these circumstances I can only point out that it is always open of
course to the Football League to try to jidentify an MP or MPs who
would be willing to introduce Private Members Bills on these issues.




   .UGHAN
