V*
                                                                                 REF. No.
                   DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION A ND SCIENCE



                       MINISTER’S CASE
                                To be given priority over all
                         cases other than Parliamentary Questions.


     Corr e s p o n d n t                  MRS J WOODMAN
     Organ isat ion                        CONSTITUENTS < TE )< ENFIELD NORTH)


     P a r ty                 C o n s t ituent/Person Concerned          MRS J WOODMAN

     D escription             I SPORT AND RECREATION
     of Subj ect              I
     Rema rks                 I

                               I Latest Date for      1                                                                                                           I
     Reply for RA             I Draft Reply:          I Ref No:                                                                         J .0 7 5                  I
                               I   18/83/92           I

     R eferred to:           MISS A J STEWART
                  R o o m : 3.61        @4/03/92                     I CO No           Ext 6285
         B i..i11 d 1 n g : SB                                       I


                                                                               Date              N otes
                Referred to            Date              Referred to
                                                                                                 1. If you do not expect to put
                                                                                                 forward a full reply by the date
                                                                                                 given above, please complete the
                                                                                                 interim slip enclosed and return it
                                                                                                 to the Secretariat urgently.
                                     r/3
                                                                                                 2. . If the subject o f the letter is
                                                                                                 not your concern, please pass the
                                                                                                 file immediately to the officer
                                    CO.                                                          responsible,    and     notify    the
                                                                                                 Secretariat.

                                                                                                 3. If you wish to see these
                                                                                                 papers after registration, please
                                                                                                 enter your name below.




 These papers must not be registered without instructions from Secretariat (Correspondence Section).

                                                                                  H M S O D d D 0 2 3 5 0 0 7 9 4 4 2 / 9 2 C21 G P 2 2 6 5 C C N 1 3 4 1 2 ( 6 7 6 6 '
SV2.S


 ^ 2 A ( 0 ^   .
    / <i^~a                                ^ lL ^ J U sA




                                                           "S
tl-w/



Mi      tfa ** £ L   (y it-< -z X L




  /A
         s/\£v c_                     t& s z 0!

          6'S -?2-
JL10/25
                THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION & SCIENCE
   SANCTUARY BUILDINGS GREAT SMITH STREET WESTMINSTER LON DO N SW IP 3BT
         SWITCHBOARD 071-925 5000 CENTRAL FAX 071-925 6000 GTN 3060




Tim Eggar Esq MP                                                   Direct Line
House of Commons                                                    071-925
LONDON
SW1A 0AA                                                           RA/4021/1075

                                                                       March 1992




Thank you for your letter of 28 February, addressed to
Robert Atkins, enclosing one from               about
Safety and Football Matches.

This is, however, a matter for the Home office and I am
transferring your correspondence to them for a reply to you
d ire c t*                                       i b   o


                                                                           a/h   .




                                                  MICHAEL BELTRAMI
                                                  Ministerial Correspondence
                                                  Section
                     From: TIM EGGAR




                     H OU SE OF C O M M O N S
                         L O N D O N SW1A OAA
                     Private Secretary 071 - 219 - 3544
                     Constituency Office 081 - 363 - 0653
                     Messages 071 - 219 - 3000




28th February 1992


R. Atkins, Esq., M.P.
Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State,
Department of Education and Science,
Sanctuary Buildings,
Great Smith Street,
London SWlP 3BT




I enclose a letter that I have iust received from my
constituent
would be grateful for a response that I can pass on to tier.




Enel.
• •


      Tim Eggar, M.P.
      c/o House of Commons,
      Westminster,
      SW1
                                              20th February 1992


      Dear Mr. Eggar,
      As you will see I live in your constituency and would
      confirm that I have always supported the Conservative Party
      and whilst residing in Enfield your goodself.

      I am also a season ticket holder at Tottenham Hotspur and
      am very worried that if all the requirements of the Taylor
      Report   are implemented throughout the English League
      Football grounds football itself will never, ever be the
      same again.

      Since the horrendous events at Hillsborough highlighted the
      problems brought about by "caging" fans, the safety,
      protection and control of those attending football matches
      has become of paramount importance to the relevant agencies
      involved   in ensuring trouble-free and      safe football
      matches.   Gone are the restricting cages that were a
      contributory factor to the disaster at Hillsborough, and
      gone too   is the obligatory pitch invasion, whichof course
      was part   of the reason for installing cages in the first
      place.   Policing and stewardship is much tighter, racist
      and obscene chanting are actively discouraged.

      I have only missed three or four 'away' games this season,
      and obviously attend all home games. I've visited Norwich,
      Everton,   Leeds,   Sheffield   Wednesday, Notts   Forest,
      Highbury, Selhurst Park, and many more grounds, and whilst
      in the football ground not once felt that my safety was in
      jeopardy, or threatened in any way.

      Football is traditionally a working man's game - and
      is supported most enthusiastically and vociforously by
      those who   stand, I would dispute with Lord Justice Taylor
      that vocal support is the same whether fans stand   or sit,
      this is not my experience at all.         (Point 70 of the
      Report).
      If  all seater stadia are introduced to the League Football
      clubs we will lose:

      a)   The standing capacity, the cameraderie     and   energy
           transmitted by these fans.

      b)   Revenue by lessening capacity, the consequence would
           be higher entrance fees for fans, and less likelihood
           of 'away' fans gaining entrance to the match ground.
Mr. T. Eggar,                           20th February 1992




It would be extremely sad to see the traditional game of
football   'gentrified' with executive boxes, televised or
video screenings, you need to be at the ground - cheering
your team, showing encouragement, or dissatisfaction, and
all seater stadia will certainly curtail this, and lead to
attendance by those that can afford the seat; as has been
shown by the problems Arsenal and West Ham are facing over
their proposed Bond Schemes, which would seem to be one of
the only ways of raising revenue to pay for the all seater
legislation, and it is the fans who will have to pay. It
will change the face of football completely and somehow
 'plastify' it. At Ibrox Park you may be able to sit for £4
    £6 (Point 72) but I doubt you could anywhere else within
the first and second division now, let alone if the
legislation is finally implemented.

So many things today are taken over by big business,
'yuppified'  and I appreciate that football, with the
executive box, corporate hospitality, merchandising, share
options and debenture offers in some way has been taken
over, but football is still one facet of working class
culture that can be enjoyed by most of us at a price we can
afford.

I would ask you please take time to have a look at this
problem before we go too far down the road to all seater
stadia, our Clubs ARE safe, they have a high degree of
policing and stewardship, and the policing is strong and
forthright - the first sign of trouble, physical or verbal
abuse, and the culprit is ejected from the ground, and yes
that's how it should b e . Apart from that who wants to pay
£10 or £15 for a ticket to then be removed half way into
the game!

In writing this I hold Spurs in mind at all times and the
comment of a colleague shown on one of the newspaper
clippings enclosed - "our days are numbered".   I paid £360
for the privilege of holding a Spurs season ticket.   In an
all seater stadium with a reduced capacity of approximately
25,866 would I be able to afford a season? I think not.

I would be grateful to receive your comments and advice, I
note that as a policy the Conservative Party wish to back
the Taylor Report 100%, and many of the measures recommeded
by Lord Justice Taylor have been implementedto the benefit
of the game, but I truly don't see how all seater stadia
will make local grounds any safer, and I would like to
think the Party I support could have enough vision to look
again and act positively      to preserve a    truly British
tradition.

                                        3/continued.
Mr. T. Eggar,                            20th February 1992




It is interesting that at Coventry City's ground, from all
seater they have reverted to accommodation for standing
areas within the ground (Point 74). The policing and
stewarding policy is extremely efficient and vigourously
enforced.
The F.A. and Football Supporters' organisations are also in
favour of retaining standing areas (Point 66).

Who   bears the cost      of alterations with     restricted
admission, and where    will the funding come from?      The
Football Trust yields   approximately 21% of turnover from
the three major Pools   Companies (statistics as at the time
Lord Justice Taylor's   Report was prepared) per year = £9M,
the proposed cost of    converting say Millwall's ground is
projected at £15M?

I appreciate that National stadia, such as Wembley, would
of necessity be all seater due to the wide variety of
events they stage, and that the European bias is toward
seating,  (various points under the  'Europe' heading page
14 of the Report), and appreciate that at a local level,
Clubs may well have to close their remaining standing
areas, when or if, they play European teams on the home
ground.
Thank you for taking the time to read this letter. As you
will understand I do feel very strongly that to lose the
traditional standing fan would be a disaster to the game,
and to put it out of reach of the working person or family
would be a tragedy, and I look forward to your advice as to
how I can progress this matter further.

Yours sincerely,




enclosure:
                                                                                REF. No.
               DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION A N D SCIE'NCE



                  MINISTER’S CASE
                           To be given priority over all
                    eases other than Parliamentary Questions.




          Referred to                                                                         N otes
                                    Date              Referred to             Date
                                                                                              1. If you do not expect to put
                                                                                              forward a full reply by the date
                                                                                              given above, please com plete the
                                                                                              interim slip enclosed and return it
                                                                                              to the Secretariat urgently.

                                                                                              2. If the subject o f the letter is
                                                                                              not your concern, please pass the
                                                                                              file, im m ediately to the officer
                                                                                              responsible,     and   notify   the
                                                                                              Secretariat.

                                                                                              3. If you w ish to see these
                                                                                              papers after registration, please
                                                                                              enter your name below.




                    ■   -




These papers must not be registered without instructions from Secretariat (Correspondence Section).

                                                                                 H MSO D d D 0 2 35Q 0 794 4 2 /9 2 C21 G P 226 5 C C N 1 3 4 1 2 (6 766)
