        s.1 .16/allseatl.peb
                                                        HOME OFFICE
                                                Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9 AT
                                                        Direct linexfl 1-273 3 3 2 2
                                                      Switchboard 071-273 3000


Our reference:
v                                                    16 January 1991
Your reference:
    John Vaughan Esq
    Department of Education and Science
    Sport and Recreation Division
    Room 1/67                                                                          (M glm A
    Elizabeth House
    York Road
    LONDON    SE1 7PH




           ^XsV/VA   j




    ACCOMMODATION ^LL *        STRATEGY   FOR   IMPLEMENTING        ALL     SEATED

                y°^ °n 19 December providing an initial response to
                 2   14 December with which you enclosed a note from
    the All Party Football Group on progress towards all seated
    accommodation. On the same day I received, and I enclose a copy
      ' a PaPer prepared for discussion by the Football Licensing
    Authority which, if it is agreed, will form the basis of a press
                   9 out.t5® Authority's own views on the move towards
                accommodation.    We have only minor comments on the
    note which I have conveyed to Gordon Dunkley by letter, a copy
    of which is enclosed.

    1        on reflection that there is little that I would wish to
          H.
           m y let.ter of 19 December.   I think it would be sensible
    f? a ^ SC^1SSJLO-
                    .
                    n fn, W to talce this forward and I wonder whether
    pSt^rUrf«             ^°.talk about this with Gordon Dunkley and
          Lee lrV the first instance. We have a meeting arranged for
    5 February when we are due to meet Arthur Sandford. That meeting
    is currently scheduled to start at llam, but we could perhaps
    convene a separate meeting, without the Football League, to start
    at, say, 10.15am.

      _ thJ-s appeals to you, perhaps we could have a word on the
    telephone and I will make the appropriate arrangements.

                                                    Yours sincerely



                                                      i<AA ta ' P ' W u
                                                    P E BOLTON
                                                    (Fire and Emergency
                                                    Planning Department)
    Encs
hs.1.16/allseat.peb

                                                          3322




                                            16 January 1991




Mr G E Dunkley
Chief Executive
Football Licensing Authority
Room 1022
50 Queen Anne's Gate
LONDON    SW1H 9AT




ALL SEATED FOOTBALL STADIA
Thank you for your letter of 19 December.    I am sorry that I have
not replied before.
I can see no objection in principle to the paper which was
enclosed with your letter and I agree that it is very desirable
that not only the Football Licensing Authority but also the
Football Trust and the Government should be seen to be giving a
clear lead to the Football League clubs on the move towards all
seated accommodation.
I have two observations of relatively minor detail.    The first
refers to the sentence which begins in the first line of the
second page of the paper and refers to the difficulty of
attempting to give any indication that the Authority might
approach the Home Office for some amelioration of the deadline
in particular cases. My point here is simply that I think that
in practice it will never be necessary for the Authority to make
an unsolicited "approach" to the Home Office because the normal
position will be that the Home Office will consult the Authority
on the application of the Taylor recommendations in particular
cases. My second point is that in many cases it will be possible
for a club to meet the Taylor interim recommendations by either
reducing the density of its standing accommodation or by taking
particular standing areas out of commission.      Taylor himself
makes the point that there are very few clubs which _enjoy
capacity crowds on more than a few occasions.      The option of
reducing standing density does not apply of course at the end of
the day, but it does not follow that it is necessary for all
clubs to provide seats in all parts of their grounds.

You may feel that it will be helpful to reflect these two points,
firstly in the sentence to which I have referred by amending it
to something on the following lines:
     "But the Authority recognises also the difficulty of
     attempting to give any indication that it might be prepared
     to advise the Home Office either that the deadline in
     particular cases should be extended or that a greater
     proportion of standing accommodation should be retained,
     because this might be seen by clubs as a sign that they need
     not comply when they might well be able to do so."

Secondly, in order not to give the impression that third and
fourth division clubs need do nothing at present, can I suggest
that you add a further sentence after paragraph 4 which says, "In
reaching this conclusion the Authority is conscious that for-
several years at least, these clubs will be able to reduce
standing accommodation without in practice reducing the capacity
of the ground to accommodate the numbers of spectators^, who
normally attend."
I fully recognise of course that the proposed paper and press
release are both matters entirely within the discretion of the
Authority.
My colleagues in the Department of Education and Science feel
that it would be helpful, and we agree, that the Government, the
Trust and the Authority should be seen to agree on the principles
involved in the move towards all seated accommodation and this
might be something which we should seek to discuss round the
table. I will write to you again about this.
                                          Yours sincerely




                                          P E BOLTON
                                          (Fire and Emergency
                                          Planning Department)
                                                      : ^           lv£Cf>
                                                   |o\o^

  THE FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY

    Room 1022
    50 Queen Anne’s Gate
    London
    SW1H9AT

     T elep h o n e:071-273-   2 322                19 December 1990




ALL-SEATED STADIA
As vou know, the Authority has been giving urgent consideration
to its views and position on the issue of           stadia^^t
its meeting yesterday the Board approved the attached statement
as a basis for consultation with the Home Office.
The statement is I think self-explanatory in content. It is not
SS iSSSSr-s
su b ie c t
                         intention to give it wider circuiat.on b u t ,
                 to any comments which you may like to of
s u b s t a n c e will be set out in a Press Release.   The Authority
wishes to issue the Release as soon as possible and in a n y event
      t h e f i r s t two weeks of 1991.  It is likely however that a
press conference may be deferred for a while, perhaps until we
have resolved the location of the Authority s headquarters
appointed the Inspectorate.
I should be grateful if you would let me know as quickly as
Dossible if the Home Office sees any difficulty in what is
proposed.   Norman Jacobs and myself are of course ready  o
discuss if that would be helpful.




                                              G E DUNKLEY
                                              Chief Executive.




 Mr P Bolton
 G2 Division
 Home Office
ALL-SEATED STADIA - THE VIEW OF THE FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY


1 . Under the provisions of the Football Spectators Act 1989, the
Football Licensing Authority has a role to advise and assist
Government in the detailed implementation of its policy in
respect of the seating of spectators in designated football
grounds. In undertaking this role, the Authority has to consult
the relevant local authority before making a recommendation on
seating to the Home Secretary.      In view of expectations and
apprehension being expressed about the Authority s position on
the movement towards all-seated stadia, the Authority considers
it essential that it should make known its views on this issue
as soon as possible. As the lead in this matter rests with the
Home Office, the purpose of this note is to set out the
Authority's views on seating and to suggest an early meeting with
the Home Office if that Department has any difficulty with these
views
2. Lord Justice Taylor recommended that spectators at football
matches played on designated grounds should be admitted only to
seated accommodation. This conclusion was based on a view that
seating does more than any other objective or measure to achieve
safety and cure problems of hooliganism and crowd control. The
Authority has considered the principle behind this recommendation
and endeavoured to assess the arguments that have subsequently
been put both for and against.     The Authority s conclusion is
that on overall grounds of safety, discouragement of hooliganism
and the comfort and well-being of spectators, all-seated grounds
are to be preferred to stadia that include standing terraces.
The Authority has noted the Government's acceptance of the Taylor
recommendation that the stadia of First and Second Division clubs
 should become all-seated by August 1994, followed by those of
Third and Fourth Division sides by August 1999. The Authority
 accepts this programme and will contribute, within its powers and
 ability, to its achievement.
 3. In reaching these conclusions, the Authority intends to make
 it clear to all those interested and concerned, that it supports
 both the principle of all-seated stadia and its application to
 grounds on which designated matches are played within the
 timetable set by the Government. The Authority makes two further
 points.
 4.  The first is that in looking at the implementation of the
 all-seated principle, the Authority has not looked specifically
 at the case of clubs in the Third and Fourth Divisions.   There
 is time for a longer and deeper examination of the problems of
 these clubs and the Authority will address these when it has
 gained more experience of the practical implementation of the
 policy at grounds of the First and Second Division clubs.

 5   The second point is that the Authority is concerned about the
 potential plight of individual clubs for whom rigid adherence to
 the programme might cause an excessive degree of hardship or
 /




difficulty. But the Authority recognises also the difficulty of
attempting to give any indication that it might approach the Home
O f fice for soml amelioration of the deadline in Particular cases
because this might be seen by other clubs as a sign that they
need not comply even though they might be able to ^o          .
Authority has had real difficulty in resolving this dilemma.The
T i m e s correspondent will not be the only one to construe a wrong
emphasis and balance from these inter-related views if not the
wrong conclusion altogether.
     There are two sets of circumstances which exemplify the
          O n e is a club which is totally cornrnitted to an all-
p r o b l e m 6

seated stadium and has cast-iron arrangements to_convierit it
ground but cannot quite meet the deadline. The^o er is
       h_s a cast-iron arrangement to relocate, but a ii^yi
outsid^ th?     deadline, and for whloh expenditure on putting
seating into the existing ground meanwhile
not financially impossible given the cost of relocation.
may   be other categories too.
 7The Authority would    not wish to see such clubs forced out of
 footba 11 by over-rigid application of the formula. It believes
 aenuine cases of extreme hardship should be comparatively
 The Authority believes from its contact with Government m ^ * ® t e r s
 and officials, that this overall view of the likely situation
 not dissimilar from that of the Government.
 8    The practical criteria which the Authority is developing in
 order to assess the genuineness and degree of certainty n sue
 situations is somewhat akin to the rigorous requirements expected
 r,f a landlord seeking through the courts to secure an order to
 evict a tenant from business premises. The club would have to
 have a total plan of programme with every aspect firmed up and
 be able t o demonstrate that it had the intention, means finance
 resources permissions, consents and approvals, support from t e
          "th!r” “   police etc and, where appropriate, formal
  contracts and agreements.
     9     The way the Authority proposes to give effect to this
     strategy is to secure as much information as possible of w a
     clubs hive done and are doing and plan to do to implement the
     Tavlor recommendations (in general and on seating in particular),
     tlYf o h Z uTlhts exercise by visits from its inspectors as soon
         fhpv are ready and to maintain close scrutiny of how each
     club's programme is progressing.    It will then               ^
     those First and Second Division clubs which do not
     Authority that they a « going ^ ^ “ v ^ ^ t i ^ t a W e . ^ ^

     difficulties* If the Authority concludes that a club cannot meet
     the
     the deadline
         s a l i n e because
                     1aec*   of difficulties
                                     ^ wiil outside  thecircumstances
                                             bring the   club s power to
                                                                      to
     the°attention of the Department to discuss a possible extension
     o f the time limit solely for that club. It does not expect that
     many clubs will get into this last stage.
     10. The Authority will also emphasise that where a club will not
                                                                           2
meet the deadline and the Authority is not satisfied that the       .,
circumstances warrant exceptional consideration, it will not        /
hesitate to refuse a licence.
11 . The Authority wishes to make its views known to all
concerned.  The message is not a simple one to convey and the
Authority sees a need to issue a press release and hold a press
conference to deal with points of clarification.    Ideally, the
Authority would wish to confine its statement to saying that it
fully supported LJ Taylor's recommendations on all-seated stadia    .
both as to principle and as to the time by which the various
Divisions should have achieved all-seated stadia, adding that it
proposed to keep a very close watch over the programme and would
be assessing the circumstances at each individual ground.
Realistically, however, the Authority will not get away with such
a limited statement and one way or another we shall be pressed
to say exactly what we mean.    In the absence of clarification
from the Authority, others will seek to clarify our position for
us.   It is accordingly considered that the views expressed in
this note, including those in paragraphs 6 to 9        should in
substance be reflected in the press release.

12. The Chairman and Chief Executive would be very willing to
discuss this with the Home Office, but it needs to be soon.



FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY
19 December 1990




                                                                3
