                                                        fiA<

                                            Miss Nicholson
                                            Ms Harrison
From:   A H Turney (2798)                   Ms Rex
        Fire and Emergency                  Mr Yates
        Planning Department                 Mr Chilcot
                                            Mr Moriarty
        1 August 1989                       Mr Boys Smith
                                            HMCIC
                                            HMCIFS
                                            Mr Mower
                                            Mr Bolton
                                            Mr Goddard
                                            Mr Gilbert
                                            Mr Mould
                                            Mr Lidington

                                             all without report

Miss Bannister




HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY
Annexed to this note, for the information of the Home Secretary,
is the final version of Lord Justice Taylor's interim report.
Copies are being sent to colleagues attending tomorrow's
Ministerial meeting. The following paragraphs, based on a late
draft to which officials were given access, describe briefly the
contents of the report and comment on its recommendations and
their implications.

2. This submission proposes arrangements for handling the
report, including publication on Friday, and its distribution;
for informing in advance those who are subject to adverse
criticism in the report and for drawing the report's
recommendations to local authorities and others by means of a
circular. Subject to the Home Secrtary's views, these
arrangements can be confirmed at the Ministerial meeting
tomorrow, which can also consider the statement the Home
Secretary makes on publication and which can then be circulated
to the Prime minister and colleagues on H Committee. The line to
be taken is suggested below and a draft of the statement will be
available tomorrow afternoon after an inter-departmental meeting
at official level.

The contents of the report

3.   It must be said at the outset that the South Yorkshire
Police do not come well out of the inquiry. Nevertheless the
report is also critical of the physical arrangements for safety
at the Hillsborough ground. A safety certificate was in
existence but it was out of date. At the Leppings Lane end,
changes had been made to the arrangements of "pens" and of crush
                  CONFIDENTIAL



barriers so that the terraces did not comply with the
recommendations of the Home Office "Green Guide" and were not
capable of accommodating the numbers of people specified in the
safety certificate. The numbers of turnstiles were inadequate in
relation to the numbers of spectators likely to be present and
there were no satisfactory arrangements for controlling the
numbers of spectators in particular pens on the Leppings Lane
terrace.
4.   The report describes in detail the events on 15 April
including the confusing ticket system, and the lack of adequate
arrangements to direct spectators to particular areas on the
Leppings Lane terrace. It reveals that two of the pens were
overcrowded before the match began. The report describes the
late arrival of large numbers of Liverpool fans and the
decision to relieve the crush outside the ground by opening gates
which permitted fans, because of the absence of arrangements to
divert them elsewhere, to join the already overcrowded pens
behind the goal.
5.   The report directs criticism at the Sheffield Wednesday
Football Club, including its technical adviser, for the
inadequate arrangements for crowd safety and control. It also
criticises the Sheffield City Council for the shortcomings in
their enforcement of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975. But
the most severe criticism in the report is undoubtedly directed
at the South Yorkshire Police. Paragraph 276 of the report says
that the main reason for the disaster was the failure of police
control. The report is critical of the operational orders for
the match, of the failure to take account of an earlier crushing
incident on the terraces in 1981, and it is critical of the
actions of particular Senior Officers including especially Chief
Superintendent Duckenfield who was the match commander. The
report criticises the evidence of Senior Officers who are
described as defensive and evasive witnesses. Paragraph 283 of
the report says that it is a matter of regret that at the hearing
and in their submissions the South Yorkshire Police were not
prepared to concede that they were in any respect at fault in
what occurred. It will be for the Chief Constable, perhaps the
DPP and the PCA as well, to act on the conduct of individual
officers and South Yorkshire Police collectively. There is the
possibility of disciplinary and civil action and prosection
cannot be altogether excluded. Publicly the Home Secretary may
wish to take the line that he will look initially to the Chief
Constable for a report on the action he proposed to take.
The report*s recommendations

6.   The interim recommendations of the report are contained in
Chapter 24.

7.   The report contains some 43 recommendations, many of which
(marked with an asterisk) the Judge recommends should be carried
                   CONFIDENTIAL



out before the 1989/90 season starts. They include revised
arrangements for calculating and enforcing the maximum number of
spectators to be admitted to each self-contained pen or area.
There is a call for a written agreement between the club and the
police setting out their respective responsibilities for crowd
safety and control at football matches.  (There have been in the
past and there were on this occasion disputes between the police
and the club on the extent to which the police were performing
their normal police duties of securing and preserving law and
order amongst a crowd or providing "special police services".)
There are recommendations relating to fences and crush barriers,
for the review of safety certificates, on specific duties of each
football club and on a number of other issues.

8.   The recommendations do not, in the main, call for any
immediate Government action other than to commend them to the
local authorities, the clubs and the police. There are one or
two points of possible difficulty (for example to specify the
number of ambulances to be in attendance as a requirement of the
safety certificate may be ultra vires). But these are interim
recommendations which may be subject to amendment when the final
report is received at the turn of the year.
Resource implications

9.   There are undoubtedly resource implications for both the
police and for football clubs. We have some concern at the
resource implications for the police, especially over increased
levels of police at matches. We will have to see what the
response is from the police once they have considered all the
recommendations further. Not only may greater costs have to pass
on to clubs but if significant new demands are made on the police
they might have to be more selective in the service they provide
at grounds, eg leaving clubs to strengthen their stewarding
arrangements so as not to divert them from their general policing
responsibilities.   Resource implications for clubs include not
only the additional cost of police manpower but also loss of
receipts arising from changes in recommended safety standards
which could result in a reduction in capacity in some parts of
grounds.

Handling of the report

10. The report has to be presented to Parliament and it is
proposed that it should be laid at 11.00 am on Friday August 4th.
Lord Justice Taylor proposes to hold a press conference at
11.00 am.

11. Embargoed copies of the report will be available(for the
press from 9.00 am on Friday.

12. Advance copies of the report need to be made available to
those who are particularly affected by the report and its




                  CONFIDENTIAt
                  CONFIDENTIAL



conclusions. It is proposed that a copy of the text should be
made available to the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, Mr
Peter Wright, who will be visiting the Home Office on the
afternoon of Thursday 3 August and that he should be able to take
back with him to South Yorkshire extracts of those parts of the
report which are critical of particular officers of the South
Yorkshire force. We also propose to make special arrangements to
get to Sheffield City Council and Sheffield Wednesday Football
Club similar extracts on Thursday evening.

13. It is proposed that arrangements be made for embargoed
copies of the report to be made available to other interested
parties, in particular those who were represented at the
tribunal, at 9.00 am on Friday.                   c
Ministers* response to the report

14. In consultation with PRB, we propose that the Home
Secretary's response to the report should:

     (i) welcome unreservedly the broad thrust of the report
     (rather than unreservedly welcoming the report per se or all
     recommendations made by it);

     (ii) announce the issue of the circular with strong
     encouragement for all the parties concerned to get on with
     the task of implementing its advice where relevant;

     (iii) suggest that the interim report paves the way for
     more detailed consideration of some of the problems which
     have so far been identified by the inquiry so as to permit a
     more considered response after, for example, consultation
     with various organisations and bodies concerned.
On a point of detail with regard to Mr Storr's minute of 31 July
to Mr F Smith (expressing the Home Secretary's wish for the
National Football Intelligence Unit to be set up at the earliest
possible date) the post of Superintendent to head the unit was
advertised on 28 July with a closing date for applications of 18
August. Interviews had been arranged, including ACPO
representation, for 7 September but we will look again urgently
at bringing that forward. We can then - especially given the
Home Secretary's express wish - do all we can to have the officer
in post very rapidly thereafter. The Home Secretary may wish to
comment on the National Football Intelligence Unit in his
response to the report, pointing out that it is the unit
envisaged in paragraph 218 of the Report and should help to
strengthen the system for advising match commanders of the
possibility of trouble at forthcoming matches.

15. We suggest that for best effect the Home Secretary's
response to the report might be made by way of a statement which
would be issued as a Home Office news release following Lord
                        CONFIDENTIAL



Justice Taylor's proposed news conference on Friday morning. The
Home Secretary could then, if he wished, make himself available
for interview on request for the broadcast media. If there is
considerable demand for radio and television interviews with the
Home Secretary, PRB would seek to rationalise and organise the
interviews so as to obtain significant coverage of the Home
Secretary's main points, but with a minimum of inconvenience to
him.

Wider circulation

16. Attached is a first draft of a Home Office circular which
we propose to issue on Friday to local authorities, police
authorities, fire authorities, ambulance authorities, football
league clubs and other representative bodies, with; in each case,
one copy of the report;   for practical reasons it is unlikely
that it will arrive in many places before the following Monday.
Stinrniayy

17. The Home Secretary is invited to note the contents and
recommendations of the Hillsborough interim report, and to agree:
      a.     the proposed arrangements for its handling and
             distribution;
      b.     the line of his press statement;   and

      c.     the proposed circular to local authorities and others,

subject to final agreement at the Ministerial meeting tomorrow.




                                           A H TURNEY
