                DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL HERITAGE
                    Sport an d R ecreation Division
        Sanctuary Buildings Great Smith Street Westminster London SW1P 3BT
               Switchboard 071 925 5000 Fax 071 925 6934 GTN 3060



D A Peters Esq                                               Direct Line
Fire and Emergency Planning                                  071-925 6371
 Department
The Home Office                                              Direct Fax
Queen Anne's Gate                                            071-925 6934
London
SW1H 9AT
                                                             20 May 1992




          ALL-SEATING REVIEW AT FOOTBALL LEAGUE GROUNDS

In connection with the above I attach a copy of a paper produced
by John de Quidt of the FLA for our Secretary of State in
connection with the above review. As you know the Secretary of
State requested such a paper from the FLA and has also asked for
a similar paper from the All-Party Football Committee. I attach a
copy of a preliminary paper produced by that Committee which was
given to the Secretary of State last week. I set out below my
immediate thoughts on the FLA paper and as you will see I have a
number of questions which I would be grateful if you could ask
David Webb to address. You may well have some further thoughts
yourself on the paper. In addition it would be most helpful if
David and Steve could give some thought to what further
information or advice we might need from the FLA to address the
various issues set out in my submission of 15 May which I copied
to you. The Secretary of State has now cleared these issues and
the draft announcement.

On the cost points put forward in the paper it seems to me that
the case for a review is not that football does not have the
money to implement all-seating but rather for clubs with small
gates the money might be better spent on other safety measures,
since standing is not necessarily unsafe.

I agree entirely with what John de Quidt says in paragraph 10
about safety improvements.

On safe terraces, it seems to me that there is an important
distinction, which is in danger of being blurred in the paper,
between a desirable quality of terracing and what is the minimum
necessary to ensure that the terracing is safe. Surely the FLA's
responsibility at present is solely with the latter and either
the Green Guide provides adequate guidance on this or it does
not? Once the FLA goes down the path of quality considerations
then it is in the area of amenity rather than safety. The
question of extending the FLA's remit in this way is an important
point of principle on which a policy decision needs to be taken
by our Secretary of State. I would also be grateful for advice on
the point that John makes about safety certificates not actually
being a mechanism by which safety improvements cannot be insisted
upon for terracing?

On licensing a major issue as you know for the review is whether
we should abandon the licensing system and amend the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act 1975 as appropriate, or amend the Football
Spectators Act 1989 to ensure a more sensible licensing regime.
Any work which David can put in hand on this would be
appreciated.

On the dividing line, the paper also addresses another key issue
of whether the all-seating requirement should be dropped on a
divisional basis or in relation to ground capacity. I suggest
that David should begin marshalling the arguments for and against
both of these options.

On deadlines.     I   broadly   agree   with   what   John   suggests   in
paragraph 29.

Yours sincerely




A R BADEN
Sport and Recreation Division




                                                                        2
