                                OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR                                   MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                                             WATERY STREET
                                        SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                                             SHEFFIELD
                                             (West District)
                                                                                             S3 7ET
   STEFAN L. POPPER, U..B., B.MED.Sci., B.M., B.S., M.R.C.G.P.
                                                 CORONER


                            Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721




SLP/JT.


                                                          HGs-3
                                                      10 QUE&*
The Right Hon. Hr. Kenneth B                          e r, M -.f .|'1 a Y 19 9 i
Home Office,                                                 REG'S >
50 Queen A n n e ’s Gate,                                        COH«£i>                      # a®*'
                                                                 D iS T R 5 B U T J‘J f “.
London. S W 1 . H 9 A T .




Dear Sir,

I have recently concluded the Hillsborough Inquests.  I am of course aware
that Lord Justice Taylor has presented a report in two parts incorporating a
substantial number of recommendations, many of which I believe have already
been implemented or are in the process of being acted on.

Nevertheless at the conclusion of the inquests I indicated that there were a
number of matters which I was intending to raise with you.

For convenience I have dealt with these matters as schedules to this letter:

   1.       Schedule A deals with the issue of a National Licencing
            Authority for sports grounds.

   2.       Schedule B deals with the issue of police involvement within
            football stadia (and no doubt any other major venue).

   3.       Schedule C deals with the inter-relationship of inquests and
            Public Inquiries with some reference to other investigations which
            may follow a major disaster.

            Also attached as Appendices are:-                                                                       .

   4.     Photocopy of Page 11-14 of the closing session on 28.4.91 of th^’
                                                                          ’*
          Inquest hearings (Appendix A) .

   5.     A copy of a letter which I wrote to the Chief Fire 0 f f ic e rShie f.fie 1d
          drawing his attention to evacuation difficulties and ;i 9 ^ati^n of means
          of escape (Appendix B) .

If I can be of any further assistance in relation to any of these matters,
please let me know.
                    SCHEDULE   A         ls t   ^   lg g ;u




SLP/JT/HO/LICENCE




SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS - NATIONAL LICENCING AUTHORITY.




At the present time, the licencing of designated sports grounds rests
with the local authority.  It is my view that a better system would be
to have a national authority to deal with appraisal, licencing,
supervision, enforcement, training as well as various other activities,
rather than what is in fact the current practice of having local
authorities responsible for the licencing of sports grounds.

My primary reason for making this suggestion is that each local
authority by its very nature, has responsibility for only a limited
number of sports grounds.  It follows that however adequate and
competent, individuals within each local authority have of necessity
limited experience in this field.  In addition, the individual role in
relation to these matters can only form a small part of his total
duties.

Furthermore because of the large number of local authorities involved,
the level of competence will inevitably vary and the standards which may
be acceptable to one authority may not be accepted by another.
Differences in safety requirements throughout the country will therefore
tend to become apparent.

It seems to me that there are sufficient number of stadia within the
United Kingdom to justify the setting up of a national licencing
authority (hereafter referred to as the Authority) capable of
appraising, inspecting, licencing and enforcing the provisions relating
to the safety of sports grounds.  Such an authority could also perform
various other functions, some of which will be indicated later.

It should be possible to staff such an Authority with highly qualified
and capable individuals who would be able to build up a considerable
amount of expertise on this subject within a relatively short period of
time.

Such an Authority would be able:-


    a.   To apply safety standards and criteria as far as possible
         uniformly throughout the country, though of course individual
         variations for local circumstances might have to be allowed
         for.




BAGAAZ
*

                              -     2   -




        b.   To provide expert guidance to holders of safety certificates
              and others involved in the running of events.

        c.   To provide the proper training programme for parties involved
              in staging of events.

        d.   To ensure that knowledge, perhaps painfully acquired was not
             lost because of breakdown in communication or changes of
             staff.

        e.   To have sufficient authority to be able to effectively enforce
             any breaches of safety certificates.

        f.   Toenable the dissemination and sharing of information relating
              to safety aspects which may have been gleaned in one field
              and to apply the same in different circumstances.

    With regard to paragraph f. for example I came across some very
    interesting work which had been undertaken by Dr. Helen Muir of the
    Department of Applied Psychology at the College of Aeroneutics,
    Cranfield, Bedford arising out of the Manchester Air Disaster.  A short
    video film has been prepared which makes very interesting viewing.

    My suggestions are not intended to exclude from an active role the local
    organisations who at present constitute advisory groups.  It seems to me
    essential that not only should the police, fire and ambulance and indeed
    almost certainly the local authority be involved, but that their views
    should be actively sought and carefully evaluated by the Authority.
    Indeed I would go further and say that it is essential that the views of
    the owner/occupier/organiser of events as well as those of other
    interested parties (supporter clubs spring to mind) should be sought,
    considered and evaluated.

    I think however that it is desirable that the final enforcing Authority
    should be distinct from the holders of the safety certificate with whom
    the primary responsibility for safety should rest, but also from the
    parties constituting the advisory group.

    There are of course problems.

        i.   Divorcing the enforcers from the effectors ensures a degree
             of impartiality but may also generate expectations
             in the application of conditions which from a practical point
             of view are unrealistic.     On the other hand there is a
             danger that if you allow the people who are running a show
             to play too large a part in its regulation, even given the
             best will in the world, there may be sufficient blurring of
             the edges for proper independent thought not to be given to
             proposals put before the licencing authority.

       ii.   The other side of the coin is of course that the stronger
              the supervising body becomes, the tighter the regulatory
              function, the less scope there is for the holder of the
              certificate to have any input into the safety standards




    BAGAAZ
                           3




         at the venue.        Apart from making him in effect a spectator
         within his own ground, there is also a danger that it removes
         the h o l d e r ’s initiative for safety and in addition, his
         responsibility for the safety of the premises and the
         invitees.

  iii.   A corollary from the foregoing point follows, namely that
         the supervisory authority may find itself with a measure of
         liability (be it civil or criminal) in the event of something
         going wrong.

My impression is that there is already a tendency to try and spread the
net of liability further and wider.  At some stage the issue of where in
the public interest one should draw the line will have to be faced.  I
am doubtful on the whole whether individuals or organisations whose
objective is to seek to help and improve public safety are likely to
function any better if they are under potential threat of say criminal
proceedings in the event of something going wrong.  Indeed I think there
is an argument for saying that such risk may be against the public
interest as it may deter people of outstanding ability from seeking
appointments in what quite often are high risk and very responsible
positions.  If that is so, then the staffing is likely to be by persons
of possibly a lower calibre which is unlikely to be in the long term
interests of the safety of the public.

I appreciate that this is an exceedingly difficult problem and there are
of course arguments which could be put the other way on the issues of
liability.

The Authority would also of course be in a position to undertake
educational training functions with a view to ensuring as far as
possible, that standards of safety are maintained and appropriate
research e.g., crowd behaviour or evacuation procedures.




BAGAAZ
                                     SCHEDULE B .
\


                                                      1st Hay 1991.



         SLP/JT/HO/POL




         POLICE INVOLVEMENT WITHIN FOOTBALL STADIA.

         It was clear to me from my involvement with the Hillsborough Disaster
         Inquests that a very substantial police presence was involved, not only
         outside the ground but also within it-  At the conclusion of the
         inquests I commented that one had to ask oneself the question as to
         whether or not the involvement of the police and the activities within
         the stadium was a proper use of both their training, expertise and
         abilities.

         There are in fact two ways of looking at this namely, (a) are the police
         competent to cope with safety aspects within the stadia and (b)
         irrespective of their competence, is it a correct and proper use of
         police resources to employ them in this capacity.   It was with the
         latter point in mind that I was making the comment though there is as in
         most cases an overlap.

         At any function where a substantial number of people are expected to
         attend, problems are likely to be encountered both away from the
         location as well as at or within it.

    1.   OFF SITE AC T I V I T Y .

         From a practical point of view it may be difficult if not impossible to
         expect organisers of an event to undertake control of law and order,
         traffic safety etc., on the public highway and approaches to a venue. If
         that is so and if as is the underlying assumption of this letter, the
         event is going to take place, then it seems that the only body of people
         capable of mounting an operation are in fact the police and there may
         therefore be no alternative but to continue deploying them for these
         p urp o s e s .



    2.   ON SITE ACTIVITY.

         The position however within the venue seems to me rather different.

         Simply because someone enters another’s premises for the
         purposes of watching a football match or for any other reason
         does not of course absolve him or her from exercising proper
         care for their own safety, nor does it absolve them from




         BAGAAH
                          2




responsibility to act and behave reasonably and in a
responsible and civilised manner.

Nevertheless there are certain matters for which an
owner/occupier/organiser of an event (for convenience here after
referred to as "organiser") has to take some responsibility e.g., it
would not be reasonable to expect someone entering a stadium to have to
satisfy himself that staircases are properly constructed and will bear
the weight of a reasonable influx of people over them.

It is therefore a complex relationship between what is required from the
organiser and what can and should be expected from members of the
public.

As far as football stadia are concerned, it seems to me that
what has happened is that because law and order problems have
unfortunately featured heavily over the past few years, the police
involvement within a stadium has become more pronounced and they have in
addition to their conventional functions, also become heavily involved
and committed in the general management and running of major events.

One of the consequences of police status is that their relationship to
the organiser differs in many respects from the relationship which an
organiser might have to either his staff or indeed other independent
contractors.  A consequence of this is that the organiser has tended in
respect of many police activities to take a back seat and not to seek to
interfere with the organisational matters of police activity.  This may
be entirely understandable but it has a consequence of shifting the
responsibility for invitees from the organiser.



It is therefore necessary to first of all establish the basic parameters
and reasons for the involvement of organisations such as the police and
to clearly define the extent and scope of their responsibility.  It is
my view that a football match in principle is no different from any
other large social gathering and the general responsibility at such
gatherings for management and control within the venue rests with the
organiser.  If that is so, then the responsibility for the event and for
the safety of the invitees (subject to the qualification mentioned
above) should be seen to be and should be executed by the organiser
whose responsibility it should be to provide not only the necessary
facilities but also the staffing which is required to achieve this.

If the responsibility is firmly placed on the organiser, this would have
the added advantage of concentrating the or ganiser’s mind on the safety
requirements which he has to meet and would go some way to ensuring that
staff and premises are adequate for their purpose.

It could be argued that utilising the police would be one way of
fulfilling this obligation, but I do not favour it.



Police training and expertise in my view is more directed towards the




BAGAAH
                              3




 maintenance of law and order and the preservation of the Q u e e n ’s Peace
 rather than stewarding, packing, crowd control and general management
 and supervision of private premises and crowds within them.

 In general, police do not attend other functions e.g., theatres, cinema
 performances in large numbers in order to effect these matters, but
 merely attend if they are called in to deal with a specific problem. In
 principle I see no reason why similar considerations should not apply to
 gatherings such as football matches.

 It may well be that if the police are withdrawn from these activities
 that organisers will have to employ additional staff, including possibly
 security staff in larger numbers and deploy them in a different manner
 in order to ensure not only safety but also order within the crowd.



I am not ruling out for one moment that if a situation were to develop
in which law enforcement becomes an issue or which goes beyond the
capacity of the staff to handle, that the police should not be called
in; on the contrary I think that is precisely the role which they should
fulfill.

It may be argued that visible police presence is desirable not only to
provide a quicker response but also to act as a deterrent and as a
preventative of a situation getting out of hand. I would have  no
objection to this and indeed arrangements could be made for officers to
be deployed strategically, so that their presence was visible.    What I
am arguing is that their role should be clearly understood and properly
defined and not extended.

I appreciate that if one puts responsibility entirely on the organisers
this may involve considerable increase in the cost of running an event
which no doubt would then have to be reflected in the price of the
admission ticket but that is an unfortunate consequence for ensuring
that the quality and standard of safety is maintained.

I appreciate that if this view were adopted it would make a considerable
difference to the way in which football matches are run and controlled
and in particular, the police function from their control box would
either cease or would be very substantially diminished.



It would still be necessary of course to have proper lines of
communication between the organiser within the ground and the force
without, in order to ensure that the former is aware of any difficulties
or problems which may be being encountered for example, major holdups on
motorways and so on.

Such a change in emphasis would have the benefits of;-




   a.    Putting responsibility for the ground and what occurs in it




BAGAAH
                          4




          where it ought to be i.e., with the organisers of the particular
          ev ent,

  b.      Release police resources for purposes for which they are better
          equipped, suited and trained and,

  c.      Avoid a situation where the organiser becomes sandwiched between
          on the one hand the enforcing authority under the safety of
          sports ground legislation and on the other the police (the latter
          in fact also forming part and not an unimportant part of the
          advisory group of the safety of sports ground arrangements).

I appreciate that there is a strong argument for saying that people who
are running matches should be playing an active role in decision making
regarding safety and that by divorcing the advisory group and the police
from the actual management of the match, the effect of practical
experience may be lost. This is a valid point but I feel that proper and
appropriate arrangements can be made to ensure that those who have the
responsibility for staging events have a direct and easily accessable
means of communication with on the one hand the advisory group under the
safety of sports ground legislation and on the other the police in their
capacity as enforcers and preservers of the Q u e e n ’s Peace.

The comments in this letter have been written on the basis that in the
society in which we live sporting events will continue to take place,
notwithstanding that there must be an inevitable risk whenever a very
large number of people are brought together in a relatively confined
spa ce.

Perhaps however it is worth saying that it is also a legitimate question
to ask why the staging of football matches should be permitted when an
event such as the semi-final at Hillsborough at which 54,000 people were
expected required an allocation of up to 381 of the total police force
of the county of South Yorkshire.  If that were the sort of committment
for other similar sized events associated with different activities,
then perhaps one would not question it,  but if in fact it is correct
that major football matches require a substantially larger police
presence for the safety and security of the public at large as well as
the crowd attending, then one ought at least to ask the question whether
the advantages and benefits of allowing the matches to proceed in the
conventional way outweigh the risks and costs associated with them.

Before one totally discounts this thought, it should be borne in mind
that probably the vast majority of people who actually watch a match do
so these days not at the stadium but in the privacy of their own homes
by means of television.  This is a medium which was not available in
bygone days and its use should not be underestimated nor its impact on
social behaviour.  It is of course true that watching a match on T.V.
does not produce the same atmosphere as being present at a stadium.   On
the other hand it is likely to be considerably safer.
In the final analysis it is a matter of balance.




BAGAAH
                  SCHEDULE   C

                                                   1st May 1991.




Ref:   SLP/JT/HO/INQ




INQUESTS AND PUBLIC INQUIRIES.

You will be aware that I have recently concluded a series of inquests into
the Hillsborough Disaster which took more than 90 days to complete in the
presence of a jury. In addition, there was a major public inquiry under Lord
Justice Taylor which sat for 31 days, apart from the criminal investigation
undertaken by the D.P.P.  and the civil process which has also been
involved.

Thus you will see that without taking into account the police
complaint procedures or other internal and private investigations and
inquiries, there were four major investigative procedures and which because
of a lack of definition, tend to overlap and repeat to a large extent the
work of each other.

I suppose that if one wanted to approach the matter logically, one could
argue that the role of the inquest is to establish how a person came by his
death, a public inquiry to establish what can be done in order to avoid a
repetition of such an incident, the civil aspects to determine the questions
of negligence and compensation payments if any and the D .P .P/Criminal Courts
to deal with the issue of criminal liability and punishment insofar as it is
deemed necessary or appropriate.

Unfortunately although lip service tends to be paid to the principle that an
inquest is not concerned with issues of civil or criminal liability the
fact remains that particularly with regard to criminal matters, the powers of
the coroner have only been modified to the extent that he no longer is in a
position to name someone who may or may not have committed a criminal
offence.  As one of the possible verdicts remains that of unlawfully killed,
it unfortunately follows that in order to enable a jury to intelligently
apply their minds to the possibility of this verdict, a comprehensive amount
of evidence has to be taken in order to enable them to form a judgement.
Similarly public inquiries, e.g.,the Sheen report and Lord Justice Ta yl o r ’s
report have been framed in such a way as to not only overlap with the coronal
jurisdiction but have also tended to be critical of individuals.(See for
example the comment by Lord Justice Bingham in R-v-H.M.Coroner for East Kent
ex parte Peter Alan Spooner et al, Q u e e n s ’s Bench division, 6th of October
1987). Quite apart from the difficulties which this may create should a
prosecution subsequently be brought, it tends to impinge on the D . P . P ’s and
the civil litigation aspects, quite apart from the impact which it may have
on an inquest.


The main purpose of this letter however is to draw to your attention the
urgent need to sort out the inter-relationship between coroners inquests and
public inquiries.

I do not need to say that I fully appreciate that I am not the first to note
this.  Indeed Mr.  Justice Bingham in the case referred to says "one might
suppose that one inquiry of this magnitude even into a disaster on this scale
would be enough but the law required Her M a j e s t y ’s Coroner for East Kent to
conduct an inquest with a jury pursuant to Section 3 of the Coroners Act
1887".  That was of course precisely the situation in which I found myself as
well.

There are many options and I mention five:-

1.    To make no change, which I consider to be unsatisfactory.

2.    To recognise that an inquest is in fact a judicial public
       inquiry of a limited nature but that coroners each day
       throughout the country deal with sudden violent death which
       to those individuals who are involved are just as important,( even
       though they are only singletons) as a major disaster is to those
       persons who are involved in that.

3.    To broaden the base of inquests in appropriate circumstances, possibly
       by direction from the Home Secretary, so that where it
       is felt necessary to undertake a more extensive inquiry and in
       particular to look at prevention and improvement to authorise the
       coroners inquest to deal with these matters.

4.    If it is felt that 3 is not an appropriate choice
       in any particular event and a public inquiry (whether statutory
       or departmental) is the appropriate way of dealing with the matter
       then that Inquiry could also be given the task of performing the
       appropriate coronal function with or without the appointment of the
       coroner to sit as a member of the Inquiry.


      If that were the preferred option, consequential amendments
      would have to be made to primary legislation in order to remove
      the duty to hold this type of inquest with a jury.

5.    Another way forward might be to extend the provisions of Section
      16 of the Coroners Act 1988 so as to permit say the Home Secretary in
      appropriate circumstances e.g., (a Public Inquiry)
      to give a notice or direction which would enable the coroner
      to deal with the inquests in the same way as he at present
       is entitled and empowered to do where a person has been
      charged before Magistrates Court with certain offences or where the
      D.P.P. gives the appropriate notice under Section 16 (1) (b).

I want to make it quite clear that I am not seeking to reduce the powers or
the authorities of coroners, on the contrary, there may be an argument for
enhancing them.  What I am not happy about is the apparent duplication of effort
and evidence inherent in the present arrangements.

I understand that there are high level discussions going on in relation to
this issue.

Over the recent years there has been several major disasters.

              Bradford Fire Disaster.
              Zeebrugge Ferry Disaster.
              Kings Cross Fire.
              Kegworth Air Crash
              Clapham Train Disaster.
              Marchioness Sinking.
              Hillsborough Football Disaster.

I believe that not one coroner involved in any of these disasters has been
invited to participate and contribute to the discussions, a situation which
find quite extraordinary and regretable.
            APPENDIX     A

                                                             11




     jCoj-tji Mg Cra-fefa—
     IanTfromas-^Qiover
     Paul David Bracty---
     Barry Sidney Bennett      ■— —
      I have already reminded you, and givenyou~~th«— Ijjjcy^s^
£ind ings— s-o— I— cto— not— propose— to— gepaa t— fchatn. —
      Now I explained to you, ladies and gentlemen, that you
were not allowed to add any riders to your verdict.
Indeed, I am not allowed to do that either, but under
Rule 43, if I think there is any matter which I should refer
to someone for their consideration then I am entitled to do
that.    What I propose to do is that I do think there are
one or two matters which I think could usefully be thought
about by various bodies.    Indeed, they m a y already have
thought about them.    I make no recommendations with regard
to them because most of these are matters of expertise as
opposed to mere commonsense and there may be problems which
I am not expert enough to be able to deal with.      However, I
feel there are one or two matters which I do want to draw to
certain persons' attention so they can apply their mind to
them.    Whilst I would not wish to add riders or, indeed,
make recommendations, I just propose to outline the main
topics which have occurred to me as I have been sitting
 listening, together with you, to evidence which we have
heard.
     The first matter that I think concerns me is the
problem which I think was illustrated by the fact that if
you have people looking in one direction particularly
intently to watch an event, as indeed one would get at a
football match or, indeed, at other major^events, it may
prove very difficult to turn them round, if I can use that
term, so that they use escape routes which are at the back
or at the sides.     That is the first thing.

     The second thing is that I know, because we made
inquiries, that a lot of work has been done in connection
with aircraft disasters, particularly arising out of the
Manchester air disaster, on people escaping from aeroplanes
in stress situations and what happens with regard to gates
and when they move forward and so on.   A great deal of work
has been done by Dr. Hannah Muir and others at their
research establishment.

     I think it would be beneficial if one could bring
together information from different sources which may have
applications in other fields and so I intend to write to the
appropriate authorities, for example, the Fire Service and,
indeed, Dr. Muir and see whether or not there isn t some
scope whereby information can be pooled and perhaps
improvements made with regard to future safety.
                                                                            12




                         The second thing that concerns me is the Safety
                    Certificate.  I am, of course, aware that there is a new
                    one in force, and we have not been concerned with that,
                    but one of the factors which we all became aware of was
                    not only that there were problems on the terraces but that
                    there were problems within the turnstile areas, and it
                    seems to me that some additional thought maybe is required
                    to see whether there is not some way of more effectively
                    controlling ingress, because at the moment, of course,
•       »           there is no system of counting, as far as I understand,
                    into the turnstile area, so one is in fact left with
                    exactly the same position as one was before, namely that
                    you have to estimate the numbers within that area by eye.

                          Whether that is a situation which can be overcome or
                     not I do not know, but I do intend to write both to the
                     Local Authority, as the enforcing authority, and indeed
                     also to the Club, to ask them to apply their minds to that
                     part of the Ground. We have tended to think of simply the
                     terraces and the pens but I think one has to go a little
                     further and think about the area without.  There may be no
                     solution, I don't know, but I feel that it is a matter
                     which I would like to think I had drawn to somebody's
                     attention.
        D
                          With regard to the Safety Certificate, I am of course
                     aware that Lord Justice Taylor spent a great deal of time,
                     in fact much more time, with regard to recommendations
                     than I have done, and he did make recommendations with
                     regard to inspectorates, but it seems to me, and I intend
                     to write to the Home Secretary on this, that with a matter
                     such as safety in sports grounds it might perhaps be worth
                     looking at not simply an inspectorate but possibly an
                     homogenous, national, licensing, appraisal, inspecting
                     organisation or service, because at the moment, of course,
                     the Safety Certificates are issued by local authorities,
                     there are many of them, and each one of them has a
                     relatively small number of sports grounds.  However hard
                     the people within the authorities may try and however
                     competent, their experience will be limited and I would
                     like some thought to be given to whether it would not be
                     better in the interests of safety if a body of expertise
                     could be built up which (a) applies more uniform
                     standards, and (b) would be in a much better position to
                     assess risk and so on at any particular stadium, so my
                     intention is to write to the Home Secretary and ask him to
                     consider that.

                         In addition such a body would have - and this is a
                    further point which I wish to draw to his attention - or
                    maybe some other body, the facility for ensuring that
                    there is both proper training and the establishment of
                    continuity of information from one person to another, in
                    order to try and ensure that practice which is good and
        H




    J. L. Harpham Ltd.
                                                                        13




                 sound is passed on and continues to be applied and be
                 developed, but even if such a body was not set up, of
                 course, within each organisation that may be involved in
                 staging major events where loads of people come together
                 great effort should, I am sure, be put into both training
                 and the need for continuity of some sort or another.

                      There is another aspect which I want to write on - it
                 all happens to be the Home Secretary because it happens to
     B           be his department, including the first point.  One has to
                 ask oneself the question as to whether or not the
                 involvement of the Police in the activities within the
                 Stadium is a proper use of both their training, expertise
                 and abilities, and I would like to suggest to the Home
                 Secretary that this is something which needs, in my view,
                 addressing as a matter of relative urgency, to make some
                 decisions as to who, in fact, on the safety side should
                 have (a) the ultimate authority, (b) the expertise and (c)
                 the responsibility.

                      It is a matter of considerable regret to me to say
                that whilst we were sitting during these Inquests, and
                without me making any effort to keep abreast of events, I
                read in the paper of one football disaster in South
    D           Africa, where about 40 people died as a result of crush
                injuries.   There were at least two other non football
                situations that I remember, one was abroad where numbers
                of people were injured and killed, and although in the
                event nobody was seriously hurt, just last Saturday in the
                town in which I live there was a crushing incident at a
                football match.   So although it would be nice for me to
                say we have had all this inquiry, we have discussed it and
                everything else, it will never happen again, unless there
                is considerable, continuous vigilance and perhaps even a
                change of attitude with regard to matches, I fear it will
                happen again and it will be, of course -- well, you know
                how awful it has been once but to have it again would be
                just^that much worse.   How you solve it - the only safe
                stadium, in my view, is an empty one. As soon as you
                bring a substantial number of people together you run
                risks, and whether it is possible to have terraces where
                people stand without risk I have doubts.   So I intend
                again to draw these thoughts to the Home Secretary and see
                what, if anything, he can or wishes to do.

                     Finally, and I am cheating a little bit because this
                is not actually a safety matter, I do intend to write to
                the Home Secretary and ask him to seriously apply his mind
                to the inter-relationship between coroners' inquests and
                public inquiries in major disasters of this type, because
                I think somebody has got to grasp the nettle and sort out
                the situation, which I do not think is entirely
                satisfactory.

    H




J. L. Harpham Ltd.
                                                                                                   14
F*




                                That is the broad outline of the matters which occur to
                          me   at the moment.    If something elsewere to come to me at
                          some time in the future and I thought it right, then of
                          course I can always write.     Indeed, anybody can write to
                          the Home Secretary if they wish.

                                 1 want— &e— fcurn— to -youj— lad-ie s— and ganfe-lcmon»---- 1— w ant--
                               say first of all that you have had an infinitely harder
                          t^sk than I had imagined.           I knew it was going to be pretty
     •    B               h a w for you but in fact it has been harder.               I want to
                          tharvk you for your perseverance, for your interest, for your
                          attention, for your courage in reaching decisions and
                          announcing them.        I admire you.         What more can I say?         I
                          thank y\u,

                               It ik within my power to excuse you from jury service
                          in     Coroners^ courts. It is not in my power to excuse you
                          from other courts, but as far as I amconcerned, subject to
                          a proviso whrch I will mention in a moment, I intend to
                          excuse you frota Coronal jury service for the rest of your
                          lives.   I think you have done your bit. The only proviso I
                          have is that if smy of you do not wish me to do that, please
                          write to me at th«» Medico-Legal Centre, because I would not
         D                want to excuse you\if it wasn't something you wanted, but if
                          I do not hear to you. I will write a letter to you in due
                          course, or at least my Jury Officer will write you a letter
                          to confirm that so youv have got it.

                               I want to remind y&u that right at the opening on the
                          18th of April, 1990, wherkyou first came together, I drew
                          your attention to the factCthat this would be stressful,
                          that things might get to y<ni.  If you remember I reminded
                          you that one of the good thrngs was you had yourselves and
                          that you could support one another.   I did at that point
                          allude to the possibility that\if external help was needed
                          because you had problems yourselves with coping with the
                          situation, then one should seek J^t.  I want to repeat that
                          but I want to add one or two addiM.onal points.   When we
                          have finished today you will, of course, be splitting up and
                          in that sense you will lose the fellowship of the eleven of
                          you which you have built up over several months.

                           I do not want to suggest for a miruite that you are
                      going to need any counselling or any heLb or anything of the
                      sort, but you may do and there would be n\ shame if you did.
                      If you do, remember that your GP is the ficst port of call.
                      You may not like him, don't go to him, but rve should be in a
                      position to help you.

                            In addition, I know because I have heard iNrom them,
                      that the Family and Community Services Department in
                      Sheffield, that is the social workers if you like\ at

         H
                                       ,
                      Redvers House, Union Street, Sheffield, are both available
                      and,— indee d — a-n-x4» us— to help you with any— personal




     J. L. Harpham Ltd.
                           APPENDIX                  B
                                OFFICE OF H.M. CORONER FOR       MEDICO-LEGAL CENTRE,
                                                                 WATERY STREET
                                        SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                                                 SHEFFIELD
                                             (West District)
                                                                 S3 7ET
   STEFAN L. POPPER, LL.B.. B.MED.Sci., B.M.. B.S.. M.R.C.G.P.
                                                 CORONER


                            Telephone: SHEFFIELD (0742) 738721   ....l.st.-May........ 19.. 91




SLP/JT/Hills/Escape.




The Chief Fire Officer,
South Yorkshire County Fire Service,
West Division H.Q.,
Wellington Street,
Sheffield. SI 3 F G .



Dear Sir,

Hillsborough Inquests/Evacuation Procedures and Means of Escape.

You may well be aware that I have recently concluded the inquests into the
Hillsborough Disaster and you will also be aware that Mr. Seaman came and
gave evidence at the inquests.

Although there were various matters which arose during the course of these
inquests which gave me some cause for concern e.g., the possibility of
closure of the tunnel exit gates in order to prevent ingress on to the
terracing.   I expect that you will be considering this problem.
However, part from that, the matters which I felt I wanted to raise with you
in this letter are:-

For whatever reason, the terracing at Hillsborough were not evacuated within
the notional evacuation time which had been calculated in respect of them.
I have no doubt that there were many causes but one factor which has occured
to me is that evacuation times are calculated as I understand it by applying
flow rates through specific apertures.  This of   course assumes that the
people who have to leave a specified area are:-

       (a)        Aware that a life-threatening emergency exits and that it is
                  in their interests to go.

       (b)       Realise where the exit points are and the routes are unobstructed.

       (c)       Do not have some motivation which makes them hesitate not to
                  give up their position and

       (d)        Are prepared to be distracted from the object of their attention.

A crowd which attends a football stadium is of course intent upon watching
the match.   Their attention will therefore be towards the field, i.e.,
forward and away from exits which may be located at the rear or to the side
of them.   Clearly, if there were to be a raging inferno immediately in
front of them the natural instinct of people will tend to make them back away
from the apparent problem and move towards exit   points located behind them.
                                          2


    If however the problem which presents itself is not so obviously apparent,
    and if attention is focused towards the front, there may be considerable
    reluctance for people to move away from their viewing positions and out of
    the viewing area particularly if they have some fear that they may not
    subsequently be allowed back, or that they might lose a vantage point if in
    the events they were mistaken about the need to go.

    The point I am trying to make is that simple flow ratesmay not be a
    sufficient basis for calculating evacuation times in certain circumstances.

.   Another matter which occurred to me whilst listening to the evidence was that


•   on the terrace in question, the means of escape were all situated at the
    rear.  I am of course aware that there were little gates in the perimeter
    fencing, which in fact turned out to be one of the primary routes of escape
    on the day in question, but I also understood that these had never been
    contemplated as forming a major escape route in the calcuations which had
    been made.

    I am less concerned with that happened to Hillsborugh on the
    15th of April 1989 but more concerned with the general principle as to
    whether it is wise to locate the means of escape and the secondary means of
    escape in the same general area.  I say this because it   does not take too
    much imagination to be able to contemplate a situation  where the rear exits
    are all blocked.  To take one scenario, if there was a collapse of the upper
    tier of the stand across the back of the terracing.

    I appreciate that if exits or escape routes are located forward, then
    particularly if a panic arises, there may be substantial risks of these
    routes becoming blocked by a movement of spectators forward, and this
    difficulty is compounded by the possible problem of distinguishing a safety
    movement from a pitch evasion at football matches.

    The purpose of this letter is not to suggest solutions to you or to be
    critical but simply to draw to your attention two matters which gave me some
    concern.  Whether there are any solutions which could usefully be applied,
    at Hillsborough or elsewhere is of course a matter for you.


    During my preparation for Hillsborough I learned of some very interesting
    work which had been done by Dr.  Helen Muir at the Research
    Establishment, Department of Applied Psychology at the College of
    Aeroneutics, Cranfield, Bedford.  Her work was based upon the Manchester Air
    Disaster and she has undertaken some experimental work to try and demonstrate
    problems with egress and crowd behaviour from a confined space.   I have seen
    a short video of some of this work and I was struck by the fact that problems
    which appeared to me to have arisen at Hillsborough were not dissimilar to
    those which she was demonstrating in her experimentation.

    It may be that you might feel that it would be helpful for you to get in
    touch with her so that there could be an exchange of information which may be
    of interist and use to all.




    I am sending a copy of this letter to her so that she can be aware of what is
    going on.

    As I indicated on the last day of the inquest,   I am interested in the
                             3




possibility whether there is scope for the pooling of information regarding
safety from separate disciplines.

Finally, I am sending a copy of this letter to the Home Secretary for his
information.




Yours faithfully,




S.L.Popper,
H.M.Coroner.


c:.c . Home Secretary Hr. Kenneth Baker,
c .c:. Dr . Helen H u i r .
