             PRESS RELEASE: 19TH MAY 1992: FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE

FOOTBALL COMMITTEE REPORT TO DAVID MELLOR
URGES ALL-SEATER RE-THINK FOR ALL CLUBS
TOM PENDRY MP, CHAIRMAN OF THE PARLIAMENTARY ALL-PARTY
FOOTBALL COMMITTEE, today submitted a closely argued 8,000 word
paper to Rt Hon David Mellor MP, Secretary of State for National
Heritage, on behalf of the Football Committee, urging him to replace Lord
Justice Taylor's timetable for all-seater stadia with a sympathetic
framework and timescale for developing modern football stadia -
Including the option of safe terraced areas for supporters.

In the paper, the Football Committee sets out a rationale and a logical case for a
reassessment of the Taylor recommendations, in the light of developments within football
since the publication of Lord Justice Taylor's Final Report. These include:
*      Falling arrest rates and the creation of new offences
*      Spending on ground improvements, families and disabled supporters
*      Improved safety criteria and technology
*      Government delays in establishing the Football Licensing Authority
*      Problems for clubs in obtaining planning permission for ground developments
*      The crisis in football finance
*      Escalating police costs
*      The implications of the national lottery
*      Supporters' opposition to all-seater stadia


The paper recommends to the Minister:
*     The replacement of the Taylor timetable for all-seater stadia with a sympathetic
       framework and timescale for the development of modem stadia.
*     The granting of permission to the Football Licensing Authority to enter into discussions
       with individual clubs throughout the Football League as to the best way to achieve
       safe, modem accommodation for spectators - with the option of developing upgraded
       terracing for standing supporters.
*     Immediate permission for clubs willing to restrict ground capacity to 10,000 to retain
       standing accommodation, subject to strict safety regulations.
What the Report says....

On terracing

"It is clear that by adhering to the amended conditions in the new Guide to Safety at Sports
Grounds, terracing at football stadia is now an appreciably safer option than at the time at
which Lord Justice Taylor was compiling his Report"


On the Taylor timetable

'Given the delays in establishing the Football Licensing Authority, and the effect of newly-
published planning policy guidance - both of which have been totally outside the control of
football itself, and were not factors included in the Inquiry conducted by Lord Justice Taylor,
the Football Committee strongly believes the Government should seriously reconsider its
requirement that clubs in Divisions One and Two convert to all-seated accommodation by the
start of the 1994/5 season."


On the role of the supporters

'Supporters are the essence of football. The atmosphere which they generate at British
grounds has frequently been described as unique. Any action which jeopardises that
uniqueness should be avoided if at all possible. The Football Committee believes it is time for
the supporters' voice to be heard."


On football's financial state

 The myth that the national game is awash with money is quite simply untrue...Any policy
 which would force smaller clubs to increase ticket prices and thus possibly deter the casual
 supporter would be unwise and possibly fatal tor many clubs"


On the need for a flexible approach

 "By adopting a flexible approach, the Government will be acting within the spirit of Lord Justice
 Taylor and will achieve the highest possible standards of safety and comfort which Taylor was
 concerned with developing. Furthermore the Government will be demonstrating a laudable
 desire to stand up for the millions of people who M ow the national game and a responsible
 willingness to reconsider policy proposals in the light of changing circumstances"

, *The safety of supporters can be combined with a flexible and responsible attitude towards
  the game - the Football Committee believes this submission provides the basis for such an
  attitude"




                                                                                    continues.
Tom Pendry said today

"This Paper provides the most convincing, logical and thorough argument produced since the
publication of the Taylor Report on the issue of safe accommodation for football supporters
and the modernisation of stadia."


"In asking David Mellor to accept the Football Committee's reasoned case for football, we are
confident that we have the ear of someone who knows football himself and is willing to act in
a positive fashion to secure its bright future."


"Safety should be paramount in all our minds - there have been too many tragedies at football
to risk any other approach. But flexibility and effectiveness must also be pursued. This paper
shows how they can be combined for the good of football."


"I am convinced that the Football Committee's case for a reassessment of Taylor's deadlines
for all-seated stadia will receive support from the whole of the game - from the directors box
to the terraces."




FOR FURTHER INFORMATION

Tom Pendry MP
House of Commons
Tel 071 219 5519/4590/5198




NOTES TO EDITORS


A summary of the Football Committee's submission to Rt Hon David Mellor QC MP is
attached.
    ALL-SEATED STADIA

                     Sl

    THE TAYLOR REPORT




                A submission

to the Secretary of State for National Heritage

                    from

the Parliamentary All-Party Football Committee




                  May 1992
            ALL-SEATED STADIA AND THE TAYLOR REPORT

                                     CONTENTS


Summary


Section 1: The Taylor Report and the need for safer stadia



Section 2: C on dition s at football since Tavlor: Better behaviour and conditions

          Falling arrests at football and the creation of new offences

          Spending on ground improvements - families and disabled supporters

          Improved safety criteria and technology



Section 3: The Timetable for implementing Tavlor: An Impossible Deadline

          The Football Licensing Authority

          The implications of Planning Policy



Section 4: The Finances of Football - a game in crisis

          Falling profits and an uncertain future

          Rising police costs - an intolerable burden

          Football and the Pools Industry



Section 5: Consumer Opposition - listening to the supporters

          The role of the supporters' organisations

          Supporters' opposition to all-seater stadia

          Listening to the supporters


Section 6: The way forward for football - upgraded stadia and a flexible approach
              ALL-SEATED STADIA AND THE TAYLOR REPORT


      TH E PARLIAM ENTARY A LL-P A R TY FOOTBALL COMMITTEE.


                                        SUMMARY


This paper is submitted by the Parliamentary All-Party Football Committee, one of
Parliament’s largest backbench committees, which exists to bring together Members of the
House of Commons and the House of Lords, united in their love of the national game, to
argue the case for football.

The paper provides a rationale and a logical case for the reassessment of Lord Justice
Taylor's recommendation that all seated-accommodation should be introduced from the start
of the 1994/5 season at all matches at grounds in the first and second divisions of the Football
League, the Premier Division of the Scottish Football League and at national stadia, and from
the start of the 1999/2000 season at all matches at all other football grounds designated under
the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.

 The paper stresses the Football Committee's support for the work of Lord Justice Taylor in
 seeking to achieve higher standards of comfort and safety at football. None of the arguments
• contained in it should be taken to mean that the Football Committee supports the retention
 of outdated, unsafe terracing. Nothing could be further from the truth - the paper argues the
 case for exercising the greatest degree of flexibility and effectiveness in improving standards
 of safety at all types of accommodation at football grounds, including considering the option
 of upgraded, safer terracing. Safety is the ultimate watchword of the Football Committee's
 argument.

 The Football Committee notes that conditions at football grounds have greatly improved since
 Lord Justice Taylor conducted his Inquiry. The numbers of arrests at football have plummeted
 and the creation of new offences has given more effective powers to the police to ensure good
 order within grounds. Spending on safety and improved facilities, particularly for families and
 disabled supporters, further adds to a more welcoming and attractive environment at football.
 The revision of the guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (The Green Guide) has raised the
 safety threshold of all types of accommodation at football - including terracing.

 The Football Committee outlines delays outside the control of football, and unforeseen by Lord
 Justice Taylor, which have rendered the Taylor timetable impossible. These include, most
 notably, delays in establishing the Football Licensing Authority and problems for clubs in
 obtaining planning permission for ground redevelopments in the light of recently-published
 planning policy guidance for sport and recreation.

 The Football Committee details the parlous financial state of football. Falling profits and an
 uncertain future for many clubs is the norm in football today. Escalating police costs have
 exacerbated this situation. The possible introduction of a national lottery has created further
 financial uncertainty, reducing the capacity of clubs to plan for the future. This should not
 mean that clubs should be allowed to penny-pinch on safety, but does justify a more flexible
 approach from Government toward the implementation of Taylor.
»   The Football Committee considers the role of the supporters' organisations and notes
    supporters' opposition to mandatory ail-seated stadia. The Football Committee recognises that
    supporters are the essence of football and believes their voice should be heard.

    In light of the above arguments, the paper urges the Government to adopt a more
    flexible approach towards the upgrading of standards at football grounds. It
    recommends that the Government replaces the Taylor deadlines for conversion to all—
    seated accommodation at football with a sympathetic framework and timescale for
    developing modern stadia facilities.

    The Football Committee recommends that the Football Licensing Authority should be
    permitted to enter into discussions with individual clubs as to the most cost-effective
    and realistic way to achieve the highest possible standards of safe, modern
    accommodation for spectators. Within these discussions, the option of developing
    upgraded terracing for standing supporters should be available, subject to the
    overriding requirements of safety.

    In the interim the Football Committee believes that for clubs who are willing to specify
    in the terms of their safety certificate that no more than 10,000 spectators are to be
    admitted to the ground, the Government should accept the recommendation of the
    Home Affairs Select Committee Report on "Policing Football Hooliganism", that these
    clubs should be allowed to retain some measure of safe standing accommodation.
    Furthermore every area of the ground should have its own specific crowd limits and
    should be individually monitored for numbers entering that area.

    The Football Committee recognises recent decisions made by football's international governing
    bodies - UEFA and FIFA - that 'high risk' matches should be played in all-seater stadia and
    is aware that the Football Association regards itself duty-bound to follow this policy in regard
    to the domestic scene. The Committee believes that for the many clubs who might only take
    part in such matches very infrequently, sacrificing 'home advantage' for these few games
    would be an option which they would wish to exercise in return for more flexible treatment
    regarding their own situation for the vast majority of their existence.

     The Football Committee hopes that the Government will accept these arguments put forward
     by football-lovers of all parties, whose experience as legislators and as parliamentarians
     makes them keenly aware of the many demands and responsibilities of Government. Safety
     at football should be the primary aim of any policy for Government, whilst the preservation of
     the national game is of primary importance for the nation's heritage.

     The Football Committee believes the approach suggested by this paper will achieve both of
     these aims in the most positive and realistic fashion possible.




     Tom Pendry MP                                                                  Jim Lester MP
     Chairman                                                                           Secretary.

     (This paper is submitted on behalf, and with the full approval, of all the Officers of the
     All-Party Football Committee)

     May 1992
             ALL-SEATED STADIA AND THE TAYLOR REPORT

1) The Taylor Report and the need for safer stadia


1.1     The Parliamentary All-Party Football Committee has long argued the case for an
upgrading of conditions at football stadia throughout Britain, whilst emphasising the overriding
importance of ensuring increased comfort and safety of supporters. Since its creation, over
a decade ago, the Football Committee has constantly urged both the football authorities
themselves and successive Secretaries of State to implement policies and measures which
will promote the positive development of the national game, whilst attending to the needs not
only of football clubs and their supporters, but also the communities situated around football
stadia. In its work, the Football Committee has remained ever conscious of the duty and
 responsibility of Government to ensure the safety of its citizens at all times.


1.2     The Football Committee strongly supported the work of Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry
into the disasters at Heysel Stadium and at Hillsborough. A delegation from the Football
Committee met with Lord Justice Taylor during the course of his Inquiry and urged upon him
many measures which were incorporated in his Final Report. These included the need for the
removal of perimeter fencing where safety allowed, the linking of turnstiles to self-contained
areas to facilitate crowd monitoring and strong support for the use of Closed Circuit Television
cameras to aid crowd control.


1.3     The Football Committee further recommended to Lord Justice Taylor the need for
better information on tickets and signposts within football grounds to reduce the dangers of
confusion amongst supporters within stadia and stressed the urgent requirement for legislation
against ticket touts, whose activities can endanger safety at football matches by undermining
segregation arrangements. The Football Committee was delighted, once more, to further
receive the support of Lord Justice Taylor in these areas, and has welcomed the commitment
given by the Government to implement Taylor's recommendation regarding ticket touting as
soon as parliamentary time allows.


1.4     In particular, the Football Committee strongly opposed, for reasons of safety and order
at football matches, the introduction of compulsory Football Identity Cards. The Football
Committee's view was that the operation, in practice, of Identity Cards would pose serious
threats to order and safety for supporters attending football matches. The support of Lord
Justice Taylor for this position and the welcome flexibility exercised by the Government in
accepting Taylor's arguments against introducing its proposed scheme for Identity Cards, as
contained in Part I of the Football Spectators Act 1989, have been applauded by the Football
Committee.


1.5    The Football Committee strongly supported the findings of the Home Affairs Select
Committee Report into "Policing Football Hooliganism" and the subsequent introduction of the
Football Offences Act 1990, implementing the Taylor recommendations that there should be
created specific offences of chanting racialist or obscene abuse, throwing a missile or going
onto the pitch without reasonable excuse.
1.5    Within this general context of supporting the work of Lord Justice Taylor and promoting
the development of safe conditions at football matches, the Football Committee is of the
opinion that the time has come for a reassessment of conditions at football stadia and clubs'
progress towards the implementation of Lord Justice Taylor's recommendation that spectators
should be admitted only to seated accommodation from the start of the 1994/5 season at all
matches at grounds in the first and second divisions of the Football League, the Premier
Division of the Scottish Football League and at national stadia, and from the start of the
1999/2000 season at all matches at all other grounds designated under the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act 1975.


1.6     The Football Committee notes the decision of the Government, announced in a
Parliamentary Written Answer on 16th January 1992 1 not to implement Lord Justice Taylor's
recommendation that mandatory seating be extended to rugby union and rugby league
grounds. The Football Committee agrees with the view of Lord Justice Taylor, as expressed
In his Final Report, that "a well attended Rugby match of either code may attract numbers in
excess of those attending many Football League matches. There would seem little reason for
requiring a fourth division League club to convert to seating whilst permitting major Rugby
dubs to keep their terraces indefinitely,e


1.7     The Football Committee believes that by this decision, the Government has
demonstrated a willingness to be flexible in deciding whether to implement in full the
recommendations contained in Lord Justice Taylor's Report concerning seating at sporting
events. The Football Committee is firmly convinced that developments within football since the
publication of the Taylor Report fully justify the reassessment of conditions at football grounds
that is suggested.


7\ Conditions at football since Taylor: Better behaviour and conditions


Falling arrests at Football and the creation of new offences

2.1     The Football Committee notes that in recent years, football stadia have become
radically more pleasant places in which to watch football. The numbers of arrests at football
matches has fallen steadily since the season 1987/88, and in the season 1990/91 alone
arrests fell by an impressive 31%. At the same time attendances have increased, making the
fail in numbers of arrests even more impressive. The subsequently decreasing arrest rate at
football matches for 1990-91 (0.02%) compares more than favourably with the increasing
general arrest rate for England and Wales (3.9%).


2.2    The Football Committee is aware that the season 1991-2 is the first season at which
the police have had at their disposal the new offences created by the Football Offences Act
1990. As a consequence there is the possibility that the overall number of arrests at football
matches for 1991-2 may show a slight increase. Should this be the case, however, the
Football Committee believes that this is evidence not of increasing violence at football, but the
application of more effective policing at matches, thus making grounds even safer than before.


        1 Parliamentary Written Answer from John Patten to Tom Pendry: 16th January 1992

        2 Lord Justice Taylor: Final Report into the Hillsborough Disaster: Paragraph 85
Spending on ground improvements - families and disabled supporters

2.3 The Football Committee agrees with Lord Justice Taylor's argument that "crowd safety
and crowd behaviour are closely related to the quality of accommodation and facilities offered
and to the standards which are encouraged and enforced'0. The Football Committee notes
that figures compiled by the Football League show that between January 1990 and September
1991, clubs in the Third and Fourth Division spent £8.16 million on ground safety and
conditions. A further £26 million programme of works is planned to commence this summer.
Within the First and Second Division clubs, £34.2 million was spent between January 1990
and September 1991, with a further £110 million to be spent this summer.


2.4 The Football Committee further notes that contained within this spending programme,
nearly £1 million has been spent by football on improving family facilities. Since the Taylor
Report was published, 21 clubs which previously did not have specific facilities for families
have now developed such accommodation. Nearly every club in the Football League now has
a specific family area in its ground. The Football Committee welcomes such developments
with enthusiasm and believes that the further encouragement of a family atmosphere at
football, together with the continuing development of initiatives designed to bring together
young supporters from competing clubs on match days can only lead to further improvement
of behaviour at matches.


2.5 The Football Committee further welcomes the imminent publication of a major report into
facilities for disabled supporters, due to be published in early June4 and notes that the
Football Stadia Advisory Design Council is shortly to issue new design guidelines on the
subject of disabled access and facilities at football grounds. The Football Committee notes
that the latest building guidelines issued by the Department of the Environment, and due to
come into effect on June 1st, will oblige football clubs to provide "access for disabled people
into and within any storey of the building and to any facilities provided“5 The Football
Committee applauds this encouragement by the Government for the provision of greater
facilities for disabled supporters, and believes such provision to be overdue. However, the
Football Committee believes that there will be cost implications for clubs attendant on these
new regulations which the Government should appreciate.


Improved safety criteria and technology

2.6 The Football Committee is aware that as a direct result of recommendations of the Taylor
Report, the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (The Green Guide) has been amended to
introduce stricter safety measures, particularly with regard to such issues as crowd density on
terraces. It is clear that by adhering to the amended conditions in the new Green Guide,
terracing at football stadia is now an appreciably safer option than at the time at which Lord
Justice Taylor was compiling his Report.



        3 Lord Justice Taylor: Final Report into the Hillsborough Disaster: Paragraph 26

        4 Football Stadia Advisory Design Council & Sir Norman Chester Centre for Football Research:
         "On the Sidelines - Football and Disabled Supporters*

        5 Department of the Environment / Welsh Office: "Building Regulations 1991:
          Access and Facilities for Disabled People"
2.7 In addition, recently developed technology in the kinds of areas such as crush barriers and
crowd control will facilitate a much more sensitive handling of terracing. The positive benefits
flowing from the introduction of Closed Circuit Television and better segregation arrangements
for supporters in terraced areas have brought about an enormous improvement in conditions
for standing supporters. The Football Committee is, furthermore, aware of technology currently
being developed, for example, that enables data concerning loads imposed on crush barriers,
walls and other structures to be relayed continuously to a safety officer within the ground. The
Football Committee believes that progress in areas such as these, combined with the
provision of individually segregated areas of the ground, each with specific crowd limits and
turnstile monitoring, further raises the safety threshold of well designed terracing.


2.8 The Football Committee notes Lord Justice Taylor's advice for football clubs. "The aim
should be to provide more modern and comfortable accommodation, better and more varied
facilities, more consultation with supporters and more positive leadership. If such a policy is
implemented it will not only improve safety. There will also be an improvement in crowd
behaviour, making crowd control easier."6


2.9     The Football Committee agrees with this view, and believes that such a considerable
programme of improvements in ground safety and conditions will undoubtedly lead to better
conditions for supporters, and provide an environment within which good behaviour and order
can flourish. Whilst not in any way falling prey to complacency, the Football Committee
believes that such improvements in stadia conditions justify a reassessment as to whether the
full-scale implementation of Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations represents the most
effective and beneficial use of the scarce resources available to clubs.



3) The Timetable for implementing Taylor: An Impossible Deadline


3.1     The deadline set out in Lord Justice Taylor's Report for completion of moves towards
all-seated accommodation at football grounds, is an extremely tight one for football. It leaves
only two more summers for major developments to be carried out, as building work on, for
example, stand roofe often entails the erection of cranes on the playing surface - something
only possible during the close season. Such a timetable would have posed difficulties for clubs
even in the total absence of delays. The situation has been considerably worsened, however,
by delays and obstacles totally beyond the control of football itself.


The Football Licensing Authority

3.2     The Football Committee has welcomed the creation, under Sections 8-13 of the
Football Spectators Act, of the Football Licensing Authority. This body has been charged by
Parliament with "the function of keeping under review the discharge by local authorities of their
functions under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975*. The Football Committee believes
that the FLA has a pivotal role to play in the implementation of the Taylor Report, not only as
regards seating at stadia, but in all aspects of ground safety.


        6 Lord Justice Taylor - Final Report into the Hillsborough Disaster: Para 59

        7 Football Spectators Act 1990: Section 13(1)
3.3      The powers of the Football Licensing Authority are considerable. It is responsible for
issuing licenses to admit spectators to any premises for the purpose of watching any
designated football match played at those premises. It can revoke or suspend the license
indefinitely or for such a period as the authority considers appropriate. In particular, under
Section 13 of the Football Spectators Act 1989 'the licensing authority may, by notice in
writing to the local authority concerned, require the local authority to include in any safety
certificate such terms and conditions as are specified in the notice; and it shall be the duty of
the local authority to comply with the requirement. " 8


3.4      As regards the implementation of the Taylor recommendation regarding requirements
for all-seated accommodation, it is the Secretary of State who "may, by order, direct the
licensing authority to include in any licence to admit spectators to any specified premises a
condition imposing requirements as respects the seating of spectators at designated football
matches at the premises; and it shall be the duty of the authority to comply with the
direction*.


3.5     The importance of establishing the Football Licensing Authority was stressed by the
Government at the time of publication of Lord Justice Taylor's Final Report. On 30th January
1990, the then Minister for Sport, Colin Moynihan MP, told the House that the establishment
of the Football Licensing Authority *enables us to act swiftly in replacing stands by seated
accommodation. If we did not have the legislative vehicle in place, we would not be in a
position to meet the timetable outlined in the report".10 Eight days later, the Home Office
issued a Circular to local authorities advising them not to amend their own safety certificates
to require clubs to move towards all-seated accommodation, as this would be achieved
through the introduction of the relevant sections of the Football Spectators Act, setting up the
Football Licensing Authority.11


3.6 The Football Committee notes with regret, therefore, the subsequent delay in setting up
the Football Licensing Authority, which it believes has severely hampered clubs' efforts to
make progress towards implementing the Taylor Report. Although the Home Secretary laid
a commencement order before the House on 21st March 199012, giving June 1st as the date
for the establishment of the FLA, it was not until 13th July 1990 that Norman Jacobs was
appointed FLA Chairman and 29th August 1990 that a further six members were appointed.


3.7 In the interim, the Football Committee received numerous inquiries from football clubs,
worried that the FLA had not been set up, and unsure as to what action they should take to
begin work on the Taylor recommendations. Indeed on 1st May 1990, Mr David Dent,
Secretary of the Football League addressed a meeting of the Football Committee and


        8 Football Spectators Act 1989: Section 13(2)

        9 Football Spectators Act 1989: Section 11

        10 Official Report: 30th January 1990: c 257

        11 Home Office Circular: FEP/90 35/48/89: 7th February 1990

        12 Sports Grounds and Sporting Events: The Football Spectators Act 1989 (Commencement Order
           No. 1) Order 1990: S.1.1990, No. 690 (C.21)
informed members that, in the absence of the FLA, football clubs were unsure even as to what
would actually constitute 'a seat' under the legislation.


3.8      The Football Committee recognises the understandable desire on the part of the
Government to ensure that suitable candidates should be found to fill the vacant posts on the
Football Licensing Authority, and furthermore believes Mr Norman Jacobs and his colleagues
to be excellent choices in that capacity. The Football Committee also willingly accepts the
apology made by Earl Ferrers in a letter on 12th July 1990 to the Chairman of the Football
Committee, in which he acknowledges that "In March, when we made the Commencement
Order which permitted the establishment of the authority from 1 June, we were optimistic that
the work which was necessary to redefine the role of the Authority, following the decision not
to proceed with the football membership scheme, and to identify the qualities and experience
 which would be needed by its members in the light of that redefinition would be completed in
 time to permit the appointment of the Authority by that date. I very much regret that we have
not managed to meet our own target"13


3.9 This apology notwithstanding, however, it remains the view of the Football Committee that
the determined efforts of football clubs to get to grips with the implementation of the Taylor
Report were severely hampered in this vital early stages by the absence of the FLA to offer
guidance to them. This view was underlined by the findings of a survey of League clubs
carried out during the summer of 1990 by the Football Committee, which revealed that 66%
of clubs had been unable to carry out any work during the close season and 86% had no
plans to do so during the forthcoming season. One respondent summed up the view of many,
when he said "The delay has reduced the impetus...of Taylor's recommendations"14.



The Implications of Planning Policy

3.10 The Football Committee notes the importance that Lord Justice Taylor attached to a
sympathetic framework of planning for football, and local authority assistance for clubs seeking
to relocate or redevelop their grounds. Lord Justice Taylor says in his Final Report "Although
the local authority may be unable to assist with finance, it could play a useful role in bringing
parties together and as planning authority. It could take a favourable view, tor example, of a
planning application which involved the provision not only of a communal sports stadium but
of further facilities, whether tor sport or otherwise, benefitting the community as a whole. There
has recently been a number of attempts by clubs to find greenfield sites tor new grounds only
to be turned down at each attempt on planning grounds...if we want safety and improved
standards at grounds there are some clubs that will need a new site at which to achieve them,
To this end, local authorities should surely give what assistance they properly can” 15




        13 Letter from Earl Ferrers to Tom Pendry: 12th July 1990

        14 Football Committee Survey: Summer 1990

       15 Lord Justice Taylor - Final Report into the Hillsborough Disaster: Paragraph 125
3.11 The Football Committee notes the findings of a major survey carried out by the Royal
Town Planning Institute in May 1991 which identified 34 cases of clubs wishing to move to
new locations.16 When one considers that since 1955, there have been only two League
clubs which have completed moves to new stadia, the scale of the task facing football is clear.


3.12 Since Taylor conducted his inquiry, the Department of the Environment has published
Planning Policy Guidance on sport and recreation in September 199117. The Football
Committee welcomes that this guidance calls attention to the timetable set out in the Taylor
Report for the introduction of all-seated stadia, and asks local authorities to give sympathetic
consideration to development proposals designed to achieve the aim of all-seated
accommodation at Football League grounds.18


3.13 The Football Committee regrets, however, that almost immediately after this advice, the
Planning Policy Guidance specifically states "Because of the size of the structures involved,
major football stadia cannot be regarded as appropriate development within an approved
Green Belt"19 The Football Committee notes that this advice runs contrary to the arguments
advanced by the Football Committee for a considerable period of time, and supported by Lord
Justice Taylor, that the urgent need for new sites for modem multi-purpose football stadia
justifies the possible granting of planning permission in Green Belt areas, subject to binding
agreements regarding community use of the facilities to be developed.


3.14 The Football Committee notes that since the publication of his Report, the enthusiasm
expressed by Lord Justice Taylor as to the positive role that councils could play in supporting
the development of new stadia has proved to be over-optimistic. Many clubs have spent time
and money putting together detailed planning applications only to find their schemes turned
down. In one particularly illustrative case, Maidstone Utd's proposals for a new multi-purpose
stadia, incorporating community use of its facilities and associated leisure activities, and
chosen for development on a site that was not even situated in the Green Belt, nevertheless
failed to obtain planning permission.


3.15 It is clear that in the current climate, and as a result of a strict interpretation of planning
policy guidance issued by the Government since Taylor conducted his Inquiry, the
development of new football stadia is an altogether more difficult task than Lord Justice Taylor
envisaged when considering the timetable for the introduction of all-seated accommodation.




        16 Royal Town Planning Institute: "Planning and Football League Grounds": 17th May 1991

        17 Department of the Environment / Welsh Office : Planning Policy Guidance: Sport and
           Recreation (PPG 17): September 1991

        18 Department of the Environment / Welsh Office : Planning Policy Guidance: Sport and
           Recreation (PPG 17): September 1991: Paragraph 47

        19 Department of the Environment / Welsh Office : Planning Policy Guidance: Sport and
           Recreation (PPG 17): Paragraph 50
An Impossible Timetable

3.16 Given the delays in establishing the Football Licensing Authority, and the effect of
newly-published planning policy guidance - both of which have been totally outside the
control of football itself, and were not factors included in the Inquiry conducted by Lord Justice
Taylor, the Football Committee strongly believes that the Government should seriously
reconsider its requirement that clubs in Divisions One and Two convert to all-seated
accommodation by the start of the 1994/5 season.


4)   The Finances of Football - a game in crisis


Falling profits and an uncertain future

4.1 The Football Committee is aware of the financial crisis gripping football. The myth that
the national game is awash with money is quite simply untrue. A recent analysis of the football
industry over the period 1987/88 - 1989/90 by ICC Business Publications20 revealed that of
the 124 clubs in the Football League and the Scottish Football League, together with six
holding companies, only two clubs - Liverpool and Arsenal - were able to show three
uninterrupted years of positive profit margins. Over the same period, the average profit margin
for football fell from -3.7% to -8.2%. It should be remembered that this financial performance
does not take into account the huge financial burden facing clubs as a result of the Taylor
Report.


4.2 Of particular worry to smaller clubs playing in the lower Divisions is their dependence on
supporters paying at the gate on the day of a match. The ICC Report shows that msmall-time'
dubs, particularly in the Third and Fourth Division, derive on average more than 60% of their
receipts at the gate, resulting in a more difficult cash flow situation. Season ticket sales
account for an average percentage of 13% and 8% for these two divisions respectively. The
result of this is that these 'small' clubs are over-dependent on week-on-week takings at the
gate, an almost 'hand to mouth' existence** The Football Committee believes that under
such circumstances, any policy which would force smaller clubs to increase ticket prices and
thus possibly deter the casual supporter - as would the insistence upon a compulsory
conversion to all-seated accommodation - would be unwise and possibly fatal for many clubs.


4.3 The Football Committee is aware that this season, one Fourth Division club, Aldershot
FC, has gone out of business. The Football League is aware of at least a further haif-dozen
lower division clubs whose financial circumstances give cause for concern. Estimates provided
by the Football League indicate that it is going to cost some £103.7 million for the 46 current
Third and Fourth Division clubs to meet the all-seater requirement22. With clubs in such a
perilous financial position, the Football Committee considers it unwise to further unnecessarily
jeopardise their existence. It would be a terrible waste of time, money and effort to move
towards developing all-seated accommodation at a ground only to see the football club go out
of business.


        20 ICC Business Ratio Report: Association Football Clubs: 1991

        21 ICC Business Ratio Report: Association Football Clubs : 1991: Page 12

        22 Football League Survey: November 1991
4.4 The Football Committee is anxious that one popular misconception surrounding football's
finance be dispelled - that is the argument that 'big money' transfer fees are evidence of a
surfeit of money within the game. Nothing could be further from the truth. Far from being a
financial luxury on the part of rich clubs, transfer money represents quite literally the lifeblood
for smaller clubs. The ICC Report makes clear that for clubs such as Mansfield Town, Halifax
Town and Scarborough, money coming into the club through transfer dealings saved the clubs
from incurring heavy losses. Other clubs such as Gillingham, Ipswich and Leyton Orient,
despite generating substantial profits in the transfer market, still incurred heavy losses.



Rising Police costs - an intolerable burden


4.5 The Football Committee notes that the cost to clubs of policing football has soared in
recent years. Figures supplied to the Football Committee from the Football League reveal that
police costs have more than doubled over the three seasons 1987/88 - 1990/91 - from
£3,300,000 to almost £7,000,000 for matches in England and Wales alone.23 Over this
period, police costs at 16 clubs increased by over 200%. For Port Vale FC, the increase was
a staggering 905%


4.6 This rise in costs seems set to continue in the light of the decision by the Government to
advise police authorities to seek to recover from clubs the 'full economic cost' of policing inside
their grounds. The Football Committee notes with concern the formula devised for arriving at
an estimate for this full economic cost, a formula which includes such items as police uniform
and holiday leave.


4.7 The Football Committee has warmly welcomed the work carried out by the Home Affairs
Select Committee in its Report into "Policing Football Hooliganism"24 and strongly supports
the argument contained within that Report that the closure of football clubs due to swingeing
increases in police costs is unacceptable. As the Home Affairs Select Committee argues This
is the argument of accountants. We do not think it is practical politics: a town cannot be
deprived of its soccer club because the bill for policing bankrupts it'e5


 4.8 The Football Committee supports the view of the Home Affairs Select Committee that a
 new formula for policing football matches, based upon varying percentages of a club's gate
 takings, should be introduced. Nevertheless whatever formula is introduced for policing
 football, the fact remains that clubs are facing a substantial and in many cases intolerable
 increase in their bill for policing. The Football Committee believes that the introduction of full
 economic charging - a policy which was not recommended by Lord Justice Taylor, who
 merely argued in his Final Report that police charges should be "realistic• - has made, for
 many clubs, the introduction of all-seated accommodation an unrealistic and inadvisable call
 on scarce resources.



         23 All-Party Football Committee Press Release: 4th September 1991

         24 Home Affairs Select Committee: "Policing Football Hooliganism": February 1991

         25 Home Affairs Select Committee: "Policing Football Hooliganism": Paragraph 70
Football and the Pools Industry

4.9 The Football Committee notes the significant revenue flowing into football from the pools
industry, channelled through the Football Trust. The Committee welcomed the decision of the
Government, in 1990, to reduce the rate of pool betting duty from 42.5% to 40% to release
£100 million to football over five years to help with the cost of the Taylor Report, a move for
which the Football Committee has argued consistently for many years. In cutting the pool
betting duty to 40% the Government returned it to the rate at which it stood when the
Rothschild Commission on Gambling recommended a cut in duty to 37%26. The Committee
further notes however that this revenue represents only a small percentage of the £2.7 billion
which the Treasury received through football pool betting duty between 1979 and 1991
The Football Committee recognises the Government's decision in 1991 to reduce the football
 pool betting duty from 40% to 37.5% in order to establish the Foundation for Sport and the
Arts but regrets that none of the money released through this further reduction is available to
 football, at a time of enormous financial demands on the game.


4.10 The Football Committee believes that the introduction of a national lottery could have
implications for money coming into football from the Pools Promoters Association. Whilst
definitive figures on the financial effects of a national lottery on the football pools industry are
difficult to determine, further financial uncertainty within football has been created as a result
of the national lottery proposal. This development was not a factor which Lord Justice Taylor
was able to consider when framing his proposals for all-seated stadia and the Football
Committee believes that its emergence adds weight to the argument that the proposal should
 be reassessed.


S) C o n s u m e r Opposition - Listening to the supporters


The role of the supporters organisations

5.1 The Football Committee has been in the vanguard of the campaign for supporter
representation at all levels of the game. The Football Committee welcomes and strongly
endorses the view of Lord Justice Taylor that the development of more consultation with
supporters will have a positive effect in assisting crowd control and improving safety.^ But
the Football Committee is well aware that the harnessing of the knowledge and expertise of
the supporters will have benefits for the game that goes beyond simply ensuring ground
safety.


 5.2 As the passionate and informed followers of the national game, it is the supporters who
 will be affected by any moves towards all-seated accommodation. It is the Football
 Committee's view that their voice should be heard and taken on board by both the football
 authorities and legislators. The supporters themselves have, perhaps, a uniquely direct insight
 into the day-to-day reality of conditions on the terraces at football grounds throughout the
 country. TTnat insight should be included in the formulation of policies for football.


         26   The Rothschild Royal Commission on Gambling: July 1978

         27 Parliamentary Written Answer to Tom Pendry MP: 16th January 1992

         28 Lord Justice Taylor: Final Report into the Hillsborough Disaster: Paragraph 59
5.3 The Football Committee recognises that the two main supporters' organisations - the
Football Supporters Association and the National Federation of Football Supporters Clubs -
have different structures and histories. The National Federation of Football Supporters Clubs
was established in 1927 and is *based upon a number (currently 140 structured into six
geographical divisions) of individually constituted clubs each dedicated to the support of a
specific League or Non-League football team in Great Britain"29


5.4 The Football Supporters Association, on the other hand, is a more recent phenomenon,
arising from the tragedy at Heysel Stadium in 1985. It is non-club-specific and organised on
the basis of local branches, each of which sends delegates to an annual policy-making
conference.


5.5 The Football Committee recognises, therefore, that in many respects the roles of the two
supporters organisations can be seen as complementary. Indeed many supporters are
members of both organisations. There exists a cordial relationship between the Federation and
the FSA at a national level and co-operation between the two organisations is more the norm
than the exception to the rule. The Football Committee appreciates, however, that the
argument is sometimes made that in the light of policy differences between the two
organisations, it is difficult to determine what 'the supporters' view* actually is.


5.6 Furthermore, when considering how best to achieve supporter representation on official
bodies, a similar argument is sometimes advanced as to why it is difficult to determine which
individual or organisation can be said to represent 'supporters'. The Football Committee itself
has met with this argument when seeking to promote the appointment of supporter
representatives within football. The Football Committee appreciates that 'the supporters'
cannot and should not be seen as a monolithic block, each and every one of whom holds
identical opinions. Likewise, it appreciates that the question of how the supporters themselves
wish to organise and campaign is a matter solely for them to determine.


 5.7 As a body made up of legislators itself, however, the Football Committee has urged the
 supporters organisations to speak with one voice. Nevertheless, the Football Committee
 strongly believes that the existence of two organisations cannot be used as a defence for
 keeping supporters from holding positions of responsibility within the game.



 Supporters opposition to all-seater stadia

 5.8 The issue raised above cannot be said to apply in the specific policy area of seated
 accommodation at football grounds. The Football Committee recognises that the FSA and the
 Federation are united in their opposition to mandatory all-seated stadia and in their view that
 terracing can be designed so as to meet exacting standards of safety.




         29 Home Affairs Select Committee Report: Policing Football Hooliganism: Memorandum submitted
            by the National Federation of Football Supporters' Clubs
5.9 Events at grounds throughout the 1990-91 season indicate that the opposition of the
supporters' organisations is shared by their 'rank-and-file' as it were. Supporters
demonstrations against all-seated stadia have been a regular feature of football this year. At
Arsenal FC and West Ham Utd, the supporters have been particularly active in their opposition
both to the moves towards all-seated stadia and, especially, the clubs' 'bond schemes' for
raising the necessary finance to carry out the necessary work.


5.10 There can be no doubt, therefore, that there is very strong supporter resistance to
compulsory seating because of both preference for their traditional practice of watching from
the terraces and also the extra cost they will have to pay. Next season, most Premier League
clubs will be charging £8 or £9 just to stand up. Seats will cost £12 to £20. This trend is
inevitably deterring families from coming into the game at a time when football is being urged
to develop, for the first time, as a genuine family activity. A mistake frequently made by
commentators is to say that football needs to attract families back to the game. In reality,
football in Britain has never truly been a family game. However it has made significant
progress in recent times towards becoming so, and undoubtedly has the potential to develop
further in this direction. It should not lose that potential through having to raise ticket prices
to deterrent levels.


5.11 To carry on with the present timetable will be to risk leaving thousands of supporters
locked out of their grounds in August 1994. Such a scenario, with the likelihood that it might
provoke further demonstrations at grounds by large numbers of disenchanted supporters,
effectively disenfranchised from watching their own game, contains seeds for potential disorder
which the Government would do well to seek to avert. Violence associated with football, once
unfairly referred to by some as 'the English disease' has been all but eradicated from our
grounds. Now it is this country to whom the rest of the football world looks for solutions. The
Football Committee is sure that the Government would wish to be associated with that
progress and not wish to take any action which might put the clock back on that success
story.



Listening to the supporters


5.12 The Football Committee is keenly aware that in choosing to follow football, supporters
frequently display commitment, enthusiasm and perseverance which goes well beyond the
bounds of most other leisure activities. The Government should therefore recognise its duty
to protecting and promoting a crucial part of British history and an integral feature of its
heritage. As Lord Justice Taylor himself observes *Football is our national game. We gave it
to the world.1*0

5.13 Supporters are the essence of football. The atmosphere which they generate at British
grounds has frequently been described by overseas players and administrators as unique. Any
action which jeopardises that uniqueness should be avoided if at all possible. The Football
Committee believes that it is time for the supporters' voice to be heard.




        30 Lord Justice Taylor: Final Report into the Hillsborough Disaster: Paragraph 26
6) The wav forward for football - upgraded stadia and a flexible approach

A flexible approach

6.1 The arguments advanced in this submission provide a rationale and a logical case for the
reassessment of the implementation of Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations. The question
remains, what is the alternative way forward for football? The Football Committee believes
that it lies in the provision of upgraded, safer stadia and a flexible approach by the
Government and the Football Licensing Authority towards clubs.


6.2 The Football Committee believes that the Government should do everything in its power
to facilitate the development of modern, safe stadia whilst recognising that each individual club
has its own problems and particular needs. There can be no single transferable formula which
can be applied to every club regardless of size, location, needs and resources. When Lord
Justice Taylor announced his proposals in the immediate aftermath of Hillsborough, many of
the positive developments inside the game, which have been outlined in this submission, had
not established themselves as a consistent pattern. The Football Committee is convinced that,
with hindsight, had these developments been evident to Lord Justice Taylor, his conclusions
may well have been different.


6.3 However that hindsight is a luxury which Lord Justice Taylor did not have and a
reassessment of his conclusions should not be seen as undue criticism of his work. His Report
has undoubtedly been a milestone in the history of the game and has lead to great progress
in improving standards at football stadia. It is the Football Committee's wish that it will
continue to do so. However it would be wise to view his Report as a catalyst for debate, not
as a tablet of stone.


6.4 It is the Football Committee's view that the strict deadlines for conversion to all-seated
stadia, that is the start of the 1994/5 season at all matches at grounds in the first and second
divisions of the Football League, the Premier Division of the Scottish Football League and at
national stadia, and from the start of the 1999/2000 season at all matches at all other football
grounds designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 are impossible to meet.
These proposals should be replaced with a sympathetic framework and timescale for
developing modern stadia facilities.


6.5 As part of this framework the Football Licensing Authority should be permitted by the
Secretary of State to enter into discussions with individual clubs as to the most cost-effective
and realistic way to achieve the highest possible standards of safe, modern accommodation
for spectators. Within these discussions, the option of developing upgraded terracing for
standing supporters should be available, subject to the overriding requirements of safety.


6.6 In the interim the Football Committee believes that for clubs who are willing to specify in
the terms of their safety certificate that no more than 10,000 spectators are to be admitted to
the ground, the Government should accept the recommendation of the Home Affairs Select
Committee Report on "Policing Football Hooliganism", that these clubs should be allowed to
retain some measure of safe standing accommodation. Furthermore every area of the ground
should have its own specific crowd limits and should be individually monitored for numbers
entering that area.
The implications of UEFA and FIFA policy

6.7 The Football Committee is aware that the Federation Internationale de Football
Association (FIFA) passed a resolution on 26th July 1989 that "as from 1993 it will be the duty
of the Confederations and National Associations to hold high-risk matches in their zones only
in all-seater stadia. Under regulations compiled by the Union des Associations Europeennes
de Football), high risk matches are defined as

    i) All UEFA final and semi-final ties of the UEFA club competitions
       as well as the final tournament matches of the European Football
       Championship.

    ii) When declared as such by UEFA on the basis of previous incidents
        of supporters of one or both teams or of other exceptional
        circumstances.

   iii) When it is expected that visiting team supporters will exceed 10%
        of stadium capacity or will exceed 3,000 persons.

   iv) When full capacity stadium is expected or more than 50,000 persons
       present.

    v) When the match is likely to attract a large number of emigrants/
       foreign workers originating from the country of the visiting team,
       who either live in the country where the match is being played or
       in neighbouring countries.


6.8 The Football Committee recognises that Lord Justice Taylor considered this development
in his Final Report, together with the view of the Football Association that although this
resolution is strictly only binding to international matches or matches between UK clubs and
clubs from abroad, the FA feels duty-bound to follow this policy in relation to the domestic
football scene.


6.9 The Football Committee agrees with the view of Lord Justice Taylor on this issue that
“The Resolution does not force clubs to install all-seating as a condition of staging high-risk
matches. There is still the option to use only those parts of the ground which have seating...if
a small club with little seating accommodation draws a large first division club at home in the
Cup in 1993 (a high risk match) it will be able only to use its limited seating accommodation
or the game will have to be played at a better equipped ground elsewhere" 31


6.10 The Football Committee believes that for the many clubs who might only take part in
such matches very infrequently, sacrificing 'home advantage' for these few games would be
an option which they would wish to exercise in return for more flexible treatment regarding
their own situation for the vast majority of their existence.




        31 Lord Justice Taylor: Final Report into the Hillsborough Disaster: Paragraph 83
6.11 Through this approach, a possibility for the Football Licensing Authority to consider might
be, for example, three categories of grounds. Those smaller grounds with a capacity of less
than 10,000, discussed in paragraph 6.6 above; grounds which fully meet the FIFA and UEFA
requirements and are fully all-seated; and an intermediate category of ground which has
retained some degree of limited standing accommodation. Whatever the criteria adopted by
the Football Licensing Authority, the essence of the Football Committee's argument remains
that the maximum degree of flexibility within the requirements of safety should be exercised
wherever possible.


6.12 The Football Committee believes that by adopting such a flexible approach, the
Government will be acting within the spirit of Lord Justice Taylor and will achieve the highest
possible standards of safety and comfort which Taylor was concerned with developing.
Furthermore, the Government will be demonstrating a laudable desire to stand up for the
millions of people who follow the national game and a responsible willingness to reconsider
policy proposals in the light of changing circumstances.


6.13 The safety of supporters at football can be combined with a flexible and responsible
attitude towards the game - the Football Committee believes this submission provides the
basis for such an attitude.




THE PARLIAMENTARY ALL-PARTY FOOTBALL COMMITTEE
May 1992
