»                                THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION
                                                        LIMITED
                                                         Founded 1863
                                          Patron: H e r M a j e s t y T h e Q u e e n
                                        President: H . R . H . T h e D u k e o f K e n t
                                           Chairman: S i r B e r t M i l l i c h i p

    Chief Executive:                                                                         Phone: 071-402 7151/071-262 4542
 R. H. G.   K   e l l y f c is                                                                         Telex: 261110
                                                                                                 Facsimile: 071-402 0486



                                   16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW
    Our Ref:                                          Your Ref:

                       CFCH/MP/137                                               22 January 1992

CONFIDENTIAL


Mr. A.R. Baden
Sport and Recreation Division
The Department of Education and Science
Sanctuary Buildings
Great Smith Street
Westminster
London SW1P 3BT

Dear Tony

Further to our telephone conversation of a few days ago, I am sending to
you a copy of a report which I prepared for our Executive Sub Committee,
which is dealing with matters relating to Taylor Report implementation.

As you will see, the document is confidential but, please come back to
me if you have any questions, or observations, on the content of the
report.

With very best wishes.


Yours sincerely




C.F.C. Hu
Director of Coaching and Education

c.c. R.H.G. Kelly




                                       Registered Office: 16 Lancaster Gate, London W 23LW
                                       Incorporated in London Registration Number 77797
'CONFIDENTIAL


                                     STADIA

                    THE TAYLOR REPORT AND THE F.S.A.D.C.

       Following the work undertaken in preparing the section of The
       Blueprint which deals with Stadia, it has become evident that the
       process of implementation of the Taylor Report is less than
       satisfactory.   It is also evident that The Football Association
       should play a lead role in co-ordinating various agencies, and
       adding momentum to the implementation process.

       It has, therefore, been thought appropriate that there should be
       an additional recommendation to those already made, in respect of
       stadia, namely :

            The Football Association should establish a Stadia
            Development Unit to incorporate the work of the
            Football Stadia Advisory Design Council and co­
            ordinate the actioning of the National Plan for Stadia
            Development, in conformity with the Lord Justice
            Taylor report and the requirements of the Football
            Licensing Authority. The unit should link with a
            single regulatory body comprising The Football
            Association and the Football Trust.

       It is further proposed that the Stadia Development Unit should be
       incorporated within the proposed International Sports Institute,
       at Loughborough, which, itself, should incorporate the work
       presently undertaken by F.S.A.D.C.        It  is felt that     an
       appropriate title for the proposed unit within the Institute
       would be 'Stadium and Arena Design Centre'.

       The Stadium     and   Arena   Design   Centre   would   have   two   primary
       functions :

       *   Consultancy Services.

      *    Publications and Seminars.

      Eventually,    it is hoped that S.A.D.C. would embrace two            further
      aspects :

      *    Research.

      *    International Marketing.

      The S.A.D.C. would derive revenue from its various activities.
      After an initial pump-priming injection, it would aim to become
      self-financing.   The achievement of this would depend on the
      arrangements that it could enter into.     Particularly important
      would be the scope, scale and timing of the work entrusted to it,
      and the fees paid to it for the services it provides.   The ideal
      arrangement would be for The F.A. to ensure that the design and
      management of those projects that The F.A. helps to fund are
      channelled through S.A.D.C.'s Consultancy Services Unit, and that
      appropriate financial arrangements are entered into.
 It is proposed that S.A.D.C. will receive fees of 1.5% of project
 costs in respect of Consultancy Services.     This should ensure
 that    the    Consultancy   Services   Unit     is   financially
 self-supporting.

 THE CONSULTANCY SERVICES UNIT

 The Consultancy Services Unit (CSU) would provide a service to
 Clients (Football Clubs and other Sporting Bodies), which would
 encompass a "Cradle to the Grave" concept for the upgrading of
 existing grounds and stadia and for the development of new ones,
 i.e., review of a Club's Business Plan, (and, when requested,
 advice on its preparation), assistance with a consideration of
 options at the conceptual stage, through the development of
 preliminary and detailed designs, to the management of contracts
 for implementing approved designs.

A Club embarking on a development or re-development project would
normally adopt one of the following courses :

 *    appoint a lead Consultant (usually an Architect or
      Structural Engineer),

 *   appoint a Project Manager,

      or

*    appoint a Contractor    (to work on a Design and Construct
      basis).

Whichever route is adopted, the development of the outline
proposals,   and   of   the   approved   detailed   designs and
specifications, will involve professionals from a number of
specialist disciplines.  Among these would normally be :

*    Planning Consultant

*    Architect

*    Structural Engineer

*    Services Engineer

*    Quantity Surveyor and

*    Project Manager

as well as

*    Legal Advisor and

*    Financial Advisor

For work entrusted to CSU, it would assume the role of Project
Manager.   It would not establish its own Design Office, but would
work with selected private sector Architects, Consultants and
Contractors,   as appropriate.      It  would   establish  quality
standards and operating procedures which such organizations would
be required to follow.
CSU would also involve the appropriate specialist Departments of
Loughborough University to provide expert input in various
fields.   These could include Management and Business Studies,
Construction Management, Materials Technology etc.

For each project with which it becomes involved, CSU would :

*    discuss with the Club, or other Client, the merits of the
     various ways of proceeding,

*    make recommendations, and after a decision has been taken

*    prepare a Design Brief, in conjunction with the Client.

For projects for which Consultants are to be directly appointed,
CSU would also :

*    agree with the Client which Consultants should be appointed,

*    co-ordinate, direct and manage the input of the individual
      consulting organizations engaged on the project,

*■   monitor their performance,

*    oversee the selection and appointment of Contractors and
     Equipment Suppliers,

*    oversee the supervision by the Consultants of the
     construction and installation activities of the Contractors
     and Suppliers,

*    oversee the certification by the Consultants of payments
     to be made by the Client to the Contractors and Suppliers,

*    assist with the resolution of any disputes that may arise
     between the parties during the execution of the project.

When a Design and Construct route is to be followed, CSU would :

*    agree with the Client which Contractors should be invited
      to tender,

*    approve the principal Design Consultants the Contractors
      are proposing to engage,

*    advise on the Tender Documents that should be adopted,

*    advise on the Tenders that are received,

*    approve the   Equipment Suppliers to be used,

*    arrange for the supervision of the work of the Contractor,
      Sub-Contractors, Suppliers and Installers,

*    arrange for   the testing of installed work,

*    certify payments due to the Contractor, and

*    assist with the resolution of any disputes.
5.9    CSU would always work closely with the Club's Legal and Financial
       Advisors, and when so agreed, it could also co-ordinate their
       input.

5.10   Through the use of CSU-developed and approved procedures and
       standards,   and by co-ordinating the inputs of the various
       individual    Consultants    involved,   the consultancy  services
       provided, through SADC/CSU, should result in improved quality and
       better value for money, which would more than offset the cost of
       CSU's fees. In this connection, it should be remembered that the
       costs of construction and equipment supply are by far the major
       part of the total costs of any development, or redevelopment
       project,   and   it is    invariably   sound policy,  and a   good
       investment, to ensure that full and proper consideration is given
       at the preliminary stages to both the conceptual and detailed
       aspects of the project by experienced and appropriately qualified
       specialists.

6.     PUBLICATIONS AND SEMINARS

       At the outset, this work will not be essentially carried out by
       the staff working at the S.A.D.C.  This service, from a staffing
       point of view, will proceed in much the same way as at present.

6.1    There is, however, a need for funding, although the publications
       do produce modest income.  It is proposed that the Football Trust
       be requested to make a grant of £150,000 to ensure the continuity
       of this essential work, and will secure 12 publications.

6.2    The publications will, of course, form an important part of the
        promotion and marketing of S.A.D.C.,       both nationally  and
        internationally, and because of the professional standing of
        those involved in writing the publications, they will carry the
        stamp of authority.

7.     OTHER FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS

       The costs of providing a facility for S.A.D.C., within the
       International Sports Institute, have been costed under the
       financing of the Institute,     in connection with which,     an
       application will be made for funding through the Foundation for
       Sport and the Arts.   The cost of providing office accommodation
       at the outset will be absorbed within the overall office
       provision for the Institute.

       There are, however, sum pump-priming costs of £250,000,     which
       constitute estimated outgoings, in year one, as follows :

                SALARY AND SUPPORT COSTS - CONSULTANCY SERVICES

                Director ;                          £ 55,000
                Secretary :                         £ 20,000
                Travel :                            £ 10,000
                Office Supplies :                   £ 30,000
                Legal and Accountancy Fees :        £ 30,000
                Honorarium and CommitteeExpenses : £ 30,000
                L.U.T. Expenses :                   £ 50,000
                Contingency :                       £ 25,000

                                                    £250,000
#
    7.1    On the basis of the agreement in principle, outlined in 4 above,
            and on the basis of grants, or loans, to the value of £25m, the
            projected income for the Consultancy Services @ 1.5% would be
            £375,000.

           The S.A.D.C. would show a small profit at the end of year one
           which could be used to facilitate expansion.

    8*     OPERATIONAL STRUCTURE OF S.A.D.C. WITHIN THE INTERNATIONAL      SPORTS
            INSTITUTE

    8.1    As a Division of the International Sports      Institute, S.A.D.C.
           would operate within the philosophy and         principles of the
           Institute.

    8.2    The International Sports Institute would grant a substantial
           measure of self-determination, and independence, to the S.A.D.C.
           Executive Board.

    8.3    The S.A.D.C. Executive Board   should   comprise   of   representation
           from the following :

                                The Football Association
                                   The Premier League
                                   The Football League
                                   The Football Trust
                            The Football Licensing Authority
                                    S.A.D.C. Director
                             Present Chairman of F.S.A.D.C.
                                 Loughborough University
                             Observer status to: Home Office
                               Observer Status to: D.E.S.

    8.4.   The S.A.D.C. Executive Board would,     subject to 8.1 above,
            determine the Centre's policy and be responsible for monitoring
            the performance of the Centre.
                                                                           /


    8.5    In addition to, and separate from, the S.A.D.C. Executive Board,
            there is a need for an S.A.D.C. Consultative Committee.      The
            members should comprise professionals with relevant expertise
            drawn from Academia and the Construction Industry.

    9.     INTERNATIONAL INSTITUTE BOARD OF GOVERNORS

    9-1    It is appropriate that a representative from the S.A.D.C.
            Executive Board has a seat on the Institute Board of Governors.

    10.    The contents of this paper have been discussed with the Chairman
            of F.S.A.D.C. and the Secretary of the Football Trust.




cfch/mp/13.1.92
