               a c tio n   f M5   STLWART
               BY
                                                      QUEEN ANNE’S GATE LONDON SW1H 9AT
               FOR INK:

                                                                                       - Vm«Y o f s t a t e
                                                                                b i ^ r . O F NATiOWAL




                                                                                  811 JUN 1992!
                                                                              rf)UH@ INSTRUCTIONS
                                                                                                 ...........
            Review of All-Seating Requirement at Football League Groum


      Thank you for your letter of 29 May providing the opportunity for me to comment
on the scope of the re-examination of the all-seating requirement for Football League
grounds.

       I welcome your proposal and I am quite content with the scope of the review. I would
suggest that the announcement might reiterate the Government’s continuing support for the
principles of spectator safety and comfort which were set out by Lord Justice Taylor in his
Final Report.

       In the fourth paragraph of your letter you say that the review will examine whether
the Football Licensing Authority needs new powers to require terracing to be brought up to
a sufficient standard. While there may be merit in providing the FLA with additional
powers, safety matters are already addressed by the safety certification procedures of the
Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 operated by local authorities in accordance with advice
contained in the Home Departments’ Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds. I think that there
may be legal difficulties if the licensing procedures to be introduced by the FLA impinged
on the safety issues covered by safety certificates, but I leave you to consider this.

        I assume that any new powers you have in mind for the FLA could include extending
its role in reviewing the discharge by local authorities of their safety certification functions
under the 1975 Act in relation to sports grounds at which designated matches are played.
Whilst I have no particularly strong views on this, I wonder whether giving the FLA more
"policing" powers is necessary to ensure that local authorities fulfil their statutory duties.
This, of course, is a matter for you to consider in the light of the re-examination.

        Finally, I realise that as currently drafted, the Football Spectators (Designation of
Football Matches in England and Wales) Order 1990 needs to be amended to take account
of the newly formed Premier League. However, I would hope that any re-examination of
the all-seater policy would not exclude any matches played at the home grounds of Premier
or League grounds from the definition of "designated match" as this would have serious
ramifications for the use and effect of restriction orders under Part II of the 1989 Act.

       I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister, Norman Lamont, Ian Lang, David
Hunt, Tony Newton and Sir Robin Butler.




                                                   KENNETH CLARKE
The Rt Hon David Mellor, QC., MP
Secretary of State for National Heritage
Horse Guards Road
LONDON SW1P 3AL
