                                                                               fcs




                               Hillsborough Family Support Group




            26 November 1989

            Dear   &   Won     > * w , cl   k o u d c W /C M
%   |
            On 15 April 1989, ninety-five people were killed and hundreds injured
            at the P A Cup Semi-Final at Hillsborough, Sheffield.

            As a result of this, the Hillsborough Family Support Group was formed
            in an effort to provide unity for the bereaved families.

            The aims and objectives of the Group are:

            1   To support and assist each other.

            2   To seek justice.

            3   To press for a National Body to standardise and supervise the Safety
                Certification process.

            4   To improve safety at all sports stadia by revision of ’The Green Guide’
                and the introduction of such other recommendations from
                Lord Justice Taylor’s Reports as are necessary.

            5   To press Parliament for the introduction of the necessary legislation
                to ensure that (4) above becomes mandatory.

            6   Press for immediate improvement in the Administration of Justice Act 1982
                (incorporating the Fatal Accident Act 1976) and for the mt-L'Oduction
                of ’non-liability’ compensation legislation.

            The victims of the Hillsborough disaster came from a wide area of the
            United Kingdom.

            We are now liaising with Mr Frank Fields, MP for Birkenhead, who has arranged
            for the Committee of this Group to attend a meetinginParliament   on
            Monday 4 December at 4 pm, in Room 11.

            We are asking for your help and support in achievingour aims. Your
            attendance at the meeting would be most welcome.

        VSBORofy        Yours sincerely


                         Barry Devonside
                         SECRETARY
