hs.4.19/hillsb.dm


Mr Bolton

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER KORKINS PARTY (LIVERPOOL)
I enclose as requested a draft reply to the correspondence
received from the Hillsborough Disaster Working Party. Like many
others who have written in about the recommendations by
Lord Justice Taylor the group agree with some recommendations but
not others. X do not think there is much mileage to be had in
debating the pros and cons of the recommendations with them.
They have their views and are unlikely to change. For example
they do not wholeheartedly support all seated accommodation,* they
believe the Green Guide should be mandatory; they maintain their
criticisms of the police and refer to wider police accountability
arguments; they believe supporters should form part of advisory
groups; and, it seems, they take the view that £100 million
donated by the Chancellor is not sufficient.
I have read (or rather skimmed) the report about the provision
of emergency services at football grounds. We may perhaps use
this in considering what should go into the Green Guide. On the
face of it the proposals put forward seem expensive and depend
upon a considerable amount of co-operation from the relevant
health authority. The authors of the report seem to have a good
pedigree however and I do not think we would dissent from the
general view that grounds staging major events of this sort
should have an emergency action plan. Whether involvement of a
consultant casualty surgeon (paid for by the club) is a
reasonable step is perhaps more open to question.
The draft reply therefore brief touches upon the main issues to
which the Government are committed and which fall within our
sphere. I have not touched upon issues directed at the football
authorities and local Government.      I have also taken the
opportunity in the draft to suggest that if the group,have any
further specific suggestions for inclusion in the Green Guide
they should let us have them.
A draft reply for your signature is attached.




                                          D J MOULD
                                          G2 Division
19 April 1990
Enc

FSP/90 35/48/139
hs.4.19/hillsbl.peb


                                                         3322



       FSP/90 35/48/139                     April 1990



Chair
Hillsborough Disaster Working Party
Chief Executive’s Office
Liverpool City Council
Municipal Buildings
Dale Street
LIVERPOOL    L69 2DH




Dear Sir

The Home Secretary has asked me to thank you for your letter and
enclosures of 29 March setting out your Working Party’s response
to the Inquiry by Lord Justice Taylor.

Your response covers many issues and I hope you will forgive me
if I do not comment in detail on all of them - particularly that
of police accountability which, I think, goes some way beyond the
subject of safety at sports grounds. In this respect I should
like to emphasise that the police presence within a football
ground is a special service; primary responsibility for safety
at the ground rests with the ground operator who invites, for a
charge, the public onto his premises.

Lord Justice Taylor recognised that the introduction of all
seated accommodation at football league grounds would not be a
panacea to cure all the problems of safety and crowd behaviour
which are associated with the game. But he did feel that it does
more than any other single measure to achieve these objectives.
The Government regard all seated accommodation as a major step
to creating a better, safer environment in which spectators may
watch football. We therefore propose to implement it using the
provisions of the Football Spectators Act 1989 as necessary.

X note what you say about pitch perimeter fencing. The subject
was, as you know, covered fully by Lord Justice Taylor in his
final report. There is little that I can usefully add to what
he has already said. X am sure we are on common ground in hoping
that the unruly elements which affect soccer crowds can be rooted
out and that improvements to football grounds in order to make
them less fortress like in their appearance can take place.

We are in the process of revising the Green Guide in the light
of the recommendations by Lord Justice Taylor. It is only right
to say here that the guide stood up very well to intensive
examination as a result of the Hillsborough tragedy. We have
noted what you say about the provision of turnstiles and more
advice on ingress. We have no plans to make the guide mandatory.
If you have any further, specific points which you would like us
to take into consideration please do not hesitate to let us know.

Reduction in the pools betting tax is expected to release up to
£100 million over the next 5 years.      This is a substantial
contribution and is on top of the £75 million said to be
available from the Football Trust and in addition to any finance
that is raised by the football authorities and clubs themselves
who, as I have said, are responsible for the safety of their
customers.
                                         Yours faithfully




                                         P E BOLTON
                                         (Fire and Emergency
                                         Planning Department)
