x.    Mr McDonald
2.    PS/Mr Moynihai^



FOOTBALL: IMPACT OF THE NATIONAL MEMBERSHIP SCHEME
ON THE TURNSTILES


1.    This submission concerns the handling of spectators whose
cards are, for whatever reason, invalidated at the turnstiles.
There are two reasons why we need to establish a clear line on
this key practical issue now:-
     (1)   Ernst Young, the FA/League*s consultants need to know what
           to say about it in the invitation to tender document; and
           the timetable demands that they invite tenders early next
           month;
     (2)   we know that Lord Justice Taylor will raise it when we
           make our presentation to him and his assessors; the
           presentation has b§en"arranged for 17 October.
2.    We have recognised from the start that this is the single
most difficult aspect of the practical arrangements for the
scheme.   A card might be rejected by the checking machinery
because:-

     (1)   it has been declared invalid because it is in the banned.
           lost or stolen category;
     (2)   it has been damaged in some way;
     (3)   the checking system is faulty.                               •k
Ernst Young estimate that the combined effect of these counts
could produce a rejection rate of 4% or 5% at any match.    This
means 300/400 rejected cards at a game with the average
attendance of 8,000 and possibly as many as 2,500 at a big match
drawing a crowd of 50,000.

3;     We have always acknowledged that arrangements for dealing
with- the rejected card cannot be allowed to lead to delay and
confusion at the turnstiles.   Our position has been that anyone
whose card is rejected would be allowed to proceed into the
ground where his card would be given a second check and enquiries
made. This process would involve a police officer in appropriate
cases.

4.    The last meeting of the FMA working group underlined that
neither the football authorities nor the police believe that it
is practical to attempt to investigate these sort of numbers of
rejected cards either at or immediately after the turnstiles.
Even if the rejection rate turns out to be far lower, say 1%, the
police do not feel that it would be practical to attempt to
interrogate all those concerned on the spot, at most grounds. Mr
Richard Adams, Assistant Chief, Constable, Merseyside, ACPO's
representative on the working group (he is very sound and has
\
 •ade a valuable contribution to the group’s discussions)
suggested that the only sensible way of dealing with rejected
cards is for them to be retained by the turnstile operator, the
spectator given a receipt and allowed in and the Investigation to
follow later - either during the match or the following day.
5.     The advantages of this approach are that it would avoid
delays at the turnstiles and that it would catch some of those
attempting to use invalid cards, if only by preventing them from
using them again. The disadvantage‘is that a hooligan who steals
someone else's card is allowed to enter the ground freely and
will not be checked at any point, unless he is involved in
trouble inside the ground.   Mr Adams, supported by the football
authorities, argued strongly that, at most grounds, there was no
practical alternative to this approach, because there was no
space to interrogate people whdse cards were rejected.      Many
grounds have immediate access, street to terracing.

6.     I think that we are bound to accept that this is a real
difficulty since there are only a limited number of grounds where
space for interrogation is available. The immediate second check
of invalid cards also raises difficulties in stewarding and
policing arrangements.
7.     The Minister is invited to agree that we adopt the
approach set out in paragraph 4 above. We are of course ready to
discuss this important issue.       Mr McDonald and I will be
attending the next meeting of the FMA working group on 27
September and the football authorities are bound to raise it
again.   The Minister might wish to discuss this, if only on a
preliminary basis, with Mr McDonald (276 4755) or me (276 0608)
by telephone.




P A LEE
25 September 1989

cc   Mr Owen
     Mr Kinghan (o/r)
     Mr Baden *
