h s .4.2/rugby.peb


                                                        3322




                                         2 April 1991



Sir James Anderton CBE, QPM, BL, CBIM
Association of Chief Police Officers
Greater Manchester Police
Police Headquarters
PO Box 22 (South West)
Chester House
Boyer Street
GREATER MANCHESTER     Ml6 ORE




EXTENSION OF ALL SEATED ACCOMMODATION REQUIREMENTS TO RUGBY UNION
AND RUGBY LEAGUE GROUNDS

You will recall that Lord Justice Taylor recommended in his final
report into the Hillsborough Stadium disaster, that standing
accommodation be progressively eliminated at all sports grounds
designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.       The
government, in its response to the report, indicated that it
intended to apply the recommendation in the case of UEFA high
risk football matches, the 4 football league divisions and the
national stadia, and that it would consider the position of
sports other than football.        I am writing to seek the
Association's views on the need for extension of all seated
accommodation to rugby union and rugby league matches played at
sports grounds designated under the 1975 Act.

We have made it clear to local authorities that it is
inappropriate to use the safety certification procedure of the
1975 Act to make requirements on seating.       The scope of the
powers contained in the Football Spectators Act 1989 is limited
to association football and primary legislation would therefore
be required to impose a move to all seated accommodation at rugby
grounds.

Last summer we met representations of the Rugby League and Rugby
Unions   of  England   and Wales.       Both  authorities   were
unenthusiastic about the recommendation, pointing out that
neither sport has suffered the hooligan problems associated with
football; that (at rugby league at least) spectators like to
change ends at half time, and that without the hooligan element
there is no evidence that standing is intrinsically unsafe.
There are plans for the development of Twickenham to become an
all seated stadium over the next few years, but there is no
evidence of significant moves in this direction at the national
stadium in Cardiff or at club grounds.   A list of the grounds
concerned is annexed.

Whilst Lord Justice Taylor stated that there is a risk of
overcrowding wherever large numbers gather, he acknowledged that
hooliganism of the kind experienced by soccer was minimal at
rugby matches.   He said that where unruly behaviour does occur
at major fixtures, it is more likely to be unorganised,
unpremeditated and alcohol-related. The argument for all seated
accommodation at such grounds is therefore perhaps not as obvious
as for football grounds.

Cost is an additional and inevitable consideration, given the
financial status of many of the clubs concerned. Football Trust
funds are not available to rugby and there would be considerable
pressure for government assistance if all seated requirements
were to be imposed.

For these reasons we are inclined to the view that fresh powers
to impose seating at rugby grounds are not justified at present.
Before putting proposals to Ministers, however, the views of
your Association would be welcomed.

Although this letter is concerned with rugby, some major cricket
grounds are also designated under the 1975 Act. Most of these
grounds do in fact provide seated accommodation for most if not
all spectators and we do not regard what standing there is in the
somewhat different atmosphere of cricket matches as a particular
risk. I hope you agree.

Finally and on a separate issue, our Mr Brian Stickley has agreed
to talk about the Green Guide to your Football Ground Commanders
and Liaison Officers Conferences in June.    I wonder whether it
would be possible for an official from my division to attend one
or more of the conferences as an observer? We would of course
be happy to answer any questions which may crop up on the
legislation relating to safety at sports grounds and the role
of the Football Licensing Authority.    My colleague Roger Haugh
can be contacted On 071 273 3133.

                                         Yours sincerely




                                         P E BOLTON
                                         Head of G2 Division
                                         (Fire and Emergency
                                         Planning Department)

hcc   Mr Goddard
      Mr Stickley
GROUNDS DESIGNATED UNDER THE SAFETY OF SPORTS GROUNDS ACT 1975



RUGBY LEAGUE                         RUGBY UNION
Barrow                               Twickenham
Batley                               Cardiff Arms Park
Blackpool                                  (International)
Bradford Northern
Castleford                           Bridgend
Dewsbury                             Bristol
Featherstone Rovers                  Camborne
Halifax                              Ebbw Vale
Huddersfield                         Exeter
Hull                                 Gloucester
Hull Kingston Rovers                 Leicester
Keighley                             Llanelli
Leeds                                Neath
Leigh                                Newport
Oldham                               Pontypridd
St Helens                            Port Talbot
Salford                              Redruth
Swinton                              Swansea
Wakefield Trinity                    Workington (Ellis Ground)
Warrington
Widnes
Wigan
Workington Town
York
