hs.11.27.hillsb26.dm


FEP/89 35/48/122

The Chief Executive
County Councils
Metropolitan District Councils
London Borough Councils
Common Council of the City of London

Chief Officer of Police

Dear Sir/Madam

HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR      /1989
SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS -HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY

Introduction

This Circular follows up Home Office Circular 68/1989 covering
the Interim Report of the Hillsborough Inquiry and is primarily
to remind recipients of the Government's support for the interim
recommendations and of the need for continued vigilance in order
to maintain safety standards at football grounds.

General

2.   The Home Secretary is most grateful to local authorities,
police and emergency services for their prompt action and support
in securing the implementation of the Interim Report's
recommendations.     He remains of the view that continued
compliance with the recommendations contained in the Interim
Report is essential in order to restore public confidence in the
safety arrangements at football grounds.

Particular Needs

3.   Christmas and New Year fixtures are liable to attract larger
than normal crowds and extra care and vigilance is likely to be
needed. Similarly, the FA Challenge Cup is likely to result in
larger than normal crowds attending crowds of non-league or lowly-
placed league clubs drawn against higher ratejf opposition.
Strict enforcement of safety certificate conditions restricting
numbers should be applied and special arrangements may be
necessary for such matches to prevent build up, congestion and
overcrowding. Local authorities are reminded of the powers under
section 10 of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975
Act) which can, if necessary, be used in respect of grounds which
are not subject to safety certification if the admission of
spectators involves or will involve a serious risk to their
safety.

Football Clubs

4.   A copy of this Circular together with a letter reminding
clubs of their responsibility to ensure the safety of spectators
(see annex) has been sent to all football clubs, the FA
Association and Football League.

Resource Implications

5.   It is not envisaged that there are any long term resource
implications as a result of the contents of this Circular.

Other

6.   Any enquiries about the contents of this Circular should be
addressed to Mr A Brown (01-273 2765).

7.      Copies of this Circular are being sent separately to Chief
Fire Officers for information.
                                           Yours faithfully




                                           P E BOLTON
                                           (Fire and Emergency
                                           Planning Department)
h s .11.27/hillsb27.dm

                         DRAFT LETTER


FEP/89 35/48/122


The Secretary
Football Club




Dear Sir

SAFETY OF FOOTBALL GROUNDS

I enclose a self-explanatory copy of Home Office Circular
No.     /1989 to local authorities responsible for enforcement
of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) and
police     reminding them of the continuing need for care and
vigilance in order to ensure that the safety of the public who
attend football matches is properly secured.

The Home Secretary recognises that football club management are
themselves keen to ensure that public confidence in the safety
arrangements at major football matches is fully restored. Prime
responsibility for their safety rests with the clubs and those
managing the football grounds. All clubs are reminded therefore
that they should ensure that all the recommendations of the
Hillsborough Inquiry's Interim Report, have been or are being
complied with and that full co-operation continues to be given
with local authorities, police and emergency services.
                                        Yours faithfully
hs.11.27/hillsb28.dm


                            DRAFT LETTER


FEP/89 35/48/122


The Secretary
A.   Football League
B.   Football Association




Dear

SAFETY OF FOOTBALL GROUNDS

I enclose copies of Home Office Circular No.      /1989 sent out
to local authorities, police and emergency services together with
our letter issued to all football league clubs. I think you will
find the correspondence is self-explanatory.

I know that you would support the sentiment for special care and
vigilance to ensure that spectators attending football matches
do so safely. I hope you will get in touch with us if there are
particular problems arising.

I have written in similar terms to the Football League/Football
Association.

                                           Yours sincerely
