                                                                                                               CD
\
                                                                                             SPORTS
    The Sports Council                                 ^   ^                        H        COUNCIL
                                                                                   1 6 Upper Woburn Place
                                                                                   London WC1H0QP
        24 May 1989                                                                Tel: 0 1 -3 8 8 1 2 7 7
                                                                                   F a x :0 1 -3 8 3 5 7 4 0
                                                                                   Telex: 2 7 8 3 0 SP0RTCG

     R M Whalley Esq                                                               Chairman: Peter G. Yarranton
                                                                                   Vice Chairman:
     Room 662                                                                      Professor J Allan Patmore B.LittMA
     The Home Office                                                               Director General: David Pickup
     50 Queen Anne's Gate
     London SW1H




    M    r   a   s   L   i h   a   M   ^   j   ,


    HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY


    I enclose three copies of a submission by the Sports Council
    to the above-named Inquiry.   Officers of this Council would be
    very willing to give supplementary oral evidence if this was
    thought likely to be helpful.

    We have not, for                               the present, given any publicity       to our
    written submission                             but would wish appropriately to do      in due
    course.   Could you                             please provide me with guidance as     to how
    Lord Justice Taylor                             would prefer us to proceed in this    regard?


         0\j A


                           \A      fi d - p
    David Pickup
THE SPORTS COUNCIL

HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER INQUIRY

INTRODUCTION

1    This report summarises the initial views of the Sports Council in respect
     of the Hillsborough Stadium disaster on 15 April 1989.   This submission
     is divided into four main sections:

     (a)     background information;

     (b)     reflections on the physical layout of Hillsborough and perceived
             crowd control difficulties;

     (c)     proposals for the future     in    relation   to   location, design and
             management of stadia; and

     (d)     areas where future    assistance    from   the Sports Council might be
             considered helpful.

BACKGROUND

2     The Sports Council was established by Royal Charter in 1972 with the
     prime functions of promoting the knowledge and practice of sport in
     general. Technical advice on the planning, design, construction and
     overall management of sports facilities is provided through the Council's
     various technical units. As far as soccer is concerned, in addition to
     general advisory work with the football authorities at national and local
     level, the Council acts in a specific advisory role to the Football
     Trust.

SAFETY AT SPORTS EVENTS - SPORTS COUNCIL INVOLVEMENT

3     The fire at Bradford City Football Ground on 11 May 1985 and the events
     at Birmingham City Football Ground led to the establishment of a Heme
     Office Committee of Inquiry into crowd safety and control at sports
     grounds carried out by Justice Popplewell.      The Sports Council was
     invited to submit both written and oral evidence. Written evidence was
     submitted on 28 June 1985 and is contained in Appendix A.      The main
     points included in both written and oral evidence were:

     (a)     The   Sports Council considered that designation of sports grounds
             for crowd safety and other purposes should run wider than stadia
             for association football.      This point was taken up within the
             Popplewell findings;

     (b)     The    Sports Council questioned the lack of legal prescription in
             this area, advocating instead an approach controlled by statutory
             regulations.    The Council proposed that consideration be given to
             incorporating a revised version of the Heme Office publication
              "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds" (known as the "Green Guide") as
             a technical approved document of the National Building Regulations
              (then being revised). This proposal was not adopted. The 'Green
             Guide' remains a voluntary code and has no legal force;

     (c)     The   Sports Council identified a need to revise further the 'Green
             Guide' and offered its technical services to assist in this task.
             While some revisions of the 'Green Guide' were made, the Council
             was not involved in the exercise;
                                                                                                                        2


                                       (d)       The Council drew attention to the fact that many existing grounds
                                                 provided entrances frcm and exits to the public pavement and
                                                 highway thereby aggravating crowd control problems due to lack of
                                                 circulation space;

                      4              On more detailed issues, the Council drew attention to two specific
                                     points regarding future construction and management of sports stadia: -

                                       (a)       The Council's work on a       number of British Standards led us to
                                                  express reservations about the use of synthetic plastic turf within
                                                  enclosed stadia.     For example, if the Bradford pitch had been
                                                  synthetic grass and itself had burned, it may not have permitted
                                                  escape frcm the stand. This issue was subsequently raised with the
                                                  Fire Research Station but was not pursued because few football
                                                  clubs have had artificial grass pitches constructed.

                                       (b)       More pertinently, the Council emphasised the need to evaluate new
                                                  materials and    products,   particularly   proposals   for   pitch
                                                  perimeter/security fences. We identified the need for these to be
                                                  able to be collapsed instantly under the control of management.   A
                                                  sketch (included as the last page of Appendix A) was provided based
r               -oi               s,              on observations of the Heysel Stadium disaster.    This point was
?                                                taken up generally within the Popplewell Report which it stated
                              -                  (Chapter 6: paragraph A.24) that "Consideration should be given to
     tovp' T* ^           ‘   f    i\            the design of a standard, efficient perimeter fence with proper
      ^                             ' jy         exits." We are not aware of any such subsequent study having been
                                  'k f o         undertaken in any depth in the United Kingdom.

                      REFLECTIONS ON THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

                      Physical Layout

               5                       By (^arrangement with thef Home Office and the West Midlands Constabulary,
       r- '/^W^vK                      technical-officers of the Spoi^ Ctouncil visited the Hillsborough Stadium
                                       on 28 April 1989 to assist their understanding of the physical layout of
    V:**,                              the stadium. From this first, and necessarily cursory, visit we have a
                                       variety of concerns about the design of the ground and noted a number of
      “     ^         *                features which do not appear to meet the recommendations contained in the
            ■                          "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds". The Council assumes that these and
                                       other features will be the subject of careful review by the Committee of
                                        Inquiry:

                                       (a)       Within the external circulation area adjacent to the stand and
                                                 terracing, signposting was poor. In particular access to the left
                                                 hand end of the terrace is not obvious, being hidden frcm direct
                                                 view by a high security wall;

                                           (b)   The tunnel to the terrace in question is ramped downwards on to the
                                                 terrace. The ramp appeared to be raked in excess of the guideline
                                                 figure of 1:10, apparently as much as 1:7 or even 1:6 at one point;

                                           (c)   The access onto the terrace frcm the ramped tunnel was split into
                                                 two with each divided access being only about 1.5m wide thereby
                                                 liable to cause excessive congestion at this location;

                                           (d)   The gates within the perimeter fence are less than the 1.1m minimum
                                                 width specified in the Green Guide and therefore appear not to meet
                                                 the need for an alternative escape onto the periphery of the pitch.
                                                 The location of the exit gates in the security fence was poor,
                                                 being in the comers rather than centrally placed;
                                                                                                       3

                  (e)   Elsewhere in the ground, a worrying feature is the narrowness of
                        gangways in the north stand. They appear to be about half the
                        minimum width (of 1.1 metres) specified in the Green Guide.

            Crowd Control

            6    The Council has identified         five main issues relevant to crowd control
                 outside or within the ground.      They underline sane of the points we put
                 to the Popplewell Inquiry:

                  (a)   The need for adequate circulation space immediately adjacent to the
                        exterior of the stadium.   Many grounds, like Hillsborough, are
                        unsatisfactory in this respect due to their proximity to housing
                        and other property;

                  (b)   The need for      clear   signposting leading to the ground and at the
                        ground itself;

                  (c)   The need for broad entrances and exits to terraces and stands to
                         allow relatively free movement of spectators;

                  (d)   The need for perimeter fences (where these remain) to be capable of
                         being opened or collapsed under the direct and immediate control of
                         management;

                  (e)   The need for efficient systems of ccmmunication not only between
                         the authorities inside and outside the stadia, but between the
                         authorities and spectators.     Measures to avoid undue pressure on
                         access points (eg. by delaying kick-offs) should be readily
                         transmittable to people anxious to gain entry to the grounds.

            PROPOSALS FOR THE FUTURE

                  Within this section the Council raises three principal issues:

                  (a)    The need for further legislation in respect of safety at sports
                         grounds providing, inter alia, for a central licensing authority
                         for football grounds;

                  (b)    The future location and design of stadia; and

                  (c)    The standard of provision and management of stadia.

            Legislation

            8              The Council repeats its concern expressed to the Popplewell Inquiry (as
r*V,
                          ■reported in Appendix A) that the present building regulations have
                  u        'insufficient application to existing sports grounds.       The Safety at
          y '
                     ^     Sports Ground Act does not specify that Building Regulation control needs
                  X ‘-ff H to be applied by local authorities. The safety certificates awarded by
                &\Jr
 4- i £ *                  local authorities are mostly concerned with crowd numbers, exits and
                           crash barriers.    We submit that this current voluntary code of practice
   tjo j* k
          W   j
                           (appropriately up-dated) should be the basis of legislation for sports
'f, 2 * 4 fs ^             stadia, including those for sports other than association football.

                  The Council proposes that a     central licensing authority for major
                  spectator stadia is established. We are concerned about the perceived
c.Ct^             variety in standards applied by different local authorities (perhaps even
                  by the same local authority). Central licensing would go sane way to
                  providing   co-ordination,   consistency   of   approach   and   inproved
                  monitoring.

                             A-
                                                                                                   f-u
                                                                                                              e t~ ,
                                                                                                'li*-:Lf> j
                                                                                                    4


             , Location and Design of Stadia

              10     One of the key issues raised in respect of stadia is the need for space -
                      for car parking, for external and internal circulation, exiting and
^7          _         entering the spectator areas. The location of many existing football
         8"     ^    grounds in central city/tcwn sites precludes this provision, which
         v*:       / implies the adoption of a gradual but progressive policy of disposing of
                  I grounds in densely developed areas and   replacing the facility on the
             j       urban periphery. The Council believes that opportunities exist for such
                V    developments on a self-funding basis in many instances. This would ai .<=*->
           3r»&      provide the oppattnanTty for~itE^^™thafi''~ one club to be based at newly
■    ^               developed stadia constructed to a high specification and built to meet
         %1          new demands for safety and comfort.

              11    The Council supports the proposals that stadia should be all-seated with
                     tickets sold for specific seats within the ground. While seme adverse
                     reaction should be expected frcm a minority of spectators the objective
                     should be steadily pursued.

              Standard of Design and Management

              12     The Council's earlier submission to the Popplewell Inquiry stressed that
                     it was often the nature and situation of the facility rather than
                     capacity which gave cause for concern. We believe that in a majority of
                     facilities provided for football spectators, the provision is appallingly
                     poor.    The design, provision and management of the facilities far too
                     often is primitive. Football management needs to be much more conscious
                     of the philosophy of customer care.         Its absence must add to crowd
                     behaviour problems. Spectators are often faced with hostile control
                     systems   outside   the grounds (often due to space constrictions);
                     overcrowding in certain parts of the terracing, absence of adequate
                     toilet facilities, rudimentary catering outlets; and an all-too-camon
                     atmosphere of delapidation in the physical environs of the ground.

              13     It is arguable that such poverty of conditions encourages - or at least
                     does nothing to discourage - anti-social behaviour by many football
                     spectators themselves. Certainly a major change in their behaviour and
                     attitudes will be required if more disasters or less serious problems are
                     not to arise in the future. The Council submits that it is now necessary
                     to experiment with the provision of radically inproved facilities which
                     place much more responsibility on managers of grounds to provide
                     spectator accomodation of a substantially higher standard, with more
                     space for circulation, all-seated facilities, vastly improved toilet
                     facilities and increased catering outlets.

               14    Consideration should also be given to a more professional approach to the
                     management of these facilities. The majority of football stadia are
                     managed by the clubs themselves with much of the stewarding within
                     grounds provided on a part-time or voluntary basis.          The use of
                     specialist companies to manage facilities should become more common with
                     the management skills of those companies being an integral element of
                     assessment prior to a licence to operate being provided.

               Financial Implications

               15     The cost of improved facilities and management necessarily will have to
                    _ be passed on to the customer.   However we believe that a review is
                      required of the taxation of football clubs and, at least in the short­
                      term, some allowance made to assist in redevelopment of facilities.
                                                                                     5


FUTURE SPORTS COUNCIL ASSISTANCE

16   The Sports Council can provide extensive technical advice on stadia
     design and management fron an objective stand-point.     The Council is
     anxious to assist the Canmittee within the resources it has available. In
     the inmediate future this assistance could take five main forms:-

     (a)    Assisting in revising the "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds";

     .(b)   Advising   on relevant issues arising fron current work in drafting
             BS 5588, Fire Precautions in the Design, Construction and Use of
             Buildings, Part 6 "Means of Escape in Places of Assembly". This
             advice would relate to design standards for, and associated
             problems within, all-seated stadia, whether open or covered;

     (c)    Organising a seminar of experts relating to the safe design of
             m o d e m stadia. The Council would draw on its extensive contacts in
             this field both nationally and internationally to compare British
             guidance and practices with other legislation and recommendations.
             Preliminary discussions already are taking place towards European
             CEN standards including those relating to stadia. In this work we
             would also invite co-operation from the Royal Institute of British
             Architects (RIBA) and the Institute of Structural Engineers (ISE);

     (d)    Bringing forward the publication of a design guide on new stadia as
             one of its current series on designs of various sports facilities.
             The "Green Guide" is aimed at the upgrading and improvement of
             grounds and not at new stadiumdesign; and

     (e)     Conducting research studies on different designs of perimeter
             fences and moats which provide both protection and safety.

17   TheCouncil would also be prepared toconsider its position as regards
     any central licensing authority thatmay be established     nationally to
     control   stadium   design,   improvements and management.      Currently
     discussions are being held with local authority associations          and
     professional bodies on quality assurance in the management of sports
     facilities - a principle which could be extended to football stadia.




May 1989
                                                  APPENDIX A




     THE     S P O R T S   C O U N C I L




    Written Evidence by the Sports Council


       to the 1985 Committee of Inquiry


into Crowd Safety and Control at Sports Grounds
                                                                    p n g SPORTS1
                                                                    o l J <o u n < u
The Sports Council                                                 V*

                                                                       Lo 'Joofe' \VOij>jrn Place
                                                                       Lor/lon V.Clrl OOP
                                                                       tei. 0 1 -3 S 3 1 2 ' :
                                                                       Tele.': 2 ^ 3 3 0 SPORTCG.
                                                                       Chairman: O'CW JeensCSE
                                                                       v ice Chairman: ;ar MeCaBun
                                                                       Director General: Jonn Wheati**
Mr N L Morgan
Secretary to the Inquiry
Cocnnittee of Inquiry into Crowd Safety                     Our ref.

  and Control at Sports,Grounds                            Your ref.

Home Office
Queen Anne's Gate
                                                                          28 June 1985
London SW1H 9AT




Dear Six
Committee of Inquiry into Crowd Safety and Control at Sports Grounds

Thank- you for your letter of 3 June 1985.

In the tine available I have prepared our response in the following way:

(a)    Responses to your questions are set out under the headings and numbers
        hich you have put to us.

 (b)   Additional responses are set out in appendices as follows:

       Appendix 1:   Relevant Aspects of Present Sports Council Involvement

       Appendix 2:   Products and Ideas (and the need for a focus for enquiries)

       Appendix 3:   A Fence and Division Proposal.

 I hope you find this helpful. You may feel that certain aspects need further
 discussion or oral evidence, and I or my officers will be pleased to respond
 in any way you feel necessary.

 Yours faithfully




 J D Wheatley
 Director General


 Enclosure
                                                                             1



' POPPLEWELL INQUIRY



 QUESTION 4:   DESIGNATION:   OTHER SPORTS


 4.1   We feel that designation should apply to grounds other than those
       for football. Grounds should be designated where activities are
       pursued on the arena or pitch area which will produce crowd numbers
       and circumstances demanding safety conditions.

 4.2   The Sports Council is in favour of sports grounds being used widely
       for sporting and appropriate non-sporting activities, particularly
       where this increases the viability of the facility,■thus providing
       greater satisfaction to the community.

       Examples include:

       (a) Other sports (eg the recent McGuigan boxing match in the Queens
           Park Rangers ground) may increasingly share stadia. Wembley
           Stadium is used for a wide range of events other than football.

       (b) Sports grounds are already used for "pop" concerts and enter­
           tainments which are likely to produce crowd conditions comparable
           with football.

        (c) The Sports Council has just produced (June 1985) a report in
            conjunction with the Football Association and the Football
            Trust on artificial grass surfaces for football: this is
            covered later in more detail in Appendix 1. One of the
            implications for stadia is the possibility of more intensive
            use. The Football League is considering applications from
            two clubs to lay such surfaces this year.

            This aspect should also be covered in expansion of the Guide
            to Safety at Sports Grounds: Football (1976) ie the Green
            Guide (see 7.1 et seq).
                                                                                   2



QUESTION 5:    LEGISLATION


5 .1   The figure of 1 0 , 0 0 0 spectators as a basis of designation may need
       examination. For example, the Bradford stand held approximately
       3,000. Grandstands of similar size and risk could exist on grounds
       of less than 1 0 , 0 0 0 total capacity.

5.2    High level tiers or elevated spectator provision of any size will
       create greater risks when rapid or panic crowd movements occur.
       It is sonetimes the nature and situation of the facility rather
       than the capacity which should demand designation.

5.3    The present Building Regulations have little relevance to existing
       sports grounds. We understand that new reformed Building Regulations
       have been largely re-written and will soon become law. Perhaps a
       section for these, eg "Outdoor Spectator Structures", needs to be
       written. (See also 7.4 to 7.6.)

5.4    The Safety at Sports Ground Act does not specify that Building
       Regulations control needs to be applied by local authorities.
       The safety certificates awarded by local authorities are mostly
       concerned with crowd numbers, exits and crash barriers. The
       Green Guide is more specific on this point: ref Clauses 1.6,
       3.5, 9.6 and 10.1. (Also, British Standards are referred to
        in 3.1, 8.10 and 9.6.1.)

 5.5 From Clauses 10.1 and 10.2 of the Green Guide it is apparent that
     an existing stand improvement under the Guide does not require
      full B u i l d i n g Regulation approval, as would apply to new construct­
      ion. To remedy this we suggest that Clause 1.6 should be amended
      to say that certification of ground improvements should be
      conditional on full approvals of Building Regulations and all other
      relevant legislation (including Town and Country planning aspects
      where appropriate). This will cover parts of grandstand accomm­
      odation and health and safety matters not currently included in
      the Green Guide eg those relating to toilets, snack bars, offices
      and sports facilities.

        Clauses 10.1/10.2 take into account fire resistance of the structure
        but are not decisive about improvements. If it is not practicable
        to improve the fire resistance of an existing structure, it should
        be rebuilt or closed to use.

 5.6 When checking a grandstand improvement application,a local Building
      Control Officer, who checks applications against the Building Regu­
      lations, cannot insist that other defects are put right where
      unrelated to the improvements being proposed. Likely causes of
      concern not covered by the present Green Guide include aspects which
      relate to existing structures:

        (a) Structures designed before current codes of structural design
            were produced.

        (b) Structural decay: corrosion of steel, crumbling brickwork,
            spalling concrete and decayed timber.
                                                                              3



      (c) Inadequate maintenance (eg ingress of water through roofs, and
          broken or blocked rainwater pipes), the result of which nay be
          to hasten structural decay.

      (d) The ability of old structures to cope with sudden crowd movements.

5.7   A regular inspection or certification of the construction needs to
      be considered; the suggested additions to the Building Regulations
      could be used as a guide (paras 7.4 to 7.6). Such inspection or
      certification, which we recommend should occur annually, would
      encourage a continuing commitment to the proper care and main­
      tenance of the structures.

5.8   The control of spectators with relevance to hooliganism and control
      of alcohol also needs to be considered immediately outside the ground.
      Space is needed for checking and control, but many existing grounds
      provide entrances and exits immediately onto the public pavement and
      highway.

      We suggest that this aspect needs some attention. For new stadia
      provision it can be incorporated into town planning requirements,
      but for existing situations other measures may need to be considered,
      eg the pedestrianising of existing streets in the immediate vicinity
      of the ground.

      We believe there should be a statutory obligation to seek town
      planning consent when alterations and change are made to stadia. ^
      Particular regard should be paid to crowd movement onto the public
      highway.




                  1
                                                                                 4



- QUESTION 7: GREEN GUIDE


 7.1   The Green Guide is not wholly adequate in our view.

 7.2   There are two guides:   the first is "Guide to Safety at Sports
       Grounds" (1973).

       The second is "Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds:     Football" (1976).

 7.3   The second Green Guide refers specifically to football: the status
       of the 1973 Guide needs to be clarified. Is this guide still
       relevant to non-football stadia or is it superseded?

 7.4   The introduction to the 1976 guide states that "it is a voluntary
       code and has no legal force". In the time available to us we have
       considered two alternative courses of action,which are indicated
       below.

 7.5   One alternative is to review the Green Guide against relevant aspects
       of the Building Regulations (eg criteria for staircases, fire pro­
       tection). Paragraph 5.3 (above) suggests a new section of the
       Building Regulations: indeed the latter could embrace and possibly
       replace much of the present Green Guide.

 7.6   The other alternative is to expand the Green Guide to include all health
       and safety (including structural) matters, as covered by the Building
       Regulations but adapted specifically for sports grounds. The Building
       Regulations could then simply contain a 'deemed to satisfy1 clause,
       requiring the Green Guide to be complied with as an "Approved Document".
       Preliminary discussions with the Department of the Environment indicate
       that this is a realistic possibility.
.APPENDIX 1


 Relevant Aspects of Present Sports Council Involvement


 1.    Hie Sports Council has been concerned with aspects of fire precautions
       in indoor sports centres.

 2.    TUS Data Sheet 47.1 (attached) discusses fire hazards relating to
       equipment in such sports centres.

 3.    Artificial grass and synthetic surfaces are covered in paragraphs
       6-10 following.

 4.    Information on Indoor Arenas has been prepared which is in illus­
       trated draft form at present. This information would have relevance
       to future stadia which might be covered in, and to very large indoor
       arenas where football and similar spectator sports might take place.

 'Public Entertainment'

 5     Indoor spectator seating will come within the requirements of the
       proposed new British Standard BS5588, "Fire Precautions in the Design
       and Construction of Buildings: PART 5 Places of Assembly . Unfort­
       unately, although this BS has been in draft form for several years
       it is stil unpublished, due to complications relating to co-ordination
       with the new Building Regulations.

       An early draft overlapped with parts of the Safety at Sports Grounds Act
       (1975) and the Green Guide. A re-draft has not been received; this
       matter needs to be re-checked to ensure that the anomaly has been
       corrected or amended.

  Artificial Grass and Synthetic Surfaces

  6.    The Sports Council has produced a general Specification for Artificial
        Sports Surfaces (not aimed at football or spectator venues but for
        multi-purpose sports surfaces).

  7.    In the light of the Bradford disaster the Sports Council has reviewed
        the recoirmendations of that Specification in relation to fire. At
        present these require that the surface shall conform with any relevant
        national and local building and fire regulations, and specify that it
        shall meet certain conditions when tested in accordance with BS 4790.
        This testing is intended to ensure that surfaces do not readily spread
        fire from a relatively small ignition source, such as a firework or
        flare. In a fire such as that at Bradford, small burning fragments
        ejected from the fire and falling onto an artificial surface complying
        with this test, should not cause significant additional fire hazard due
        to the burning of the surface.
                                                                              2


8.     However, it is felt that further investigation is needed into the effects
       of intense heat from a large radiant source of fire such as occurred at
       Bradford, and in the light of this we have consulted with the Rubber
       and Plastics Research Association, the British Carpet Technical Centre,
       WIRA (former Wool Industries Research Association), the Fire Research
       Station, and the Hone Office. Following their response, we are considering
       conmissioning calculations on the basis of which guideline criteria may
       be issued for surfaces to be installed in various facilities. We are also
       considering their suggestion that two additional tests (the AS1M NBS
       Radiant Panel Ttest and the ISO Conical Radiant Heater Ignitability Test)
       should be carried out on products (on the shock pads and bases on which
       they are to be installed) to provide data on the product which can be
       viewed against such guidelines.

       We are also considering having further discussions with relevance to
       the wider potential effects of fire on synthetic surfaces eg toxic
       funes and their effects on spectators.

9.     Although this work will be carried out as quickly as possible, the
       production of guidelines and long term recommendations, not only_
       for sports grounds but also for the full range of sports facilities,
       must be considered carefully and thoroughly. We have therefore
       recommended to the Football League, and to the only firm whose product
       is presently being considered by them, that those who hope to install
       surfaces in League grounds should have the product tested in the mean­
       time in accordance with the additional tests described in paragraph 8 .
       They should also have calculations carried out to establish the circum­
       stances in which the product would be satisfactory from the point of
       view of fire. It would be wise for inspectors to require similar^
       measures to be taken in respect of existing installations of artificial
       surfaces in sports grounds which they are assessing. It should be borne
        in mind that existing installations may not have met even the require­
       ments of our Specification referred to in paragraph 6 (above).

 10.    The Building Regulations have no requirement in respect of horizontal
        surfaces. We have enquired of sports surfaces forms as to whether
        there has been any other requirement for fire tests to be carried out
        on their products, as a result of any other regulations, either national
        or local. The initial response indicates that there is no evidence of
        any such requirement.
.APPENDIX 2


Products and Ideas


1    We have had a nvntoer of submissions about various materials and products
     which can be used to reduce fire risk. Many are by manufacturers and
     associations, but some are by individuals. No doubt other agencies
     have received similar approaches.

2.    Arrangements need to be made for evaluation of these materials and
      products.

3.    We have received two separate proposals for techniques which could be
      used to instantly collapse security fences under the control of police
      or management. Both are ideas for a prototype which could need develop­
      ment. The potential for a fence to the front of grandstands and terraces
      which could be collapsed in the event of a fire like that at Bradford,
      needs to be examined.
APPENDIX 3


Fence and Division Proposal


1.   An ictei for fence types which may -merit investigation is shown in the
      attached diagram. This is based on observations of some of the problems
      seen in the Heysel stadium in Belgium arising frcm the -existence of low
      walls,

2.   It may be said that fences between sections of the crowd should not
      collapse at all, but escape under some circumstances, eg at the edges
      of terraces, might be hindered or prevented by low walls at the base
      of the fencing.
                                                                                                        <


                                                                  ^ S     p   e   c   t a   t o   r s       i r z i p f x d

                                                                          ^3<ain£f~ l o w
                                                                          particularly children
          LOW UPSTAND WALL WITH FENCE OVER




    /
/
                                    /

                                                •fence                                                ontb g ro m
                               /                a   W   o   ^ s    tz &       K       pe          €
                                                                                                                              /
                                                                                                                                          «?
                         /.                                                                                                       {/
        FENCE OR DIVIDER TYPE STRUCTURALLY PIVOTTING AT GROUND LEVEL
                     /
                ThisAllows easy egress in event of collapse
                                                                                                             vCWj                 * ’■/»JJ
                                                                                                            W -0   r          U->   j ^ ^ S i A   A
juonct                                                TUS DATA SHEET
      >Tnnr, JT2S EAZABDS OF                               GJ/ Jan. 19^5           J     a     j
      E30IH«SHT IN spozrs CENTSSS                .     ^   2nd Edition             | no Z f / ^ |




background

1   .
           “ i S T ^ ^ r t s          ^ i p m e n t , particular* that which xs foa*
           filled.

 2. There ha.e been 3 f i r - at                          / ^ p E ^ d l f is
                          J o ^ o t f t L r a S T f ^ ^ o u s h ? t? have been cause*

           by vandalism.
           It was thought useful to put out these notes, because of the serious
 3-
           nature of this subject.


    (TKN7TRAL
    H.         The following comments arose cut of meetings between OTS and the
               Home Office in 1980*
                      , *• :in i^Tls are
               Foam plastic          a_e ^ire
                                         _x_e -isks,
                                              --■=*-=>» . uarticulsrlypolystyrene
    5-
               and urethane foam.
                                          +.       +he» occasional discarded matcn or
    6.         Sources of ignition are not Dust                plastics stacked near
               cigarette but can even resul, x-om c        e   *     T      electrical
                or against central heating pipes and r a d o a ^ s .     1
                wiring and installations are a source Ox d a n g - .

     7.        Some fire retardant grades of infill^are not truly eiiec^ve ana
               can produce equally dangerous .oxic x^es.

     8.         Current advice is that ^ o l s t e z y or enclosing c^ers sh« £ £ £ * .
                with B£&76 concerning the safe and reasonaole degree         e—

      9.        Attention, in particular, should be                   j_s claimed to
                the dangerous foam          s’sS ^ d be repaired or the oats taken
                be fire retardenx. All tea^s snuu_u
                out of use.

         10.    Managers and p r o p e r s should be          discuss
                their local fire protection onicer, who snco—
                the local Health and Safety Adviser.

         n.      Vandalise: is a real danger to
                 Designers of new facilities sr.ould oe aw_-e o                      ?-




                                                            Tfecnnlcal Unit fo r SDort
                                                     16 Upper W o b u m Place
BUILDING

12.    New buildings will have to meet the National Buildin g Regulations
       fo all caistructional and material natters.

       Meazis of Escape is something over which there are not agreed national
       standards. The local fire protection officer will hold his own inter­
       pretation      needs to he consulted.

13.    Old and ohselete buildings are asked to cope with aaw materials and
       equipment which were not envisaged or known at the date of construction.
       They need to be checked.


NOTES FROM BS T579 : 1975, APPENDIX 3
1*f.   The following table taken from the above, which reports on the^buming
       properties of flexible urethane foam, might be found to be usexul.
       The table provides guidance intended to minimise the fire hazards
       presented by these materials.

       Situation           Recommended Actions

       Manufacture,        (a)    Maintain good housekeeping standards.
       storage and         (b)    Observe stringent fire precautions, e.g. no
       fabrication                smoking except in designated areas.
                           (c)    Ensure that employees are fully aware of the
                                  potential fire’hazards presented by these
                                  materials.
                           (d)    Consult EM Factory Inspectorate for advice, in
                                  respect of fire precautions, during manufacture,
                                   storage and handling.
                            (e)    Manuafacturers to contact ESi and Home Ofxiue
                                   for latest development and technology.
                            (f)    Maintain well established fire drill ^procedures
                                   in consultation with the Fire Authority.
                            (g)    Inform the Fire Authority of materials being
                                   used.
                            (h)    Tn^a-n suitable fire protective systems as
                                   required by the situation.

        Finished            (a)    Avoid the use of covering materials that are
        products                   easily ignited by small flame sources or with a
                                   known ability to support smouldering combustion.
                            (b)    Ensure that all users are fully aware of the
                                   •Dotential fire hazards presented by the materia..
      TEE TIRE HAZARDS OF                   TUS DATA SHEET
      EQUIPMENT IN SPORTS CENTRES                 GJ/ Jan 1985
                                            ref   2nd Edition              47 2

GIM PITS

16.    A recent development has been the introduction of foam filled gymnastics
       pits in a number of centres and dubs. These "pits" are for training
       gymnasts and help to overcome the risk of injury on landing from
       apparatus. The usual method of filling the 2m deep "pits" is by
       piling scrap urethane foam on top of several layers of foam slabs
       and this loose foam is potentially a serious fire hazard.

17.    In specialist facilities with controlled use, such as the pitted
       hall*at Lilleshall Hall National Sports Centre, good means of escape
       nrovision, together with smoke detectors and vents, appear to be
       adeauate to deal with the potential danger. Eowever, in pudic centres,
       more stringent measures are bound to be required, and the use 01 fire
       resistant grades of foam is almost inevitable. The "pit" edges are
       also protected by foam, but this is sheathed in reinforced p.v.c.
       material which can help to reduce the risk of combustion.

       (TUS Data Sheets 33-5 and 33-6 give details of "pit" facilities,
       design and infill).


MAISFIELD LEISURE CENTRE: REPORT AND INVESTIGATION

1 8 . A report and investigation into the circumstances leading up to tne
       fire on the lA-th January 1984-at the Maysfield Leisure Centre in
       Belfast has been prepared by Mr H R C Boyce. The report cones out with
       a number of recommendations. The following implications w m c h have been
       extracted are thought to be those which are important to the designers
       of facilities.

19.    A store separate frcm all other kinds of storage. This stcre,
       including any door, should have a one hour fire resistance. There
       should be preferably only one door to that store, and inis snould be
       kent locked except when mats are being taken to and irom it.

        This store should be ventilated, ideally from tne rooi sc tnat m
        the event of a fire the full width of ventilation openings is
        available. Ideally the ventilator should be opened automatically
        by a smoke detector, which is also wired to an alarm at reception
        or to the fire alarm system.

 20.    The fire resisting integrity of the building must not be impaired by
        future alterations. A -clan should be kept by tne Centre Manager and
        by the relevant client authority, in the appropriate Architecture or
        Engineering Section. (Proper maintenance of the equipment ana o u n a m g
        plant is also imperative).

 21.    Escane routes and main corridors must be kent clear oz costructions.


                                              Tfectinical unit for Sport
                                       16 Upper V/oburn Place
                                       London WC1E OQP
                                       01-338 1277
