1.   Mr McDonald
2.   PS/Mr Moynihan
3.   PS/Secretary of State




FOOTBALL HOOLIGANISM: H COMMITTEE MEETING 27 SEPTEMBER

1.     The joint Home Office/DOE paper is enclosed.   I understand
that the Home Secretary will introduce it.'


Hooliganism Abroad

2.      The Lord President is particularly concerned about matters
abroad.   He is likely to point to the need for a more active and
imaginative approach to policing hooliganism abroad.      The Home
Secretary in expanding on paragraph 11 of the Paper in reply, may
say that he is taking up with the Secretary of State for
Transport the need for the British Transport Police to have formal
arrangements in plac€ with the ferry companies under which police
can be brought in when needed. This would avoid the need for the
sort of ad hoc arrangements made in the case of the return of
England supporters from Sweden. The Home Secretary may also
expand on the role of police liaison officers and the important
part the new TREVI guidelines (paragraph 17 of the Paper) can
play in policing arrangements for the World Cup.

3.     We intend to press the signatories of the Council of
Europe Convention on Spectator Violence to prosecute (paragraph
17 of the Paper).     I am trying to convene a meeting of the
official Standing Committee on the Convention in November.    The
meeting may wish to^discuss the possibility of the Home Secretary
approaching his European counterparts.
                f




 World Cup

 4.     England’s participation in the World Cup Finals in Italy
 next year is addressed at paragraphs 16, 19 and 20.  Our present
 recommendation is that we should not ask for the England team to
 be withdrawn but continue to make every effort to minimise the
 threat of trouble before the Finals.   This position may change,
 if there is serious trouble at matches in this country or at
 matches involving the England team during the season. The second
 meeting of the inter Departmental working group of officials,
 chaired by DOE, (paragraph 16) to ensure that all possible
 anti-hooligan precautionary steps are taken will take place next
 month.

 5.     England play Italy at Wembley on 15 November.   The Home
 Office will invite the Italian police to visit the match to
 experience our crowd behaviour and policing methods.  This will
 provide the opportunity for discussions with the Italian police
 on arrangements for the World Cup.
Publicity

6.     The Paper,    at paragraph 18,    refers  to publicising
Government action in the coming months.    In this context under
paragraph 16 (i), Ministers may wish to consider speeches after
Royal Assent to the Football Spectators Bill urging the football
authorities and the clubs to take a positive attitude to
developing the national membership scheme and taking steps to
ensure spectator safety and comfort.


The Football Spectators Bill

7*     The Bill will complete its remaining stages in the
spillover - Report and Third Reading in the Commons and LCCA. It
provides for:-

     (i)    3 national membership scheme to which all those attending
            designated football matches in England and Wales must
            belong (subject to limited specified exemptions);
     (ii) the courts to have power to impose restriction orders on
          convicted hooligans to prevent them travelling to matches
          abroad for up to 5 years.

8.          The Bill establishes:-

     (i )   the Football Membership Authority (FMA) - the basis of
            which will be formed by the football authorities - to draw
            up the detailed scheme and implement it;

     (ii) the Football Licensing Authority (FLA) which will employ
           an inspectorate to ensure that clubs run the scheme
           properly.   it will also have th© power to "review the
           discharge by local authorities of their functions under
           the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975", in relation to
           football grounds.   A commencement order is required to
           give the FLA this power - to be debated post-Taylor. The
      ,    FLA will also have the task of advising the Secretary of
         i State on which grounds should be required to replace
           terracing by seating accommodation and how quickly.

The National Membership Scheme

9.     The Bill provides the framework for the scheme.  It will
be the FMA which will draw up the detailed scheme and submit it
to the Secretary of Stat© for approval.       It will be their
responsibility to produce a scheme that best suits the needs of
football within the framework set out in the Bill.          The
framework

            all those attending football matches designated by the
            Secretary of State (there are specified exemptions of
            disabled persons in dedicated areas and accompanied
            children in family enclosures) must belong to the scheme
            or otherwise be authorised by the scheme         (special
            arrangements will be made to cater for Wembley, and
            non-League grounds to enable non members of the scheme to
            attend matches);
          we propose to designate all. matches involving       the 92
          Football League clubs, including their matches       against
          non-League opposition, and international matches/
     -    members of the scheme will have a card which will enable
          them to attend any match; cards will be validated on entry
          to grounds;

          it will be an offence for anyone other than an authorised
          spectator to enter or to attempt to enter or to remain in
          a ground at a designated match;

          anyone convicted of a football-related offence, defined in
          the Bill, will be banned from membership of the scheme for
          5 years for a custodial sentence and 2 years for others;

         the scheme will enable the Football Membership Authority
         to impose discretionary bans of its own. for unacceptable
         behaviour;

          football grounds will   be   licensed   by 'the FLA to   admit
          spectators.                              ,


Part II of the Bill: Restriction Orders

10.     Part II of the Bill will enable the courts to impose a
restriction order on someone convicted of a football-related
offence. Where the court considers that it Will help to prevent
violence or disorder at designated football matches outside
England and Wales. The order will require the person to report
    a police station when a relevant match it taking place outside
England and Wales.    The Bill also makes provision to impose a
restriction order in England and Wales on someone convicted
elsewhere of an offence corresponding to a football-related
offence here.




P A LEE

25 September 1989



cc   PS/Sir T Heiser
     Mr Owen
     Mr Caines
     Mr Kinghan (o/r)
     Mr Rock
