 \V'                                                          ^

   *   >

                       CONFIDENTIAL - No copies to be taken

PS/Secretary of State

cc:        PS/Mr Moynihan
           PS/Sir T Heiser
           Mr Owen
           Mr McDonald
       iMtiCeef’
           Mr Newsom

LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S REPORT


1.   I attach an annotated summary of the report. The section on
Part IV, which deals with the national membership scheme lists
the report's criticisms and offers comments on them. As Mr
Moynihap said this morning, all the judge's criticisms were made
during the Bill's passage through Parliament. For the rest of the
report, all of which is primarily for the Home Office, we have
taken the recommendations in Part V as the starting point, with
cross-references to the body of the report.

2.   Lord justice Taylor's own recommendations for dealing with
hooliganism include measures designed to improve the general
atmosphere at grounds: a move towards all-seater stadia; improved
facilities at grounds; better discipline among players; and
leadership   from  football. Hcf also     proposes more    direct
anti-hooliganism measures: more use of CCTV; three new offences
for behaviour at sports grounds; the extension of attendance
orders; and electronic tagging of offenders. These are discussed
in more detail below.


The future of the national membership scheme
3.   As we discussed with the Secretary of State this morning,
there appear to be three options:


(1) press ahead with the scheme on our old timetable, ie a
debate on the commencement order to bring Part I into force in
the next month or two;

(2) drop the scheme completely and rely on existing measures
plus those recommended by Lord Justice Taylor which are
acceptable;

(3) "kick the scheme into the long grass", ie delay further
progress to allow more consideration of the scheme's prospects.
      Option 1 appears to have little prospect of success. The
then^ Chief Whip told the Prime Minister, after Hillsborough last
year, that an early Second Reading of the Football Spectators
Bill would be defeated. The Bill was delayed for two months; the
steam went out of the issue and two other factors enabled us to
carry 2nd Reading with a large majority (78). They were: serious
crowd disorder at the end of the season (13 May); and the promise
of further debates following Taylor's final report. I understand
that the Home Secretary's view today is that the debate on the
commencement order would result in a significant defeat for the
Government.

5*   Option 2 would have equally obvious, though different,
disadvantages. It would imply that we    now accepted that the
national membership scheme was a mistake. It would also mean
abandoning our argument that there is no convincing alternative
to the scheme, as a means of dealing with football hooliganism.
We would presumably wish to take up some, if not all of Lord
Justice Taylor's own recommendations.
6.   The most powerful of Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations
is to extend the use of attendance orders to convicted football
hooligans. It would offer a means of dealing with the worst
hooligans. We have previously resisted it (a) because of the
potentially overwhelming administrative burden of handling
thousands of offenders every time a match was played in the same
city; an<^ (b ) because the national membership scheme would also
allow discretionary bans for non-criminal behaviour. If the Home
Office will accept (a), we would have to accept (b). The move to
all-seating would no doubt Intake a difference to supporters'
behaviour in the long-term, because         it would change the
atmosphere at grounds. But it would take a long-time on Lord
Justice Taylor's timetable - 4 years for 1st and 2nd division
clubs, 9 for 3rd and 4th.

7.   Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations are not a convincing
substitute for the national membership scheme. If we abandon the
scheme completely, and there is serious crowd trouble, we will
face the same questions as we did when the decision to legislate
was made. The implication of the judge's own emphasis on
subversion of the scheme by hooligans is that the potential for
serious disorder remains.

8.   Option 3 would be less embarrassing than Option 2; it would
also not leave the gap discussed in paragraph 6 above. We
understand that it will be the recommendation of the Home
Secretary but I am afraid that his officials have been unwilling
to tell us on the telephone what he would propose to say about
the purpose of a delay in implementation. This will no doubt be
explained in his paper this evening.

9.   It seems to us that if an announcement of "further
consideration" is to be convincing, it must rest on a commitment
to further work on the development of the technology - to
establish whether the judge's doubts and criticisms can be
overcome. Even he does not go so far as to assert that the scheme
      n°t work, so there is some room for manoeuvre. The
development work would have to include an extensive programme of
testing the technology (in itself a risk, as Mr Moynihan argued)
- significantly more than the limited tests at two clubs
envisaged in the ITT and criticised by the judge.
10.It seems to us that    the Government would have to take on
responsibility for the development of the technology.         The
football authorities are almost certain to withdraw when the
report is published (certain in the case of the League; very
likely for the FA). We would, therefore, have to take over Ernst
and Young's contract; we would also have to pay for the
development work (costs of the contractors, compensation for the
                ? testing etc). The cost of the development work
       be £2m (a very rough estimate). We would not          need
Parliamentary approval since we would not be setting up the FMA
though we could expect criticism that we were avoiding
Parliamentary scrutiny. It might also be difficult to find clubs
to co-operate, though this difficulty might be overcome by enough
rooiiGy #


Publication of the report

11. Home Office officials said this afternoon that the earliest
feasible date was next Tuesday, 30 January. A proposal may appear
in the Home Secretary's paper. They seem to have dropped the idea
of a two week delay.

Football Licensing Authority (FLA)

12. The judge is in favour of creating a body with powers to
review   local   authorities  performance   in   issuing   safety
certificates under the Safety at Sports Grounds Act 1975. This
was to be one of the powers of the FLA, whose main function is to
licence grounds in relation to the national membership scheme.
The safety powers of the FLA are dealt with separately in S13 of
the Football Spectators Act. But Mrs Weinberg doubts that we can
create the Football Licensing Authority without first creating
the Football Membership Authority. The FLA's powers relate to
matches designated by the Secretary of State under section 1; and
Sl(3) requires him to consult the FMA before making a designation
order. I am afraid that we did not contemplate the possibility of
the FLA without the membership scheme.

We are to discuss with the Secretary of State tomorrow morning.




NEIL KINGHAN
SARD

22 January 1990
                          CONFIDENTIAL




PART IV - THE FOOTBALL SPECTATORS ACT 1989

1.   CONTENTS OF INVITATION TO TENDER (ITT) (CH.13)
The judge recognises that the scheme does not exist even in draft
form but goes on to criticise the concept of the scheme on the
basis of the contents of the ITT. He says that the ITT was
prepared by Ernst and Young "in conjunction with DOE'. Comment.
It was not. It was prepared on the instructions of the football
authorities' working party. It was not agreed with us. It is not
a secure basis on which to judge the national membership scheme
that could be achieved.

2.   DANGER OF CONGESTION AND DISORDER (CH.15)

a)   Pr.esent risk of congestion (paragraphs 380-381). The judge
implies that congestion is a common problem now, as a result of
inadequate turnstiles and late arrivals. Comment. ^n fact
congestion occurs only at a small proportion of matches.

b)   Additional time to check cards (382-396). The judge regards
the target set in the ITT of an additional second to check each
card as crucial but he is sceptical that it can be achieved,
given the procedures needed at the turnstiles and the fact that
there is no comparable scheme in existence, subject to large
crowds, bad weather etc. He was impressed by GEC's demonstration
but appears to discount it on the grounds that it was carried out
in perfect conditions.
Comment. This is a serious pre-judgement. The suppliers may be
able to achieve the target. They may produce a scheme which
allows the spectator to "swipe" his own card (the GEC approach).
The fact that a scheme succeeds in good conditions is not
evidence that it will fail in bad. More turnstiles can also help.
c)   Computer reliability (397). The judge quotes ACPO's anxiety
about this and endorses it. Comment. This again is pre-judgement,
ACPO's evidence was given before the ITT was even issued.
d)   Emergencies (400). The judge criticises the Act for not
spelling out how computer failures or other emergencies are to be
dealt with. Comment. As he also says, this can be spelt out in
the scheme and, in our view, should be.

®)   Testing (401-9). The judge is doubtful that testing at two
clubs, as envisaged, will be adequate because it may not test
fully (1) potential problems with the technology; or (2) the
determination of hooligans to bust the system. Comment. He does
not understand how technology is tested (nor does he seem to have



                          CONFIDENTIAL
                          CONFIDENTIAL



listened to much expert advice). The consultants are confident
that technological problems can be simulated. The extent to which
hooligan behaviour can be tested is a matter of judgement. Ours
is that a test is likely to be subject to the most determined
attempts to disrupt it. More generally, if the first tests were
not convincing, we would have some more.
3.   WILL THE SCHEME WEED OUT HOOLIGANS? (CH.16)
a)   Inside grounds (411-414). The judge's view is that the
prospects of the scheme's success in eliminating hooliganism
inside grounds are seriously flawed by our recognition that the
photograph on a spectator's card will not be checked on entry
(because of delays). Hooligans could therefore gain entry by
using stolen or borrowed cards. He quotes ACPO in support of his
view. Comment. We have never claimed that the scheme will end
hooliganism in one fell swoop. It will take time but, as the ACPO
quote implies, the photograph on the card will be a major factor
in the deterrent process.
b)   Ouftside grounds 415-419. The judge rejects our argument that
hooligans banned from attending matches will give up going to
them. He says that the Luton precedent is not relevant because it
bans away supporters and we do not. Comment. This is a matter of
judgement; it seems to us that iffootball hooligans aredenied
football matches as the focus oftheir hooliganism, they will
lose interest, if not at once, then before long.
4.   POLICE RESOURCES (CH.17)
The judge argues that the scheme will add significantly to the
numbers of police needed at football grounds, at least initially,
to deal with "problem cards". He quotes ACPO comments about
problems with computers at Manchester United as evidence of the
potential increased demand. Comment. The argument is confused.
The ITT proposes that only cards which register invalid should
lead to apprehension of the card-holder and these should be very
few in number, especially initially; malfunctioning cards would
be confiscated at the turnstile. Stewards could be used to take
the holders of invalid cards to an interrogation centre, where
the police would consider whether an arrest should be made. ACPO
had not seem the ITT.
5.   THE JUDGE'S SOLUTION (CH.18)
He proposes:


     (i)   Developing the detection and evidential potential of
           CCTV and the new National Football Intelligence Unit;




                           CONFIDENTIAL
                             CONFIDENTIAL



       (ii)   Prohibiting, by creating criminal     offences,     three
              specific activities in the ground:
              (a) throwing a missile;
              (b) chanting obscene or racialist abuse;
              (c) going on the pitch without reasonable excuse;
       (iii) Extending the courts' power to make attendance centre
             orders, in conjunction with exclusion orders, for
             football related offences on occasions of specified
             matches so as to keep hooligans away from football
             grounds;
       (iv) Using electronic monitoring      (tagging) for the same
            purpose.

Comment.
      I


(i )     is already happening.
(ii)   would mean the creation of new offences specific to sports
grounds but each of these forms of behaviour can lead to
prosecutions now. The problem lies in establishing evidence and
the attitude of magistrates' courts.
(iii) would be new; attendance orders are only used in respect
of under-21 year olds at the moment. But, in the body of the
report   (paragraphs   326-334)    the   judge recognises  the
administrative complexity of handling all convicted offenders
whenever a relevant match is being played.
(iv)   would also be new and could be a helpful way of checking
that convicted offenders do not breach exclusion orders. At
present, the Home Office is still experimenting with tagging on a
limited scale.




                              CONFIDENTIAL
PART V - FINAL RECOMMENDATIONS

No mention is made of the national membership scheme in the final
recommendations. Of those which are included the following are
of most interest to DOE:

All-seated accommodation - Chapter 2 paragraphs 61-94,
Recommendations 1-4

The Judge recommends that all grounds designated under the Safety
of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (and thus sports grounds other than
just football grounds) should, by 1999 be all-seater and that all
1st and 2nd Division grounds should be all-seater by 1994.
Comment: We welcome moves towards all-seater stadia and amended
the Football Spectators Act to empower the FLA to make
recommendations on the seating of spectators. We had in mind the
gradual move to all-seater stadia in 1st Division and at selected
grounds outside 1st Division. The Judge goes very much further.
Is it necessary for all 3rd and 4th Division clubs and indeed
minor rugby clubs for instance to be all-seater by 1999? There
are no recommendations on how these developments are to be
financed. The Judge does not see this as his task but "it can be
argued there is a case for financial assistance (from Government)
if not by direct subsidy then by some tax reduction". The
Government has made clear that costs are for football to find.
To implement the recommendations in full at football's expense
could   place   a  considerable' financial    burden  on   clubs,
particularly the smaller ones and in other sports, like rugby.

Advisory Design Council - Chapter 2 paragraph 96 Recommendation 5
The FA and the League should set up an Advisory Council to offer
advice to clubs on planning ground improvements.        Comment:
Acceptable.   Such a body would perform a useful function and
provide the means of pulling together research in the field,
including that undertaken by the Sports Council.

Safety Certificate Review Body - Chapter 3, paragraphs 154-156r
Recommendation 6.

The Judge recommends that the remit of the Football Licensing
Authority (FLA) in respect of Safety Certificates should be
expanded to cover all grounds designated under the 1975 Act, and
not just football grounds as provided for in the Football
Spectators Act. He also recommends that regulated stands at
undesignated grounds and indoor premises should be covered.
Should Part I of the Act not be implemented or delayed the same
functions should be given to another suitably constituted body.
Comment: If most of Part I of the Act is not to be implemented
then new legislation to establish a body to take on the FLA's
proposed safety responsibilities might in any event be requizred
and the opportunity could be taken to expand its powers.
Detailed Safety Recommendations - Chapter 4, paragraphs 158-242.
Recommendations 7-22

None of these raise matters of interest for this Department and
the Home Office say they might   all be incorporated in safety
certificates .•


Mandatory requirements for safety certificates - Chapter 3,
paragraphs 141-149, Recommendation 24.
The Judge proposes that it should be mandatory for safety
certificates to specify i) the maximum numbers of spectators to
be admitted to the stadium, its different parts; ii) details of
entrances and exits, and the requirements they should meet; iii)
details of crush barriers.    Comment:   This is largely a Home
Office matter, although we have an interest in view of the FLA's
proposed safety responsibilities. The Home Office are content
subject to considering whether it is necessary to specify the
maximum number of spectators to be admitted to different parts of
the stadium.


Safety of Sports Ground Advisory Group - Chapter 3, paragraphs
152-153 and Recommendation 31.

The Judge broadly repeats his interim recommendation for an
adivsory group to be set up to advise each relevant local
authority on safety certificates and to include representatives
    all three emergency services and the building authority as
will as local authority staff.    Comment: The Home Office are
broadly content although they will have to consider whether the
group should include representatives of the ambulance service.

Closed circuit television - Recommendation 35

Closed Circuit television should be installed to monitor crowd
densities. Comment: Acceptable we have pressed hard for CCTV to
be extended to all League grounds as an anti-hooligan measure. It
is sensible it should have this safety function.       But is it
necessary at all sports grounds designated under the Safety of
Sports Grounds Act?


Computer Records - Recommendation 39

Clubs should consider maintaining computer records of ticket
sales.  Comment: Acceptable at league clubs but is it necessary
a‘
 t all designated sports grounds?

golice planning and control - Chapter    5,     paragraphs   249-248,
Recommendations 44 to 46, 49 and 51

These are a repeat of the Judges interim recommendations with the
Judge also emphasising the need for a well equipped and well
placed police control room.   The Department has little interest
and the Home Office are broadly content.

Communications - Recommendation 54 and 55
More airwave channels, including a command channel for the Police
Commander, should be available at the ground. Comment: For the
Home Office who while happy with the principle think there are
practical difficulties.

Medical Facilities - Recommendation 66-67
There should be at least one trained first aider per 1,000
spectators at every match with over 2,000 spectators a doctor
should be present and it should be possible to summon one
immediately at matches under 2,000, an ambulance should be
stationed at all matches with crowds over 5,000.    Comment: For
the Home Office who will wish to consider the suggested dividing
lines.


New offence to stop ticket touts - Chapter 7, paragraphs 273-279
Recommendation 70

The Judge proposes to back up his recommendations aimed at
preventing those without tickets from turning up at matches by
creating a new offence to prevent the sales of tickets for and on
the day of a football match without authority form the home club
to do so. Comment: This is a Home Office matter but it would be
administratively difficult to implement despite what the Judge
says i.e. the clubs would have to licence ticket sellers and
would discriminate against those who on the day of the match sell
a spare ticket to a friend.

Club Strategies against hooligans - Chapter 10 paragraphs 316-319
Although not included in his final recommendations the Judge
concludes in Chapter 10 that away members only schemes should be
given further consideration.  Comment: Such schemes are open to
abuse by the hooligan who could claim to be a neutral or home
supporter.   The Judge acknowledges that much would depend on
ticket allocation by the home club. The experimental membership
scheme which failed in Holland was based on the away supporters
only concept.
