EXISTING MEMBERSHIP   SCHEMES   AT   DERBY   COUNTY,   LUTON   TOWN   AND
TOTTENHAM HOTSPUR


The Systems
Derby County
1.     The system operates on six turnstiles at the entry to one
end of the ground. This area, which is isolated from the rest of
the stadium, is for the exclusive of registered family key club
members.     Entry to the ground is made by inserting a personal
membership 'key' into a receptor.       If valid, the turnstile
operator accepts payment and the person enters.
2.    Membership is approximately 5,000.
Luton Town
3.     For those without tickets there are two turnstiles to      pass
through.     The first requires the Member to swipe his own        card
though areceptor to gain admission to the concourse. If            this
is accepted the Member then pays cash admission at the            inner
turnstiles which accesses onto the terraces.
4.    For those who already have bought tickets in advance they
need only pass though the outer turnstiles and, provided their
card is validated, surrender their match ticket in a holding
area.
5.     The scheme is based on a simple card carrying the member's
number, no name, address or photograph.
6.    Membership is approximately 19,000.

Tottenham Hotspur
7.     At Tottenham the whole of the North Stand which has both
seated and standing accomodation is restricted to Members only.
As with Luton entry arrangements are different depending on
whether a ticket for the match has been purchased before hand.
If not, members enter via a cash turnstile where the operator
takes the money and membership card for swiping through a reader.
Ticket holders pass through different turnstiles where the
operator visually checks the photo on the membership card with
the holder and takes the ticket.         In total there are 12
turnstiles with 2 supervisors and 4 controllers.
8.     Membership is approximately 17,000.

Defective/Invalid Cards
Derby County
9.     If a defective or invalid 'key' is inserted in the
turnstile a red light shows and the supporter is not allowed into
the grounds but has to go to the club office to sort out the
problem The club reports few problems with this procedure and
the incidence of faulty keys has been insignificant with no
delays caused to those queing behind or trouble created at the
turnstiles. There have been no cases of people attempting to get
in with stolen, forged or otherwise invalid keys.     This is no
doubt explained by the scheme being restricted to families.

Luton Town
10.     At Luton an invalid or defective card again results in a
red light, and locks the turnstile preventing the holder from
passing through.   Stewards or policemen having seen the light,
and a person's continued failure to pass through the turnstile,
will escort the holder to the club office outside the grounds
where his card will be checked against the records held. If the
card appears on the banned list, the club notifies the local
police.   Arrests and incidents since the scheme was introduced
have been nil in those matches where away fans have not been
allowed entry.

Tottenham Hotspur
11.     As at the other two clubs a red light results from an
invalid or defective card.   If there is not a large queue, the
turnstile operator will ask the person to go to the club office
to sort out the problem.    If, however, there is a queue the
person is allowed through the turnstile and met by a steward or
security person and taken to one of the 4 controllers who stand
in the area behind the turnstiles.   Each controller has a wall
mounted card reader and VDU screen.    By swiping the card the
controller receives an immediate reading of that card's status.
If it is held illegally the holder is escorted away from the
ground.     If it is defective the holder pays the necessary
entrance fee and is allowed to enter the seated or standing
accommodation.

Computer Breakdown
12.    Tottenham say that their system had not failed for some
considerable time.   Similarly, Luton say that they experienced
problems only in the early stages of their scheme and then only
at particular turnstiles rather than a complete breakdown. Both
clubs confirmed that should their systems fail entirely they
would have to rely on visual checks of cards at the turnstiles.
Derby report no incidence of breakdown in the system.

Benefits to the Clubs
13.    Luton and Tottenham have stressed that holding a record of
their supporters has strengthened communications between the club
and its fans.      Forthcoming fixtures could be advertised,
promotions run and opinion surveys carried out. All three clubs
have also stressed how their schemes had increased attendance at
matches by families and children, in Derby's case of course this
has been the main benefit of the scheme. The costs of policing
games at Luton has reduced considerably.
14.    Luton particularly felt its scheme had brought the club
far closer to its townspeople.       The non-footballing local
appreciated the fact that the town centre was no longer plagued
on match days by visiting fans (which consequently had caused
local gangs to form and cause trouble).     Luton's members had
benefited from reduced fares on match days offered by British
Rail and the local bus company was at present considering the
possibility of reducing its fares for travel to Kenilworth Road
on match days for Luton members.

Other Membership Schemes
15.    A summary provided by the Football league of the entry
procedures at these and two other clubs which have membership
schemes is at Annex A.


SARD
10 October 1989
