      HOME OFFICE
      Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT                                ©
                                   D ire c tiv e   071 273 3099
                                  Switchboard      071 273 3000


D C Blakey Esq                                      Your reference
Deputy Chief Constable                             GAGB/TAM/GB232
Leicestershire Constabulary                         O ur reference
PO Box 999                                         FgP/89 35/40/2
Leicester
LE99 1AZ                                           11 September 1990



Dear Mr Blakey


IMPLEMENTATION OF THE FINAL REPORT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY:
POLICING OF RFU GROUNDS

Thank you for your letter of 29 August about the application of
the Final Report recommendations by the Hillsborough Inquiry to
rugby grounds such as the Aylestone Road ground Leicester.

As we see it, the standard of safety for spectators under the
Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 (the 1975 Act) applies to all
sports grounds irrespective of the type of ground, the activities
for which it is used or whether it is designated under the 1975
Act as requiring a safety certificate.    In our view therefore,
the Final Report recommendations apply, in principle, to all
sports grounds, especially to those which are used for activities
which attract large crowds.   The measures needed, and which may
be specified within any safety certificate, in order to achieve
 reasonable safety at the ground" as envisaged under section 2
of the 1975 Act may however differ because of the different
circumstances which obtain at each individual ground.

Since the recommendations of the Final Report are "essentially
directed to designated grounds" with emphasis on those used for
soccer, we believe it is necessary to apply them sensibly to
other types of grounds. As stated in HO Circular 11/90 we feel
this is consistent with the Report.    It is also, we believe, in
keeping with the requirement for "reasonable" safety set down in
section 2 of the 1975 Act.      We would therefore expect, for
example, a reduction at all grounds in the maximum permitted
occupancy of standing areas in line with the Final Report and
improved   medical/first   aid   provision.       However,   those
recommendations relating to "pens" would have to be applied,
either wholly or partially       taking   account of    individual
arrangements at a particular ground.       Since designation also
covers rugby league and cricket grounds, where arrangements may
differ to those at rugby union grounds, I hope you will
understand our reluctance to attempt detailed guidance on
implementation of the Final Report on a "sport by sport" basis.

In the context of policing Aylestone Road we would not, of
course, seek to influence or interfere with the operational
decisions taken by the Leicestershire Constabulary.   Generally,
we do not envisage that any special police presence at rugby
grounds should automatically increase (with associated increases
in police facilities and costs to clubs) where it is judged to
be operationally unnecessary.   In other words, we do not think
the Inquiry intended to draw into such grounds an additional,
special^ police presence where it was not needed in order to
secure "the orderly and lawful behaviour of the spectators". To
do so could have the effect of shifting onto the police,
responsibility which at the present time properly falls to the
holder of the safety certificate or ground occupier. This is not
something we would wish to encourage although we do support the
concept of recommendation 11 that there should be a clear
understanding by both the police and the club as to the
responsibilities of each.

I hope the above provides some general assistance but do come
back if there is anything further on which you feel we might be
able to help.

                                                 Yours sincerely




                                                 D J MOULD

                                                 (Fire and Emergency
                                                 Planning Department)




  hcc   Mr B Stickley
        Mr M George, Greater Manchester Police
        E8 Division
