                1                 /WU,
^ / P e r m a n e n t Secretary                       IA /\
                                                      j/^a
                                                         A /\
                                     r/t f i f H
cc: Mr    Owen                           I  a iJ
                                            w  v m*
    Mr    McDonald
    Mr    Lee (o/r)
    Mr    Smith


FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL


The Bill completed its Committee stage in the Commons on Thursday
27 July. Report and Third Reading and LCCA will be in the
spill-over. We are likely to have about 12 groups of Government
amendments for Report Stage: some of them minor; most following
up promises "to consider" Opposition points made in Committee or
rounding-off our own amendments; none particularly controversial.

Lord Justice Taylor's interim report was published on Friday 4
August. Press attention focussed on the criticisms of South
Yorkshire police for its handling of the match. The officer in
charge on the day, Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, has been
suspended.  The Chief Constable,    Peter Wright,   (who is not
criticised in the report) has offered to resign; his offer will
be considered by South Yorkshire Police Authority on Monday 14
August. The judge's criticism of senior police officers was
sharpened by what he saw as their evasiveness at the Inquiry.

The club which hosted the match, Sheffield Wednesday, and the
local authority responsible for issuing the safety certificate,
Sheffield City Council are both criticised for their failure to
secure safety improvements on the terraces where the diaster
happened (at the Leppings Lane end of the ground). The supporters
are not held to blame for the disaster though some of them are
said to have been drunk and badly behaved.

The report does not bear directly on the Football Spectators
Bill, though it might be argued that the failure of Sheffield
City  Council  to keep    the  safety  certificate   up  to  date
strengthens the case for giving the Football Licensing Authority
created by the Bill monitoring powers in relation to local
authorities. The judge has said that he will consider this and
other long-term issues, including "identity cards" and all-seater
stadia in his final report, which he will produce "at the turn of
the year".

The judge has apparently not yet decided how he will carry out
the second stage of his Inquiry. He may invite some of those who
have given written evidence - including DOE - to give oral
evidence.




 NEIL KINGHAN
 SARD


 8 August 1989
