                                             Sir James Anderton CBE, QPM , DL
                                             Chief Constable
                                                                                    &
                                             Chief Constable's Office
                                                                           -7 3UN 1 ^/S 73°
                                             P 0 Box 2 2 (S.W est PDO)
                                             Chester House
                                             Boyer Street
                                             M anchester M 1 6 ORE
                                             Telephone 061 8 7 2 5 0 5 0




CC/MCJ                                           4 June 1991




Dear Mr. Bolton,
     RYt-pnsinn of All Seated A n n n im n n d a'h i on requirements
            to Ruqbv Union and Ruabv League Grounds
Thank you for your        letter of the 2 April on the above
subject.
I have considered its contents and have consulted with my
ACPO colleagues.
I note that you have made it clear to local authorities that
you consider it inappropriate to use the certification
procedure of the 1975 Safety at Sports Grounds Act to
stipulate all seater requirements.     I think this is an
appropriate stance to take - the diversity of local panels
would doubtless produce a piecemeal approach to what is an
important area of public safety.
The evidence from my colleagues indicates quite clearly that
they are in broad agreement with the contents of your
letter.   However, the lack of the "hooligan" element in
rugby union, rugby league and cricket supporters must not
give rise to complacency on our part, or lull us into taking
too short-sighted a view.
A critical factor in crowd control is of course, weight of
numbers, not hooliganism alone.    At present, rugby and
cricket do not attract the same support as association
football. However, this may not hold true in the future.
Lord Justice Taylor identified the "it can't happen here"
syndrome as a great danger to the safety of supporters where
large numbers are involved.


                                                  Continued/2
                            -   2   -




I am concerned lest this attitude prevail among other major
spectator sports with football being singled out as the only
problem.
Appropriate measures to protect public safety are essential
at all stadia where significant numbers are involved.
However, the view of my colleagues is that at present
primary legislation to extend this beyond association
football is not necessary or desirable.
I trust these comments are of assistance.
                      Yours sincerely,




                       Chief Constable




Mr. P.E. Bolton,
Head of G2 Division,
(Fire and Emergency Planning Department),
Home Office,
Queen Anne's Gate,
LONDON. SW1H 9AT
