                            DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL HERITAGE
                                S p o r t a n d R ecrea tio n D ivision
                  S an ctu ary B uildings G reat Smith Street W estm inster L o n d o n SW’l P 3RT
                           S w itc h b o a rd 071 925 5000 Fax 071 925 6934 GTS 3060



Peter Lee Esq                                                                                   Direct Line:
Chief Executive and Secretary                                                                   071-925 6370
The Football Trust
2nd Floor                                                                                       Direct Fax:
Walkden House                                                                                   071-925 6934
10 Melton Street
LONDON NW1 2EJ

                                                                                                4 June 1992

  .0   <.   i -        / - i-    i


RE-EXAMINATION OF ALL-SEATING AT FOOTBALL GROUNDS

I am enclosing with this letter a copy of today's announcement by
the Secretary of State that he has been re-examining the all­
seating requirement for Football League grounds. Mr Mellor is now
inviting further representations from a number of interested
organisations before taking a final decision.

Today's announcemnt focuses on the shape and scope of the re­
examination. You will wish to note in particular that the
Secretary of State has ruled out any review of the principle of
or timetable for all-seating at First Division grounds in the
Football League (the new Premier Division). He is also firmly
committed to the principle of all-seating for the majority of
Second Division clubs.

The main focus of the re-examination is therefore likely to be
whether there are compelling reasons not to proceed with an all-
seater requirement at all Third and Fourth Division clubs in the
Football League. It is also looking at Second Division clubs
with very low average attendances, with a view that there should
be as few anomalies as possible. The more detailed issues which
are being addressed are set out in the annex to this letter.

It would be helpful to have your views on these points by Friday
3 July. A list of bodies from whom views are also being elicited
is attached.
  t,
   C 1/               ^ C CI ^



MISS A J STEWART
COPIES TO GO TO:
The Football Association
The Football League
The Premier League
The Football Association of Wales
The Professional Footballers Association

The Football Licensing Authority

The Football Trust
The Football Stadia Advisory Design Council
The Association of Chief Police Officers
The National Federation of Football Supporters Clubs

The Football Supporters Association
                                                             B

ISSUES TO BE CONSIDERED DURING THE REVIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S
ALL-SEATER POLICY IN ENGLAND AND WALES

The Government has decided that it would be wrong to review
either the principle or the timetable for all-seating at First
Division grounds in the Football League (the new Premier League).
The Government also remains committed to the principle of all­
seating for the majority of Second Division clubs who attract
large numbers of supporters and who aim to join the Premier
League.

The Secretary of State is therefore focusing his examination on
the following issues:

     i.    whether standing accommodation should be allowed at
           some Third and Fourth Division grounds. If so, should
           this be:

           a.   in all cases (subject to the FLA determining that
                the terracing is safe); or

           b.   on the basis of a fixed capacity threshold (say
                10,000) above which clubs must go all-seating;

     ii.   whether, in view of average attendances at some Second
           Division clubs being significantly lower than at some
           Third Division clubs, standing accommodation should
           also be retained at those Second Division grounds;


     iii. under what circumstances could an extension of the
          August 1994 deadline be relaxed for any Second Division
           club.
     iv.   what transitional arrangements, if any, will be
           appropriate for clubs which are promoted;

     v.    whether any special arrangements should be made for a
           match in a cup competition where a big club is due to
                                                                    1
play "away" at a small club where all—seating is not
required, or for a league match between two small clubs
but where a large attendance is anticipated.




                                                          2
               DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL HERITAGE
                 Horse Guards Road, London SW1P 3AL
                             NEWS RELEASE

                                s



 NOT FOR PUBLICATION, BROADCAST, OR USE ON CLUB TAPES BEFORE
OVN        ,   THIS DOCUMENT IS ISSUED IN ADVANCE ON THE STRICT
 UNDERSTANDING THAT NO APPROACH BE MADE TO ANY ORGANISATION OR PERSON
 ABOUT ITS CONTENTS BEFORE THE TIME OF PUBLICATION

                                                                        DNH 13/92
                                                                       4 June 1992




            ALL-SEATING REQUIREMENTS AT FOOTBALL LEAGUE GROUNDS

                               TO BE RECONSIDERED


      David Mellor, Secretary of State for National Heritage, today
 announced that he is to reconsider the all-seating requirements at
 Third and Fourth Division clubs in the Football League.

      The    position   of   Second   Division   clubs   with   very   low   average
 attendances will also be re-examined.

      But Mr Mellor      told the House      of Commons    that no changes are
 proposed to the principle and timetable for introducing all-seating at
 First Division grounds       (the new Premier League)      and the majority of
 Second Division clubs.       "It must be a priority that our top clubs meet
 the standards necessary to compete in Europe and provide grounds of
 which we can all be proud" he said.

       And he added that the safety of members of the public attending
  football matches remained paramount.




                                             1
     In reply to a written Parliamentary Question from Malcolm Moss
MP, (North East^Cambridgeshire), Mr Mellor said:

     "The Government    keeps under continual scrutiny the safety of
     sports grounds.      We continue to support the principles of
     improved spectator safety and comfort which were set out by
     Lord Justice Taylor in his final report on the Hillsborough
     Stadium disaster.   In recent months we have been examining the
     all-seating requirement for Football League grounds in the
     context of the representations that have been made and our
     concern to ensure the highest standards of safety given all the
     factors involved, including the size of particular grounds,
     League status and the financial health of the clubs concerned.
     However, the safety of our sports grounds must remain paramount.


     "We have decided that it would be wrong to review either the
     principle or the timetable for all-seating at First Division
     grounds in the Football League (the new Premier League). It is
     essential that our top clubs meet the standards necessary to
     compete in Europe and make full use of the resources available to
     them to provide grounds of which we can all be proud.     We also
     remain firmly committed to the principle of all-seating for the
     great majority of Second Division clubs.

      "However, there may be equally compelling reasons not to proceed
     with an all-seating requirement at all Third and Fourth Division
     clubs in the Football League.     We also need to consider the
     position of those Second Division clubs with very low average
     attendances.   Further representations are being invited from a
     number of interested organisations to assist me in finalising our
     re-examination of these and related issues.    I have set a four
     week period for the receipt of these further views and I shall
      announce my conclusions speedily thereafter.

      "My Rt Honourable Friend, the Secretary of State for Scotland,
      will make a separate statement about the position in Scotland."

                       Press Office:   071 270 6919/20
                       Out of Hours:   071 270 6230


                                         2
Notes to Editors

     Following the inquiry by the Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor into the
Hillsborough Stadium Disaster (published January 1990), the Home
Secretary announced that:
     -   First and Second Division clubs would be required to provide
          all-seated accommodation at their grounds by the start of
          the 1994/5 season, and
     -   Third and Fourth Division clubs would be required to provide
          all-seated accommodation at their grounds by the start of
          the 1999/2000 season.
     Part I of the Football Spectators Act 1989 gives the Secretary of
State powers to impose all-seating requirements at Football League
matches through licences issued by the Football Licensing Authority.




                                      3
