                                                            t^'V»                  ,     f * Lj    u   (

                                                                    )-   t£T   f

                                                    f
                                                    C                                  fl
hs .6.11/ rugby .peb                      \   J' go j ' t                              'H-'V/-)

                                         ^                                3322
                                                                                            l.[i
                                V\x


        FEP/90 35/48/89                  11 June 1990
        DEW/bc



Dudley Wood Esq
Secretary
Rugby Football Union
TWICKENHAM
TW1 1DZ




Thank you for your letter of 29 May. David Mould and I were glad
that you could spare the time to see us and we were impressed by
the improvements which you are making at Twickenham.

I think you can be a little more informative in the draft letter.
I suggest the following re-draft for the second, third and fourth
paragraphs.

     This meeting has now taken place. We have made the case to
     the Home Office that conversion to all seating would be
     difficult, expensive and almost certainly unnecessary in the
     case of rugby football clubs and the Home Office have
     assured us that these points will be put before Ministers
     before any final decision is taken.     No decision will be
     made until consultation with other bodies, including the
     police and local authorities has been completed.

     Home Office officials confirmed that until Ministers make
     a decision about the application of the Taylor report's
     recommendations on all seated accommodation for sports other
     than association football, those sports were not expected
     to make reductions in standing capacity (except to comply
     with the new limits on density e t c ) .

     The Home Office has told local authorities that safety
     certificates should not be used to bring about all seated
     accommodation, even at association football grounds. Please
     let me know if you are placed under any pressure by local
     authorities to adopt these recommendations.
     Rugby football clubs are of course free to add additional
     seating if they wish to do so.  In those cases, of course,
     the safety certificate will need to be amended to reflect
     the changes.

I have asked people here to take on board your comments about
evacuation times. At the moment the Green Guide provides little
guidance between the maximum evacuation time of 8 minutes and the
shortest emergency evacuation time of 2 1 minutes.    We are very
conscious that a difference of a minute or two may not seem very
much, but that its effect in terms of requirements for staircases
can be considerable.

I will write to you again as soon as practicable.

                                         Yours sincerely




                                         P E BOLTON
                                         (Fire and Emergency
                                         Planning Department)
