                                    hcc   Mr Pete#
                                          Mr Smith
                                                               H   ome   O   f f ic e
                                                              QUEEN ANNE’S CATE
                                                              LONDON SW1H PAT




         -   ArLL             'SfVtorA               \o   March 1992




^    l)^ f   NW     ©ftv/cwSKlLa^
    Thank you for your letter of 4 February to Mr Atkins
    expressing your concern about the implementation of the
    recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor's Final Report on the
    Hillsborough Stadium disaster. As you know your letter has
    been passed to this Department in view of our responsibilities
    for matters arising from the Taylor Report and for sports
    ground safety in general. I must apologise for the delay in
    replying to your letter.

    Lord Justice Taylor recognised, in his Final Report, that
    there is no single solution to all the problems of crowd
    safety and control that exist at football matches. However,
    he was satisfied that seating does more to achieve these
    objectives than any other measure. This is a view which the
    Government supported when the Report was first published and
    which it continues to support.

    As you also know Lord Justice Taylor recommended that clubs in
    Divisions One and Two of the Football League should admit
    spectators only to seated accommodation from August 1994,
    whilst those in Divisions Three and Four should do so from
    August 1999. The Government continues to urge all Football
    League clubs to meet these deadlines, and intends that the
    same timing should apply to the Premier League.

    Under the Football Spectators Act 1989 the Football Licensing
    Authority (FLA) was established to implement certain key
    recommendations of the Taylor Report, among them the
    conversion of all Football League grounds to all seated.



                                                     /It is intended....

    Barry W Devonside Esq
It is intended that the FLA will begin issuing licences to
Football League grounds later this year. Once the licensing
procedure is in operation it will be against the law to
knowingly admit spectators to watch a designated football
match at an unlicensed ground.




                          N ROBERTS
                 Assistant Private Secretary
