                                                                a v ^ ls r
                               C   '■)
                                                                                   4 ! <T
                               fciiM            U a A v~£».              rQ > -    '   '   W




POSSIBLE SUPPLEMENTARY QUESTIONS ON THE ALL-SEATER REVIEW


(i)   Surely this will cause             Only 4 of the 76 Taylor
                                         recommendations were
confusion and some ill-
feeling among Second                     concerned with all-seating.

Division clubs if a minority             The Government remains

do not have to comply fully              committed to ensuring the

with Taylor?                             safety of spectators at
                                         sports grounds, and
                                         continues to support the
                                         principles of improved
                                         spectator safety and comfort
                                         contained in the Report.




(ii) Do you expect Second,               I have merely said that I

Third and Fourth Division                intend to re-examine the
                                         current policy.      I do not
clubs to continue to plan on
the basis of all-seating                 intend to speculate on the

being a requirement by the               outcome.

stated dates when a review
                                         The all-seater deadlines
may change their position?
                                         recommended by Lord Justice
                                         Taylor were accepted by the
                                         Government immediately after
                                         the publication of his Final
                                         Report in January 1990.             All
                                         clubs have been aware since
                                         then that they are expected
                                         to meet the deadlines, and
                                         they should continue to plan
                                         accordingly unless informed
                                         otherwise.


                                         Any delay in the
                                         redevelopment work at a
                                         particular ground over the
                                         next few weeks may hinder
                               that club's chances of
                               meeting the appropriate
                               deadline should I decide
                               that the policy is to remain
                               unchanged•




(iii) How can the Secretary    Responsibility for ensuring
of State guarantee safety at   the safety of spectators at
any ground where               a sports ground rests with
restrictions are relaxed?      the ground management.     Our
                               role is to provide the
                               legislative framework within
                               which safety may be
                               achieved, and to issue
                               guidance to ground
                               operators.   Of course,
                               absolute safety can never be
                               guaranteed -the aim of the
                               legislation is to help to
                               ensure reasonable safety.




(iv)   What about when clubs   When a big club is drawn to
are involved in cup matches    play at a small ground in a
with top clubs?                cup competition the match is
                               often moved to another
                               ground on the advice of the
                               police or the wishes of the
                               clubs concerned.     I see no
                               reason why this practice
                               should not continue.




(v) Isn't this an admission    No.   There have been
that Taylor and the            significant improvements in
government were wrong to       both safety and comfort and
press all clubs into all-      a decline in football
seater requirements at great   hooliganism.     It is against
cost to hard up clubs?         this background that I have
                               decided on a re-examination.




(vi) How long will             My officials have written to
representations take?          a number of interested
                               organisations requesting
                               their representations by 3
                               July.     I will announce the
                               outcome of the review as
                               soon as possible afterwards.




(vii) If a club from the       They will be given 3 seasons
current Second Division is     to convert their ground to
promoted to the Premier        all-seater.    This is
Division after the August      currently the arrangement
1994 deadline and they are     for clubs in the Third
not at that stage all-         Division who are promoted to
seater, how long will they     the Second Division after
be given to comply with the    the 1994 deadline has
requirements?                  passed.




(viii) If we want to provide   The Government recognises
grounds that we can all be     that there may be a case for
proud of as we enter the       reviewing the all-seater
21st Century, why restrict     policy so that it targets
these requirements to a        more effectively those clubs
minority of clubs?             where the risk is greatest.
                               It would seem appropriate
                               that clubs in the top two
                             divisions should lead the
                             way in terms of facilities
                             for the safety and comfort
                             of spectators. It is also
                             essential that our top clubs
                             meet the standards necessary
                             to compete in Europe.




(ix) Who will be consulted   My officials have written to
in the review?               the following organisations:


                             The Football Association
                             The Football League
                             The Premier League
                             The Football Association of
                             Wales
                             The Professional Footballers
                             Association
                             The Football Licensing
                             Authority
                             The Football Trust
                             The Football Stadia Advisory
                             Design Council
                             The Association of Chief
                             Police Officers
                             The National Federation of
                             Football Supporters Clubs
                             The Football Supporters
                             Association


                             I have also received a
                             detailed submission on all­
                             seated stadia and the Taylor
                             Report from the
                             Parliamentary All-Party
                             Football Committee, the
                             recommendations of which
                               will also be considered in
                               the course of the review.




(x) Will arrangements be put   Any work already undertaken
into place to compensate       which improves the safety
clubs who may have gone to     and comfort of spectators
enormous expense to put into   will ultimately be to the
place statutory requirements   benefit of the club
which may now be withdrawn?    concerned.


                               There will be no
                               compensation for clubs who
                               have already carried out any
                               such redevelopment work.




Cxi) Does the fixed capacity   Should I decide that grounds
threshold mean that clubs      which have capacities below
would only be allowed a        a fixed threshold were
maximum (10,000) capacity      allowed to retain some
even for one off cup games?    standing accommodation then
Would the FLA have authority   the capacity of that ground
to set different capacities    would have to remain below
for these games?               that figure for all games,
                               even if they were to draw a
                               big team at home in a cup
                               competition.




(xii) What about the           It is unlikely that a
anomalies that will arise      solution can be found where
between clubs in Divisions     there are no anomalies, but
One and Two and those in       I aim to ensure that as few
Divisions Three and Four?      as possible escape the
                               review.   There will always
                               be some clubs in the lower
                               divisions that attract
                               higher average attendances
                               than some in the higher
                               divisions.     This would be
                               the case wherever a cut off
                               point was established.




(xiii) Has the Government      No.    We remain committed to
backed down under pressure     ensuring the safety of
from the football industry     spectators at sports
and therefore failed in        grounds.     My announcement
their to duty to prevent       merely demonstrates our
another Hillsborough           recognition that we may need
disaster from happening?       to target more effectively
                               those club where the risk is
                               greatest.




(xiv) How can you justify      I have not ignored the
ignoring the advice of the     advice of the Committee.
Parliamentary All-Party        On the contrary, I am
Football Committee?            grateful for the considered
                               way in which they have put
                               forward their arguments.




(xv) Do you still consider     Yes.    The Government have
there to be a role for the     decided that it would be
Football Licensing Authority   wrong to reconsider either
(FLA)?                         the principle or the
                               timetable for all-seating at
                               First Division grounds in
                               the Football League (the new
Premier League).     The
Government also remains
committed to the principle
of all-seating for the great
majority of Second Division
clubs.   The Football
Licensing Authority will
continue to exercise their
functions under the Football
Spectators Act 1989 to
ensure that clubs in these
Divisions are all-seated by
the 1994 deadline.
