HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY COSTS - FIS RETURNS

I promised to let you have a note on the current financial    b
position in the light of our third quarter FIS returns.       ’

2.   On revised estimates, we appear likely to spend in the
region of £910,000 during the current financial year. Although
this is a marginal overspend on the £900,000 provision fixed by
the Treasury, it is nonetheless a sizeable reduction on our very
first estimate of £1,177,000.  In any event, Fin Div 1 has
already confirmed that there are no plans to restrict expenditure
on the Inquiry to estimate provision. They have indicated, too,
that the scale of the figures involved does not warrant a
supplementary estimate.

3.   There have been a number of changes to individual sub-heads.
On the advice of Mr Preston, the final quarter figure for pay
running costs (H6.1.1.) has been reduced to reflect (i) the
replacement of an AO by an AA, and (ii) the likelihood that the
Inquiry will finish before the end of the financial year. There
is sufficient contingency to cover any foreseeable winding-up
period.  Similarly, the final quarter travel and subsistence
figure (H6.1.2.) has also been revised downwards to reflect
completion of the Inquiry, and the unlikelihood of further
extensive travel. The third quarter figure itself reflects more
accurately costs incurred in our trips to date.

4.   The only other sub-head to show substantial change is that
for current expenditure (H6.2.).  Since we have not yet received
the bill from Sheffield Town Hall, nor paid in full the legal
costs of the bereaved and injured and FSA, the third quarter
figure is substantially lower than previously shown and the final
quarter figure correspondingly higher. We shall need to forewarn
G1 should it ever look likely that the Town Hall bill will not
reach us in time for payment during this financial year.
Elsewhere, there have been some minor adjustments downwards to
reflect costs actually incurred.

5.   I have confirmed that the Inquiry will not be required to
defray the Assessors' salary costs nop in Mr Johnson's case, the
associated salary costs of his driver.  Subject then to any
wholly unexpected charge, I am confident that the final costs of
the Inquiry will match closely the budget provision.




                                             J C SWEET

12 December 1989
Ref: FEP/89 35/48/123
