                                                                     fSoi-ton

                                                 :j !(: / s i   11

K H .6.6/FILENOTE.DM
FILE NOTE: TELEPHONE CALL - MR BARNES OF GJW GOVERNMENT
RELATIONS*

1.   Mr Barnes expressed the concern felt within the Football
League (FL) about the absence of the FLA to provide advice on
reductions in terrace capacities in order to comply with
recommendations 1-4 of the Final Report.  The FL were worried
that local authorities would use safety certificates for this
purpose.  I confirmed that we had already informed local
authorities that safety certificates should not be used for
this purpose and that this should be widely known by now.

2.    I advised that the FLA was not critical to the
introduction of all seated accommodation.   The timetable had
been recommended in the Final Report.   The power to require
seating within a licence rested with the Secretary of State,
not the FLA.   Clubs were aware of HMG's commitment.
Therefore, whilst the licence was the mechanism to require all
seated accommodation clubs should not sit back and do nothing.
It was for them to make the changes which both HMG and FL
wished to see. We all hoped to avoid replacement of poor
 terraces with poor quality seats.

 3.   I pointed out that even if the FLA were 1up and running
 it could not visit every ground, examine proposals, make
 recommendations (if any) simultaneously for all of them.  I
 felt the extent to which licences could require improved
 amenities and/or major re-development was not clear.   My
 opinion was, however, that if clubs adopted all seated
 proposals which improved ground conditions (toilets,
 refreshments etc) and met Building Regulation and Green Guide
 requirements, they could not go far wrong.  They could plan on
 that basis with confidence.

  4.    As for flexibility of the timetable, I explained that
  Ministers had envisaged flexibility within the deadline.    Mr
  Barnes hypothesized on a nil reduction in standing over, say,
  2 years with a large re-development thereafter.   I said the
  example was perhaps extreme.   I would not feel Ministers would
  rule it out because we recognised that re-development could
  not be packaged neatly into parcels of 10% or 20%.   I drew
  attention to the risk that the situation he described was one
  which, if plans were unrealistic or delayed for some reason,
  might well lead to the Secretary of State directing
  requirements as to the admission of spectators only to seated
   accommodation.
  5.   We both recognised that, FLA aside, planning permission
  would be needed for new development.  This could lead to delay
  - which I felt was another reason for clubs to start the
  process now.  There again those who had not formulated plans
  risked the imposition of requirements within the licence.

   6.   Clubs in the lower divisions would, Mr Barnes felt, pose
   difficulties.  At such grounds 'ad hoc' solutions were more
likely than at the major club grounds.  I recognised that
ability of such clubs to finance substantial work was likely
to be limited in some cases.  I acknowledged that Rugby, where
some grounds regularly attracted far more spectators than Div.
4 ground of the football league, was not subject to FLA
licensing.  I pointed out that as a result such grounds were
as likely to be "pressured" by local authorities as were
football grounds.

7.   Mr Barnes will accompany Mr Sandford when he meets us on
6 June.




                                        D J MOULD

                                        5 June 1990




     GJW Government Relations are lobby consultants for the
     Football League.
