h s .2.23/taylor3.peb


From:     P E Bolton                        cc   Ms   Snow
          G2 Division                            Mr   Turney
          X3322                                  Mr   Goddard
                                                 Mr   Mower
          2 3 February 199 0                     Mr   Godfrey


Ms Dent



TAYLOR INQUIRY:      THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION AND FOOTBALL LEAGUE

You   asked   for   advice   on   the   attached   letter   from
Mr F A (Bert) Millichip, Chairman of the Football Association.
The letter sets out the Association's response to the Taylor
report   and  asks  whether   the Home    Secretary will    meet
representatives of the Football Association and the Football
League in order to discuss the report and its implications.
Mr Millichip's letter ends, significantly, with his earnest hope
that we will be able to agree a common approach to promote, in
Lord Justice Taylor's words, "better and safer conditions at
sports grounds in the future".

2.   I very much hope that the Home Secretary will be able to
agree to such a meeting.       The response from the Football
Association and from the Football League to the Taylor report has
been surprisingly positive.   Anything that we can do to foster
a co-operative spirit with two leading organisations of the
football industry in England and Wales will make the task of
implementing the Taylor proposals that much easier.

3.   We have received requests for meeting with Ministers from
the football supporters organisations and from the Hillsborough
Families Support Group and I have recommended, in the last few
days, that they should be met by Lord Ferrers. I think that we
would be justified in treating the Football Association and the
Football League slightly differently, and that the Home Secretary
himself should meet them if his other commitments permit.
I would not expect this to be a recurring feature of our
relationship with these two organisations and I hope that at the
meeting it will be possible to encourage them to develop a close
working relationship with officials.

4.   I imagine that Lord Ferrers would wish to be present at the
meeting and it is for consideration whether Mr Moynihan should
be invited.   It must be said that since the publication of the
Taylor report, DoE have tended to push everything connected with
its implication in the direction of the Home Office. Even if it
is agreed that the Home Office should take over responsibility
for setting up the Football Licensing Authority and for
implementing the provisions of the Football Spectators Act (other
than the membership scheme), DoE still have responsibility for
promoting football as a sport. We would still expect the
Football Association and the Football League to look to the
Minister for Sport to defend their interests in Government.
Though most of the implementation of the Taylor report falls to
the Home Office, our interest is strictly confined to matters of
safety and public order.

5.   DoE officials inform us that the Football Association have
also asked for a meeting with the Secretary of State for the
Environment to discuss planning among other issues.       As it
happens Mr Moynihan is also the Minister with responsibility for
planning. DoE officials are taking Mr Moynihan's advice but are
inclined to recommend a single meeting, subject to the Home
Secretary's agreement.     That does not need to be decided,
however, before responding to Mr Millichip's request to the Home
Secretary.

6.   I attach   a   draft   letter   for   the   Private   Secretary's
signature.




                                             P E BOLTON


Encs
                                     ,^U                       2 1 FEB 1330
                           THE FOOTBALL ASSOCIATION f™ tawra?i
                                                         (Wi kwi^vJ
                                                        LIMITED                                         cc
                                                        Founded 1863
                                                                                                               ’i 'W . T i\J 'V J 2 ^ j
                                        Patron: H e r M a j e s t y T h e Q u e e n
                                      President: H . R . H . T h e D u k e o f K e n t                          IW,
                                             Chairman: F. A. M l L L l C H l P                                  1W C&nL^-e^
   C hief Executive:                                                                           Phone: 01 -402 7151/262 4542
R. H. G.      K   e l l y fcis                                                                        Telex: 261110
                                                                                                 Facsimile: 01-402 0486
                                                                                                              i\j\f,
                                 16 LANCASTER GATE, LONDON W2 3LW                                                            ^ ,
 O u r Ref:              FAM/RHGK/RB/9 0             Your Ref:                           19th February 1990




    The Rt Hon David Waadington, MP
    Home Office
    5 0 Queen Anne's Gate
    London SW1H 9AT



    Dear Home Secretary,


                                     TAYLOR INQUIRY.':                    FINAL REPORT

         Now that we have had. some time to scrutinise the Taylor
   Report fully, I thought I should write formally to set out The
   Football Association's response, to its. recommendations.

          At the outset, whilst we welcome, the Report's
    recommendations, we must make it clear to you that we consider
    some of Lord Justice Taylor's strictures most unfounded.

          The-Football Association has limited powers it-can
    exercise in relation to crowd control and safet.v which were
    set out in our submission to Sir Peter. The respective
    responsibilities of police, club, and local authority under
    the supervision of your Department were fully set out in the
    Popplewell Reports, and have been accepted by Lord Justice
    Taylor.

          We support Sir Peter Taylor's suggested strategy against
    hooliganism: stronger detection measures, new criminal
    offences, greater use of attendance orders and the
    introduction of electronic tagging, together with the crowd
    control and facility improvements he recommends. We believe
    that if this strategy is to be effective it must be treated as
    an integral whole.  We are therefore anxious that the proposed
    criminal offences within football grounds are indeed created
    and enforced.

          We accept Lord Justice Taylor's view that "in the end
    the bulk of the finances for ground improvement must be raised
    by the clubs themselves".  We have always recognised this.




                                      Registered Office; 16 Lancaster Gate, London W 2 3 L W
                                      Incorporated in London Registration Number 77797
The Rt Hon David Waddington            - 2 -            16.2.90



But in view of the considerable capital sums which will be
involved in meeting the targets Taylor sets, we are pleased
that he did not rule out consideration of a reduction in pools
betting tax or the extension of capital allowances to ground
improvements.  We would be grateful if the Government would
indeed give urgent consideration to these proposals. I am
writing to the Chancellor of the Exchequer about them.

       Increasingly over the past few years, we have been
working in a partnership with the Government and police in
tackling hooliganism.   The successful introduction of CCTV,
ground improvements and closer crowd control are all rhe
fruits of this co-operation.   Clearly there is much more to be
done, and the Taylor Report gives us the opportunity to renew
our commitment to fight hooliganism and improve crowd safety
and conditions.    We are considering areas in which The
Football Association can provide new ideas, resources and
assistance to promote safety with the game. We are ready to
work, with the Government to implement Taylor's strategies.

      As many of the Report's recommendations bear on Home
Office responsibilities, I would be very grateful if it would
be possible for us to meet you with our collegues from The
Football League to discuss the Report and its implications.
My earnest hope is that we will be able to agree a common
approach to promote, in Lord. Justice Taylor's words, "better
and safer conditions at sports grounds in the future".



                       Yours sincerely,


                                 tC u f~>
                        F .A . Millichip
                            Chairman
