                                       fV L
 V


THE SPORTS COUNCIL                                               SC (90) 12

FDR INFORMATION AND ACTION
                                                l) Z .
                     THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER
               FINAL REPORT BY THE RT HON LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR


                                                                              *t£.
INTRODUCTION

1.   The Final Report by the Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor was published on
     Monday 29 January 1990. The Report is canprehensive and reflects the
      thoroughness with which the issue has been approached.

2.   At its meeting in June 1989, the Council agreed on its submission to
     the Inquiry and it is encouraging to note that the vast majority of
     points included in the submission have been incorporated in the Final
      Report.

3.   The summary list of recommendations is appended (Appendix A) and the
      principal headings within the summary provide a structure for comment
      and the identification of further action. A copy of the full Report
      is available in the Members' Room.

GENERAL ISSUES

4.   The Report fully recognises the links between standards of facilities
      and standards of behaviour, but clearly there will have to be
      sufficient lead-in time to allow a major shift in attitude to occur
     by providing authorities an the one hand and spectators on the other.
      The Report emphasises that it is only one in a series of reports
     which often have been welcomed but seldom adopted either in spirit or
     in practice by the controlling authorities. It provides a stark
     picture of a game rich in tradition, embedded in national and
     regional    culture,  but   placed within a context of appalling
     facilities, ill-equipped management and attractive, both to         a
     majority of faithfull and well-behaved spectators who deserve better,
     and a minority of followers whose activities have helped shape an
     unenviable reputation for the national game over recent years.

5.   Members may wish to agree that the Sports Council should         do
      everything in its power     to help fully shape, and implement, the
      recommendations in the Report.

MAIN RECOMMENDATIONS

     All-Seated Accommodation (paragraphs 1 to 4 of the AppenrH*)

6.   In its submission, the Sports Council supported the principle of
      all-seated stadia on the basis that it added to safety and comfort of
      spectators. The principle has been adopted in the Report for a range
     of clubs. It may be recognised by Members that the implementation of
      this recommendation will     not   be   without   its   difficulties,
particularly relating to the design of covered seating areas and the
overall cost. However, it is an important first step to improve
facilities at football clubs.

Advisory Design Council (Paragraph 5)

•The. Inquiry recommends that the Football Association and Football
League should establish an Advisory Design Council whose functions
Should be:

(a)   The conduct and marshalling of research into the improvement
      and design of football stadia.

(b)   Tine dissemination regularly of such information and expertise
      as is required in the field to members of the Football League
      and, on request, to other football and sports clubs in England,
      Wales and Scotland.

In its submission, the Council supported the idea of a central
licensing authority and drew attention to the need for guidance on
the design of new stadia which are not covered by the Green Guide.
While the main Report does not state it implicitly, the report to the
Inquiry by a separate technical ccrnmittee stressed the need for the
Sports Council to be involved with the proposed Advisory Design
Council and Members may wish, in principle, to support a move to
offer Council services.

While supporting the principle, however, Members may wish to   express
some qualifications relating to:

(a)   The need for careful designation of the functions of the
      Advisory Design Council and particularly the extent of overlap
      with Sports Council advisory work.

(b)   The implications for other sports which take place in stadia
       and the extent to which they could influence a body established
      only by the football authorities.

(c)   The extent to which this body would integrate with the proposed
      Football Licensing Authority and with the Heme Office which
      will be responsible far revising the "Green Guide" on safety
      measures. Co-ordination between and among these new bodies and
      existing organisations will be paramount.

National Inspectorate and Review Body (Paragraph 6)

The Inquiry     recommends the establishment of the Football Licensing
Authority as   allowed for in Part I of the Football Spectators Act
1989.    The    Authority would have a range of functions and powers,
particularly   the power to reveiw the discharge of functions by local
authorities.

In its submission, the Council proposed the establishment of such a
central authority and Members may wish to reiterate their support and
possible involvement on such a body. The determination and exercise
of the powers of the Authority will be a key     issue in improving
                                                                                   3
»




          safety and other features at sports stadia, its success dependent, of
          course, on the quality of leadership provided by the Authority.

          Design and Use of Spectator Facilities (Paragraphs 7 to 22)

    12.   In an extensive section, the Inquiry makes a range of recommendations
          relating to the capacity, filling and monitoring of use of terraces
          and the design of gangways, fences, gates and crash barriers; all of
          a sensible and welcome nature.

    13.   The one area of concern is in paragraph 17 of the summary of
          recommendations, where the Report states "There must be provided in
          any perimeter fence of a pen or other self-contained area sufficient
          gates of a minimum width of 1.1 metres..." In Germany and Italy the
          minimum width new used is 1.2 metres and, in this and other areas,
          there are sometimes inexplicable differences between the measures
          proposed and the requirements throughout the rest of Europe. The
          Council may agree that more should be done to understand these
          differences and encourage the appropriate authorities to determine
          that the higher specification should be adopted. In this area, the
          Council has been involved in the initial discussions on having a
          Central European Norm (CEN) for stadia, and in considering new stadia
          in the future it may be hoped that the opportunity is taken for a
          radical, rather than piecemeal, approach to improved design.

          Safety Certificates (Paragraphs 24 to 31)

    14. The Report recommends the immediate review of safety certificates
         held by football grounds including a vigorous inspection of each
         facility.

    15. Within this context, there is proposed the establishment by each
         local authority of a local Advisory Group consisting of "appropriate
        members of its own staff, representatives of the police, of the fire
         and ambulance services and of the building authority. The Advisory
        Group should consult representatives of the club and of a recognised
        supporters' organisation on a regular basis". The introduction or
        strengthening of such groups is an important proposal, particularly
        in relation to improving co-ordination among the providing and
        servicing agencies and the "customers".

          Duties of Each Football Club (Paragraphs 32 to 43)

    16. The Inquiry identifies a range of duties to be 'tine responsibility of
        each club, including inproved sign-posting, ticketing, stewarding and
        co-operation with police and other services.           All the points
        identified are welcome.

          Duties   of   Policy and Other Service Organisations (Paragraphs 44 to


    17. Within these sections are a range of issues relating to detailed
        crowd   control,   effective   oormunications between police and
4



      spectators, co-ordination of emergency and ambulance services and a
      tightening of offences and penalties, including the use of "tagging"
      devices in the sentencing of offenders convicted of football related
      offences.

18.   These   provide   a   blueprint   for   improving the    planning   and
      implementation of control procedures at major grounds.

      The Green Guide (Paragraphs 74 to 76)

19. In its submissions, both to the Popplewell Inquiry and the Taylor
    Inquiry, the Council strongly reccrrmended the revision of the "Green
    Guide" on safety measures at stadia. In addition to revisions, the
    Council called for it to be made compulsory and, to seme extent, the
    technical committee reporting to the Inquiry accepted this stance.
    However, Lord Justice Taylor has not agreed that it should be
    compulsory stating:

            "I have reccnmended that seme safety factors covered by the
            Guide   should   be   made mandatory requirements in Safety
            Certificates. Those apart, I consider the Guide should remain
            a non-mandatory set of guidelines. Sports grounds vary greatly
            in their layout and fixtures. It must be open to a local
            authority to judge the propriety of deviating in seme respect
            from the Green Guide recommendations at a particular point.
            However, I agree with the Technical Working Party that where
            there is a specific recommendation of the Guide, the local
            authority should be aware of it and should be satisfied that
            such departure is justified for good reason".

20. In this context, Members may agree that the requirement to notify an
     "opting out" of recommendations in the Green Guide is a useful step
    forward even though it does not go as far as the Council originally
    proposed.

21.   The revision of the Green Guide is seen to be a matter of urgency and
      the Inquiry recommends that the Heme Office establishes a body for
      this purpose.      Members may wish to agree that the Council should
      offer its services to such a body. Some correspondence with the Heme
      Office has already been undertaken in the hope that the Council's
      offer to help on this occasion will not be met with the same absence
      of interest following the Popplewell Inquiry. The Council's view was
      and is that the current Green Guide is inadequate and requires a
      thorough overhaul.

OTHER ISSUES

22.   In addition to the main recommendations outlined above, there are
      several other points which are relevant:

      (a)    The Report clearly identifies the need to improve the overall
            facilities for spectators, from better location and siting of
            stadia, inproved transport and car parking, enhanced catering
            provision and generally an all-round       upgrading  of   the
           atmosphere surrounding football matches.    The Report stops
           short of agreeing to having alcohol on sale at grounds but
           indicates that this may be feasible in due course if other
           elements work successfully.

     (b)   The responsibilities of clubs to take care of spectators is
           underlined with the dramatic decline in spectators attributed
           to the lamentable facilities often provided. The provision of
           attractive facilities (even at an increased cost) is certainly
           one way to attract back a more generally civilized group of
           spectators.

     (c)   The Report agrees specifically with the        Sports  Council
            submission (page 20 paragraph 120 of the main Report) that new
            stadia on peripheral urban sites may be a way forward in the
            future, with the sale of city centre sites providing some or
            all of the capital requirements.

     (d)   The Report is sympathetic to the problems in funding and
            redeveloping stadia and makes broad suggestions to Government
            with regard to tax relief.    It does, however, make rather
            unsubstantive suggestions about extra funding from television
            contracts and levies on transfer fees, which may be of value to
            soccer but not in either cricket or rugby, and it is an example
            of the extent to which greater clarity is required in relation
            to the effect of these recarmendations on other sports, an
            issue raised recently by the CCPR with its members.

     (e)   The Report, understandably, emphasises the need for a package
            of "law and order" measures. However, there is little mention
            of educational initiatives which are taking place or which
            could be introduced.

     (f) A   key    emission is the absence of any mention of the
          professional training of operators of stadia. In the USA, for
          example, there is an association for those responsible for
          managing arenas, and there will certainly be a need for quality
          assurance, not only in the design of and safety measures at
          football stadia but also in their overall management.

ADVISORY WORK

23. In its submission to the Taylor Inquiry, the Sports Council offered
     assistance in a number of forms, one of which was to organise a
     seminar of experts to take the recarmendations further.     Such a
     seminar has new been set for 29 March 1990 in conjunction with the
     Royal Institute of British Architects.

24. In addition to this major event, the Council will continue to offer
    its advisory service. In this context, the Report suggests that the
    work of the Council in this area is valuable but too little krown, a
    comment which may reflect both the quality of the desk study
    undertaken by the Inquiry and the need for the Council to promote its
    services more effectively.
RECOMMENDATIONS

25.   It Is recommended that:

      (a)    Members  welocme    the   Final   Report of the Inquiry and
             particularly the painstaking analysis of the problems and the
             clarity of construction of wide-ranging solutions.

      (b)    The Council determines to offer its support in implementing the
             findings of the Inquiry.

      (c)    Specific Council services are offered to:

              (i)   The Home Office in its revision of the Green Guide.

            iii)    The Football Association in the establishment of the
                     proposed Advisory Design Council where the Council may
                     have a significant role to play.

            (iii)   The Football Licensing Authority in its initial and
                    substantive work.

      (d)    In a response to the Report particular points are made          to   the
              tone Office relating to:

              (i)   International standards.

             (ii)   The need for greater clarity on the effects, if any, on
                    other sports.

            (iii)   The need for an enhanced education programme.

             (iv)   Training and quality       assurance   in   respect of    stadia
                    management.

      (e)    The Council/RIBA Seminar on 29 March is extensively advertised
              and its proceedings widely disseminated as part of the overall
              strategy to improve knowledge of this area.




DGC
2 February 1990
/                                PART V - F IN A L R E C O M M E N D A T IO N S
                                                                                                  APPENDIX A



    Ail-Seated Accommodation
      1. The Secretary of State should ensure that spectators are admitted only to seated accommodation at
    matches played at sports grounds designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1075 in accordance with
    the timing set out in Recommendations 2 to 4 below,

      2. Recommendation 1 should apply with effect from the start of the 1993/4 season at high-risk matches as
    defined under the UEFA Regulations set out in paragraph 82 above.

      3. Subject to Recommendation 2 above, Recommendation 1 above should apply with effect from the start of
    the 1994/5 season to all matches at grounds in the first and second divisions of the Football League, the
    Premier Division of the Scottish Football League, and at national stadia, subject to a reasonable extension of
    time in the case of a club promoted to the second division of the Football League or the Premier Division of the
    Scottish Football League. Standing accommodation at these grounds should be reduced annually by 20% of the
    present standing capacity (such present standing capacity to be calculated according to Recommendation 8
    below), the first 20% deduction being effective from August 1990 so as to eliminate standing by August 1994.

      4. Subject to Recommendation 2 above, Recommendation 1 should apply with effect from the start of the
    1999/2000 season to all matches at all other grounds designated under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975.
    Standing accommodation at these grounds should be reduced annually by 10% of the present standing capacity
    (such present standing capacity to be calculated according to Recommendation 8 below), the first 10%
    deduction being effective from August 1990 so as to eliminate standing by August 1999.

    Advisory D esign Council
      5. The Football Association and the Football League should establish an Advisory Design Council whose
    functions should be:

        (a) to conduct and marshal research into the improvement and design of football stadia;

        (b) to disseminate regularly such information and expertise as they acquire in this field to members of the
            Football League and, on request, to other football and sports clubs in England, Wales and Scotland.

    National Inspectorate and Review Body
      6.    (a) If Part I of the Football Spectators Act 1989 is implemented, section 13 should be brought into force
    giving the Football Licensing Authority the functions and powers therein specified (power to review the
    discharge of functions by local authorities). If Part 1 of the Act is not implemented or is substantially delayed,
    other arrangements should be made for the discharge of the functions and powers in section 13 of the Act by the
    appointment of a body to exercise them.

          (b) In either event, the body exercising those functions and powers in relation to association football
    should also be entrusted with similar functions and powers regarding the discharge by local authorities of their
    certifying and licensing functions in relation to other sports grounds and sports entertainments pursuant to the
    Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 and Parts III and IV of the Fire Safety and Safety of Places of Sport Act
    1987.

    M axim um Capacities for Terraces
      7. Where a viewing terrace is divided into pens or areas which are self-contained, the Safety Certificate
    should specify the maximum number of spectators to be admitted to each such pen or area.

    A pen or area is to be deemed “self-contained” notwithstanding that it has a gate or gates affording access to
    another pen or area and whether such gate or gates be open or shut.

      8. Each figure for maximum capacity should be assessed in accordance with Chapter 16 of the Green Guide
    (“the Green Guide figure”) subject to the following qualifications:-

        (a) the maximum density permitted under paragraphs 221 and 222 of the Green Guide (when the terrace
            or view ing slope is in good condition) should be 47 not 54;


                                                           76




                                                                                                                         «P
    (b) the minimum figure specified in paragraphs 221 and 222 (when the terrace or viewing slope materially
        deviates from the recommended guidelines, so as to constitute a possible hazard to individuals closely
        packed) should be 0 not 27;

    (e) In arriving at “the Green Guide figure”* proper and realistic allowance must be made for all factors
        which should reduce the permissible density Including those specified in paragraphs 220 to 224
        inclusive of the Green Guide.

  9. Arrangements should be made:-

    (a) to limit the number of spectators entering each self-contained pen or area to the maximum capacity
        figure assessed in accordance with Recommendation 8 above either electronically, mechanically, by a
        ticketing arrangement, by counting or otherwise, and

    (b) to close off further access to such pen or area when its maximum capacity is about to be reached.

  10. The maximum notional rate at which spectators can pass through a turnstile should be 660 persons per
hour, not 750 per hour as stated in paragraph 47 of the Green Guide. The maximum rate for any particular
turnstile must take full account of all circumstances including those given as examples in paragraph 47.


Filling and M onitoring Terraces
   11. There should be a written statement of intent, agreed between the club and the police, setting out their
respective functions as to crowd safety and control and in particular as to the filling of each self-contained pen or
other standing area and the monitoring of spectators in each such pen or area to avoid overcrowding. Any
variation of the document in respect of an individual match should be agreed in writing in advance.

  12. (a) At each match, there should be on the perimeter track, for each self-contained pen or other standing
area (subject to (b) below), a steward (if the club is monitoring that area) or a police officer (if the police are
monitoring it) whose sole duty is to check crowd conditions in that area for possible overcrowding or distress
throughout the period the area is occupied by spectators. Whoever is so appointed should be in addition to any
other steward or police presence. He should have ready access to a police officer who can authorise access
through gates to the pitch under Recommendation 20 below.

      (b)       This Recommendation need not be applied to any self-contained pen or other standing area where the
spectators present, or reasonably to be expected, during a particular match do not exceed one third of the area's
maximum permitted capacity, or 2,000, whichever is the lower.


Gangways
  13. Gangways should be kept clear, in accordance with paragraphs 97 to 99 of the Green Guide. Gangways
should be painted in a conspicuous colour whether they are sunk or not. The Safety Certificate should require
that no standing is allowed in gangways and that they be painted.


Fences and Gates
   14. All spikes or similar constructions on perimeter or radial fences, and any sections overhanging or
returning inwards towards spectators, should be removed.

  15. Perimeter fencing should be no higher than 2.2 metres, measured from the top of the fence to the lowest
point at which spectators may stand, and including any wall or other foundations forming part of the perimeter
boundary.

  16. All police officers and stewards with duties in relation to the standing areas and especially those with
duties under Recommendation 12 above, should be fully briefed and trained with regard to the recognition of
crowd densities, to the recognition of signs of distress and to crowd dynamics. Training should include
demonstrations at the ground and photographs, designed to enable stewards and officers to recognise different
crowd densities.

  17. There must be provided in any perimeter fence of a pen or other self-contained area sufficient gates of a
minimum width of 1.1 metres to enable that pen or area to be evacuated onto the pitch in the time prescribed for
an emergency evacuation of that pen or area.
   18. All gates in radial or perimeter fences of pens or other self-contained areas should be painted in a
different colour from the rest of the fence and marked "Emergency Exit”.

   19. Where there is a perimeter fence in front of a pen or enclosure, all gates to the pitch should be kept fully
open during the period when spectators are in the pen or enclosure, wherever those in command feel that this
can safely be done. Whether they be fully open, partially open or closed, they should be kept unlocked
throughout the period when the pen or enclosure is occupied.

   20. Each gate in a perimeter fence affording access to the pitch from a pen or enclosure should be manned by
a steward or by a police officer when the pen or enclosure is occupied. Whether such manning should be by a
police officer or by a steward should be decided by the Police Commander. In either event, the Police
Commander should appoint one or more police officers with power to authorise access through gates to the
pitch immediately in the event of an emergency.

  21. Suitable and sufficient cutting equipment should be provided by the club at each ground where there are
perimeter fences to permit the immediate removal of enough fencing to release numbers of spectators if
necessary. Agreement should be reached as to whether the equipment should be used by police, the fire brigade
or stewards. Whoever is to use it should be trained to do so. Whether to use it should be a decision of a
nominated senior police officer at the ground.


Crush Barriers
   22. All crush barriers should be visually inspected each year for signs of corrosion. Any barrier found to be
affected by a significant degree of corrosion should be repaired or replaced.

   23. The layout of barriers in each pen or terraced area should be reviewed immediately (if this has not
already been done following the Interim Report) to ensure that it complies with the criteria contained in
Chapter 9 of the Green Guide. If it does not, the assessment of the maximum capacity figure for that pen or
terraced area, in accordance with Recommendation 8 above, should reflect the fact.


Safety Certificates
   24. The Secretary of State should exercise his powers under either section 6(2) or section 15(A) of the Safety
of Sports Grounds Act 1975 so as to make mandatory in Safety Certificates those conditions specified in the
original section 2(2) of the 1975 Act. So far as the original section 2(2)(b) is concerned “shall" should be
substituted for “may”.

  25. In assessing these mandatory requirements in the Certificate for a particular ground, the local authority
should follow the Green Guide criteria. Once that is done, the resultant figures and terms for that ground
should be specified in the Safety Certificate and no variation from them should be permitted other than by
formal revision.

  26. Where a local authority incorporates any provision of the Green Guide into the Safety Certificate, other
than one within the scope of Recommendation 25 above, it should make clear whether that provision is to be
complied with absolutely or with discretionary flexibility.

  27. There should be an immediate review of each Safety Certificate (if this has not already been done
following the Interim Report) by the responsible local authority, which should consult the club in respect of
which the Certificate is issued, the police, the fire service, the ambulance service and the building authority.
Such a review should include an inspection of the stadium. Its object should be to ensure that the operative
conditions of the Certificate are complied with and to add or substitute any condition shown to be necessary as a
matter of urgency follow ing the findings and Recommendations in this Report.

 28. Any local authority within whose area there exists a sports ground designated under the 1975 Act for
which no Safety Certificate has yet been issued should proceed forthwith to remedy the situation.

  29. Every Safety Certificate should be reviewed by the local authority at least once annually and each
Certificate should require to be renewed annually.

   30. Each local authority should review its arrangements for issuing, monitoring, enforcing, reviewing,
 amending and renewing Safety Certificates (if this has not already been done following the Interim
Report). Such review should require that there exists or is provided an accountable administrative structure
whereby the functions of the local authority are regularly and effectively supervised by senior officers and
elected members and decisions are properly taken in accordance with the local authority’s rules.

   31. To assist the local authority in exercising its functions, it should set up an Advisory Group (if this has not
already been done) consisting of appropriate members of its own staff, representatives of the police, of the fire
and ambulance services and of the building authority. The Advisory Group should consult representatives of the
club and of a recognised supporters’ organisation on a regular basis. The Advisory Group’s terms of reference
should encompass all matters concerned with crowd safety and should require regular visits to the ground and
attendance at matches. The Advisory Group should have a chairman from the local authority, and an effective
procedure. Its resolutions should be recorded and it should be required to produce regular written reports for
consideration by the local authority.


Duties o f Each Football Club
  32. Each turnstile should be inspected and its potential rate of flow measured (if this has not already been
done following the Interim Report). Thereafter, regular inspections should be made to ensure that each turnstile
remains capable of admitting spectators at the rate anticipated.

   33. The correlation between each viewing area in the stadium and the turnstiles serving it should be such as
to ensure that all the spectators intended to be admitted to that viewing area can pass through the turnstiles
within one hour. If that cannot be done, the capacity of that viewing area should be reduced accordingly. Since
this Recommendation includes terms and conditions within the scope of the original section 2(2)(c)(i) of the
Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 it should be given effect in the Safety Certificate (see Recommendation 24
above).

  34. Turnstiles should be closed when the permitted capacity of the area served by them is about to be reached
and arrangements should be made to ensure quick and effective communication with turnstile operators for this
purpose.

  35. Closed circuit television should be so installed as to enable crowd densities outside the ground, within
concourse areas and in pens and other standing areas, to be monitored before, throughout and at the end of a
match.

  36. All signposting for spectators both outside and inside the ground should be comprehensively reviewed (if
this has not already been done follow ing the Interim Report). It should, in relation to the arrangements for each
match, be unambiguous, eye-catching, simple and clear and should be designed to ensure the rapid movement of
spectators to their appropriate viewing areas. Any redundant signs should be removed.

  37. Information on tickets should be unambiguous, simple and clear and should correlate absolutely with the
information provided in respect of each match both outside and inside the ground. Retained ticket stubs should
contain information necessary to guide spectators once inside the ground.

  38. Information on tickets requesting spectators to be in position by a particular time should be reviewed (if
this has not already been done following the Interim Report) by clubs in conjunction with the police to ensure
that it corresponds with the planned arrangements for admitting spectators to the ground.

  39. Clubs should consider maintaining a record on computer of ticket sales before the day of the match, for
season tickets and tickets for all-ticket matches for seated areas, containing the names and addresses of those
purchasing tickets.

  40. All-ticket matches should be confined to those at which a capacity or near capacity crowd is expected.
When a match has been designated all-ticket, clubs should not sell tickets at the match and should take steps to
advise the spectators of both clubs accordingly.

  41. Each club should consult with a recognised supporters’ club as to the provision of pre-match
entertainment aimed at attracting spectators to the ground in good time.

   42. Clubs should recruit and retain sufficient competent stewards. They should be fit, active and robust, and
preferably between the ages of 18 and 55. Clubs should ensure that stewards are fully trained, aware of their
duties under Annex B of the Green Guide and under the statement of intent (see Recommendation 11) and able
to perform them.
  43. The club should provide a police control room which is:-

    (a) well placed, so as to command a good view of the whole pitch and of the spectator area surrounding it;

    (b) of sufficient size for the commander, his deputy and enough officers to operate the radios, telephones
        and CCTV screens. There should be space for others who may need from time to time to visit the room
        eg other senior officers, club management or a member of the emergency services;

    (c) well equipped with CCTV, radio and telephone facilities and, where necessary, sound-proofed against
        excessive crowd noise.

  It should be the duty of the club to provide a room and equipment to the satisfaction of the chief officer
nominated under Recommendation 44 below.


Police Planning
  44. The Chief Constable of each police force in whose area there is one designated sports ground or more
should nominate a chief officer to liaise with the management of each football club and local authority
concerned in respect of the safety and control of crowds.

  45. The Operational Order for each match at a designated sports ground, and the pre-match briefing of all
officers on duty there, should alert such officers to the importance of preventing any overcrowding and, if any is
detected, of taking appropriate steps to remedy it.

  46. The Operational Order for each match at a designated sports ground should enable the police to cope
with any foreseeable pattern in the arrival of spectators at a match and in their departure. It should provide for
sufficient reserves to enable rapid deployment of officers to be made at any point inside or outside the ground.

  47. Police planning should provide that ticketless fans should not be allowed to enter a designated sports
ground except in an emergency.

 48. Arrest procedures inside and outside designated sports grounds should be reviewed so as to keep to the
minimum the period during which an arresting officer is away from his post.

  49. The option to postpone kick-off should be in the discretion of the officer in command at the ground.
Crowd safety should be the paramount consideration in deciding whether to exercise it.

  50. Consideration in consultation with the club should be given, especially for high-risk matches, to the
possibility of an early kick-off or a Sunday fixture.

  51. There should be available in the police control room the results of all closed circuit television monitoring
outside and inside the ground and the record of any electronic or mechanical counting of numbers at turnstiles
or of numbers admitted to any area of the ground. Officers in the control room should be skilled in the
interpretation and use of these data.

   52. Consideration should be given to the provision of a specific training course for senior officers presently
acting as Police Commanders and those in line to do so. Such a course should include training in the basic
strategy of policing football matches.

  53. Police authorities should review the charges they make to clubs for the costs of policing inside grounds so
as to ensure that realistic charges are made. The Home Office should take steps to ensure consistency of
practice, subject to local discretion and the need to have regard to local circumstances.


Communications
  54.     There should be sufficient operators in the police control room to enable all radio transmissions to be
received, evaluated and answered. The radio system should be such as to give operators in the control room
priority over, and the capacity to override, others using the same channel. Additional channels should be used,
where necessary, to prevent overcrow ding of the airwaves.

                                                        80
  55. There should always be a command channel reserved solely for the Police Commander to communicate
with his senior officers round the ground.

   56. To complement radio communications, there should be a completely separate system of land lines with
telephone links between the control room and key points at the ground.

  57. Within the control room, there should be a public address system to communicate with individual areas
outside and inside the ground, with groups of areas or with the whole ground. Important announcements should
be preceded by a loud signal to catch the attention of the crowd despite a high level of noise in the ground. This
arrangement should be prominently advertised on every programme sold for every match.

  58. Use should be made where possible of illuminated advertising boards to address the crowd.


Co-ordination of Emergency Services
   59. The police, fire and ambulance services should maintain through senior nominated officers regular
liaison concerning crowd safety at each designated sports ground.

  60. Before each match at a designated sports ground the police should ensure that the fire service and
ambulance service are given full details about the event, including its venue, its timing, the number of spectators
expected, their likely routes of entry and exit, and any anticipated or potential difficulties concerning the
control or movement of the crowd. Such details should be readily available in the control rooms of each of the
emergency services.

  61. Lines of communication, whether by telephone or by radio, from the police control room to the local
headquarters of all emergency services should be maintained at all times so that emergency calls can be made
instantly.

  62. Contingency plans for the arrival at each designated sports ground of emergency vehicles from all three
services should be reviewed. They should include routes of access, rendezvous points, and accessibility within
the ground itself.

  63. Police officers posted at the entrances to the ground should be briefed as to the contingency plans for the
arrival of emergency services and should be informed when such services are called as to where and why they are
required.


First Aid, M edical Facilities and Ambulances
  64. There should be at each sports ground at each match at least one trained first aider per 1,000 spectators.
The club should have the responsibility for securing such attendance.

  65. There should be at each designated sports ground one or more first aid rooms. The number of such rooms
and the equipment to be maintained within them should be specified by the local authority after taking
professional medical advice and should be made a requirement of every Safety Certificate.

   66. (a) At every match where the number of spectators is expected to exceed 2,000, the club should employ a
medical practitioner to be present and available to deal with any medical exigency at the ground. He should be
trained and competent in advanced first aid. He should be present at the ground at least an hour before kick-off
and should remain until half an hour after the end of the match. His whereabouts should be known to those in
the police control room and he should be immediately contactable.

       (b)        At any match where the number of spectators is not expected to exceed 2,000, the club should make
arrangements to enable a medical practitioner to be summoned immediately to deal with any medical exigency
at the ground. He should be trained and competent in advanced first aid. The arrangements made should be
known to those in the police control room.

  67. At least one fully equipped ambulance from or approved by the appropriate ambulance authority should
be in attendance at all matches with an expected crowd of 5,000 or more.

   68. The number of ambulances to be in attendance for matches where larger crowds are expected should be
specified by the local authority after consultation with the ambulance service and should be made a requirement
of the Safety Certificate.
  69. A “major incident equipment vehicle”, designed and equipped to deal with up to 50 casualties, should be
deployed in addition to other ambulance attendance at a match where a crowd in excess of 25,000 is expected.


Offences and Penalties
 70. Consideration should be given to creating an offence of selling tickets for and on the day of a football
match without authority from the home club to do so.

  71. Each of the following activities at a designated sports ground should be made a specific offence:-

    i.    throwing a missile;

    ii.   chanting obscene or racialist abuse;

    iii. going on the pitch without reasonable excuse.

  72. Consideration should be given to extending the courts’ powers to make attendance centre orders for
football related offences on occasions of designated football matches. The provision should be capable of
imposition on an offender aged 21 or over and subject to a maximum of 72 hours in the case o f an offender aged
17 or over.

  73. Consideration should be given to the use of electronic monitoring (tagging) in the sentencing of offenders
convicted of football related offences.


Green Guide
  74. At a matter of urgency, the Home Office should set up a body to revise the Green Guide In accordance
with this Report, these Recommendations and the Report of the Technical Working Party (Appendix 3).

  75. In any revision of the Green Guide, the values to be achieved by way of percentage recovery after the
required loading tests on crush barriers should be specified. Acceptable values for various materials should be
specified.

  76. When the Green Guide is revised, the need to inspect crush barriers for possible corrosion should be
specifically mentioned and emphasised.
