                                         tV\A              ~   tST'
                    9
                                                                                                        2 8 FEB 199Q l ^ 93 (J)
                                                                            D EPA R TM EN T OF TH E EN V IR O N M E N T
                          Z & M N T a,
                                                                            2 M A R S H A M S T R E E T L O N D O N SW 1P 3EB
                                                                                              01-276 3 0 0 0

                                                                            My ref:                    M/PSO/3309/90
                                                                                                       M/PSQ/3822/90
                                                                            Your ref:


                        Councillor A M Kershaw
                        Chairman
                        National Federation of Football                                                  .2 6 FEB 1990
                         Supporters Clubs

                                                                                                 C£.
                                                                                                       (U   id

                                                   «JUUr              /

                    Thank you fox               your letter of            25 J a nuary suggesting a joint
                    meeting   with              the  Federation            and    the  Football Supporters
                    Association.

                    It may be helpful if I first explain the position on the proposed
                    national membership scheme and the Football Licensing Authority
                    in the light of Lord Justice Taylor's final report on the
                    Hillsborough Stadium disaster.

                    As you know in his final report I»ord Justice Taylor concluded
                    that he could not support a national membership scheme because he
                    did not believe that the technology would work well enough to
                    avoid the danger of congestion and disorder.        The Government has
                    always made it clear that it would not implement the scheme until
                    it had given full consideration to Lord Justice Taylor's report.
                    In the light of his repoft we have decided not to proceed with
                    the establishment of the Football M e m b e r s h i p A u t h or i ty which
                    would have had the responsibility for drawing up and implementing
                    a detailed scheme.   The national membership scheme has therefore
                    been put on the back burner.

                    Lord J u stice Taylor recommended an alternative strategy for
                    combatting football hooliganism including the creation of new
                    offences specifically related to football/ the use of attendance
                    centre    orders and  electronic tagging   of  offenders.    The
                    Government will be looking carefully and quickly at these
                    suggestions.

                    Lord Ju stice Taylor welcomed the proposed establishment of a
                    Football Licensing Authority.  While the Authority will no longer
                    be required to license football grounds for the purposes of a
                    national membership scheme it will have a crucial role to play in
                    supervising the safety responsibilities of local authorities
                    under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 in respect of sports
                    grounds at which designated football matches are played. The FLA
                    will also be the mecha ni s m through which we will ensure the
                    provision of all-seater accommodation     at those grounds#    as
                    recommended by'Lord Justice Taylor.

      100%




Rc c yc leo Paper
Safety at sports grounds and consideration of Lord Justice
Taylor* s proposed strategy for combatting footba.ll hooliganism
are primarily the responsibility of the Home Office.   You might
therefore wish to write to the Home Office.  If there are other
issues which you would like to discuss with me# my office would
be happy to arrange a meeting.

I am copying this letter to Lord Ferrers# Graham K e l l y at the
Football Association and Arthur Sandford at the Football League.




                                        COLIN MOYNIHAN
