From: D J Mould                         cc    Mr Bolton
      G2 Division                             Mr McPherson (SS8D)
      Ext 3099                                Mr Stickley
      2 Feb'ruary 1990




Mr Goddard
F8 Division


HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY: CIRCULATION OF PINAL REPORT TO LOCAL
AUTHORITIES


1. I attach a first draft of a circular for local authorities to
cover the Final Report. As we discussed, I have not addressed the
circular to the police but have included them in the copy list.

2. Application of the recommendations to designated rugby and
non-league football grounds still causes* me some concern - hence
the inclusion of the section on their scope.   I cannot, for
example, see good reason for Tooting and Mitcham football club or
Redruth Rugby Union Club to have CCTV or elaborate police control
facilities.   (The Tooting club say their match attendances are no
more than 150!) . Nor would I have thought the police would wish
to become increasingly involved at such places which, so far as I
know, pose few, if any, law and order problems.

3. We are looking to send out the circular    no later than
Wednesday next week, prior to which we need   approval of Ministers.
Could I therefore impose on you for a reply   by midday on Monday
with any comments - telephone will do if it   is easier (ext 3099).




                                        D J MOULD

                                         2 February 1990


FEP/90   35/48/89
FEP/90 35/48/89




To: The Chief Executive:

                  County Councils
                  Metropolitan District Councils
                  London Borough Councils
                  Common Council of the City of London



                                                         February 1990




Dear Sir/Madam


HOME OFFICE CIRCULAR 11/1990

FINAL REPORT OF THE HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY



Introduction



1.   The Final Report of the Inquiry set up by the Home Secretary
following the disaster at the Hillsborough football ground was
published on 29 January.     A copy of the Report is attached.


2.   The purpose of this circular is first, to ensure that
recipients are fully appraised of the Report's recommendations and
the Government's response to them; and secondly to give guidance
to local authorities with safety certification responsibilities on
whom falls the task of ensuring, as far as possible, compliance
with them.


The Report


3.   The Report contains 76 recommendations, 43 of which are
repeated in substance (see also paragraph 6 below) from the
Interim Report circulated with HOC 68/1989.     Attached at Annex A
is a copy of the Home Secretary's oral statement to the House of
Commons responding to the final Report.           At Annex B is a copy of
the schedule containing the more detailed written response.
              «= •




4.   Local authorities may well have particular interest in
recommendations 1-4 (all seater stadia!) and recommendation 6
(National Inspectorate).         The intention is to bring into force the
relevant sections of the Football Spectators Act 1989 in order to
implement these recommendations as regards football grounds (see
Annex B ) .


Scope


5.  Paragraphs 238-239 of the Report indicate that in directing
                                                   j    tcjfMcmol.
the recommendations "essentially" to sports grounds^under the
Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 the flexibility of approach
referred to in paragraph 5 of the Guide to Safety at Sports
Grounds (the Green Guide) should apply.            Paragraph 14 of the
Report makes clear that its emphasis is on football, with its
special problems-^ such         asovercrowding   and "misbehaviour", which
are not experienced      to the same extent elsewhere.       The Report
r&snii^Uga* that "crowd problems are directly related to the nature
of the event and the numbers attending it".            It would therefore be
consistent with the Report'is findings for local authorities to
                          a - » (-{a cha rs>
take proper account nf          ffar^innr I- m i l as.thft Riffl-pa-H-t-iAS
to>^#Qae%ij^T,~l'*^TrrrmTTrite^when applying the recommendations to       ^
individual grounds: for example^the absence of "misbehaviour" |iat
Rugby Union/League matches (a feature which may also apply to non­
league football) is likely to necessitate a careful appraisal of
the value of such matters as installation of sophisticated
communications systems and CCTV where spectator attendances are
numbered in hundreds rather than thousands and where the police
presence at the ground is minimal.


Interim Report Recommendations Adjusted


6.   The attention of local authorities is drawn to recommendations
8, 11, 12(b), 19, 20, 31, 33, 58, 66 and 67 all of which were
contained in the Interim Report but have been modified:-



                                                                              2
     recommendation 8 -     revised maximum figure


     recommendation 11 - "agreement" between club and police is
                            replaced by "statement of intent"


     recommendation 12 - qualification introduced by 12(b)


     recommendation 19 - discretion as regards opening of pitch
                            perimeter gates


     recommendation 20 - manning by police or steward


     recommendation 31 - revised composition of the Advisory Group


     recommendation 33 - reference to 1975 Act provision


     recommendation 58 - hand-signals not recommended


     recommendation 66 — recommended threshold figure of 2000


      recommendation 67 - ambulance may be approved by the
                             ambulance authorities


New Safety Recommendations


7.   New recommendations are summarised below and local authorities
are urged t     t    a        k    e         the action indicated yjiere
appropriate.


      Turnstiles (recommendation 10) - to note the revised
     maximum flow-rate to be used in place of the 750
      figure quoted in the Green Guide which will be amended
      as soon as possible;


     Gangways (recommendation 13) - to include conditions in
      safety certificates              ?y;


      Perimeter Fences (recommendations 14, 15, 17) - to amend
      safety certificates, as necessary;
     Safety Certificates (recommendations 24, 25, 26) - to
     consider any necessary adjustment to safety certificates
     and note Home Office intention to implement
     recommendation 24;


     Duties of Clubs (recommendations 39, 40, 42, 43) - to
     consider•appropriate amendment to safety certificates,
     as necessary;


     Police Planning (recommendations 47, 48, 50, 52, 53),
     Communications (55), Co-ordination (61) - to note the
        recommendations and Government's response (and action as
        necessary recommendation 61 with emergency services);


        First Aid (recommendation 69) Offences/Penalties
        (recommendations 70-73) - to note Government's response;


        Green Guide (recommendations 74—76 and Appendix 3) - to
        note the Government response and to adopt the revised
        criteria/requirements which will be included in a
        revised guide as soon as possible.


Resource Implications


8.   Action to consider, revise and enforce safety certificates in
the light of the Report is not expected to give rise to
significant long-term resource implications above existing
commitments.


Other


9.   Copies of this circular, annexes and enclosures are sent to
Fire and Civil Defence Authorities, Chief Officers of Police,
Chief Fire Officers and Chief Ambulance Officers for information.
Copies have also been sent to all football league clubs and the
representative organisations on the attached list.
•4

'!
     10.   Any enquiries about the contents of this circular should be
     addressed to Mr A Brown (01-273-2765).
                *




                                    Yours faithfully




                                    Fire and Emergency Planning
                                    Department




                                                                         5
