                     NOTE FOR THE RECORD

MEETING TO DISCUSS THE HOME AFFAIRS COMMITTEE REPORT INTO
POLICING FOOTBALL AT THE HOME OFFICE ON TUESDAY 16 APRIL 1991


Present : Mr Goddard - F8 Chairman
          Mr Haugh   - G2
          Miss Pugh - F8
          Mr Brewin - Football Supporters Association(FSA)
          Mr Spurnell- FSA
          Ms Melkman1 - FSA


Mr Goddard explained that the Government's Response to the
HAC's Report was due to be published before the summer. The
meeting was a welcome opportunity to discuss some of the
matters raised in the report with representatives from the
FSA.

All seater-stadia


2.   The representatives from the FSA said they were strongly
opposed to the measures to replace terracing with seated
accommodation. They suggested that the majority of those who
currently stood on the terraces did not consider it unsafe.
With the introduction of CCTV there was less opportunity for
the trouble-some minority to create disorder and less risk to
crowd safety.   They suggested that because the introduction
of seating would cut down ground capacities clubs would be
reluctant to keep as much space free to segregate rival fans.
They thought that terraping could be safe - even at the larger
grounds- where the supporters, clubs and police were prepared
to work together. Mr Hauah explained that the Government was
considering the views of the HAC & FSA.    However, he believed
that they would have to advance very persuasive arguments to
cause the Government to change its view that all 92 clubs
should have seated accommodation.
The Football Licensing Authority (FLA)


3.    The FSA welcomed the HAC's recommendation that the FLA
should act as an "honest broker" for football. It would give
the supporters somewhere they could turn to if they disagreed
with the actions of the clubs or the police. Mr Goddard
suggested that these would be essentially local situations
which would more properly be dealt with at the local level
   an by the FLA. For example, the policing of matches was an
operational matter for individual chief officers. However,
there was always scope for local liaison with the police to
resolve any misunderstandings. Mr Hauah explained that there
was a danger that people were expecting too much from the FLA.
It was a statutory body with a technical job to do in relation
to safety certificates and the licensing scheme.   Mr Brewin
agreed that'the FLA had yet to establish itself but he
believed that there was still a case for an ombudsman for
football. Mr Goddard accepted that there was general room for
improved consultation on all sides.


4.   The FSA suggested that there should be a representative
of the supporters on the FLA to take full account of their
interests. Mr Hauah explained that appointments to the FLA
were a matter for the Secretary of State. The Authority still
had a lot to learn and they would no doubt be consulting with
the FSA in due course.

Desegregation


5.   The FSA wanted to know the Government's position on
desegregation of fans. Mr Goddard explained that the Home
Office view was that desegregation was a matter for local
resolution subject to the views of the local police.
Police charges


6.   The FSA asked about the Governments response to the HAC's
recommendations on charging. Mr Goddard explained that the
Home Office was looking again at the draft circular on
charging for the policing of matches.

Stewarding


     The FSA suggested that experiments in high profile
stewarding - low profile policing had been very successful.
Mr Goddard welcomed the FSA's support for better stewarding.
The Home Office agreed with the HAC that stewards should be
younger, fitter and properly trained. Effective stewarding
would enable clubs to reduce their policing bills. It was for
the clubs to take the initiative but the Home Office had met
with the League, ACPO and the Football Trust to discuss how
best this might be taken forward. The League would be
producing guidance and the police had offered to provide
training.

European Championships


8.   The meeting wound up with a discussion on the
arrangements for the European Championships in Sweden next
June. The FSA were concerned that the difficulties should not
be talked up by the press as this only promoted the reputation
of English fans and added to the problems. Mr Goddard agreed
and explained that officials would shortly be meeting with the
Swedish Police and they would emphasise that only a small
minority of English fans caused trouble. The FSA suggested
that the organisers of Championships should be more
sympathetic to fans and should arrange for adequate levels of
accommodation. Mr Goddard said that these were not matters
for the British Government but for the Championship hosts to
address. It was agreed that the FSA and officials would
liaise as much as possible in the run up to the Championships.
