            HOME OFFICE
            Queen Anne’s Gate London SW 1H9AT

                                                   Direct line 071-273 4.135
                                                  Switchboard 071-273 3000



                                                                      Your reference

                                                                      Our reference

                                                                      d   FEP/90 35/48/139

                                                                          5 June 1991


Dear

™ 3 l OU4.kn??.y0,ir re(ient letters to the Prime Minister have been
      4-   4.  S A p a r t m e n t .in view of our responsibilities for
to you 3 Sp°r         grounds. I apologise for the delay in replying


1 hfve noted the points which you made in your letters and the
         ^ eports* Jfhe.re is no dispute that a tradgedy such as
that which occurred at Hillsborough must not happen again,   its
        5aIe to be learned. Football, including the spectators,
must look to the future.

There is little which I can add to Lord Justice T a yl or's
comprehensive analysis contained in his Final Report on the
        boro,!f?]^ S'tadium disaster.  He recognised that there is no
panacea which will achieve total safety and cure all the problems
                           an^ contro1 at football matches.    He was
              that seating does more to achieve these objectives than
a y other single measure.          He also identified that all seated
UEF a "1        n 1S consistent with the policies of both FIFA and


I have noted your view that all seated accomodation will not
necessarily improve safety.     However, that view does not equate
with the views expressed by Lord Justice Taylor.        All seated
          ?n 1 S ' .we b elieve, a major step towards creating a
almt          env\ronment i n which a11 spectators can enjoy the
S-S'    5    1S o Y we. ave suPPorted Lord Justice Taylor's
recommendation and are implementing it.

You also expreseed your concern about the costs which clubs will
face when converting their grounds into all seated ones
             th<? COsts incurred may not be as great as it may
,       iY ^ee™' ,.^s you are probably aware, through a reduction
Fion m ' f r      ? ^tn9 levy' the Government are making available
£100 million to the Football Trust over a five year period to
                 in ma,
                      k ing these ground improvements. Another reason
the costs incurred may be less than initially feared is that, as
 °in   kU i      1-,T a y l o r commented, a t t e n d a n c e s at m a n y g r o u n d s a r e
well   b e l o w the c u r r e n t c a p a c i t y of the ground.          Therefore          a
thS groSnd8 development may be sufficient involving only part of
I have also noted your view that the government should consult
the Football Association, Football League and the Football
Supporters Association.   Indeed, since the Hillsborough Stadium
disaster and following the recommendations of Lord Justice Taylor
we have met several times with each of these organisations.

Finally, in answer to your points concerning crowd control, the
policing of football matches, including judgements about the
deployment of officers, is an operational matter for the relevant
Chief Officer of Police.   In addition the Association of Chief
Police Officers issues to its members general guidance on the
policing of football matches. The Home Office does not intervene
in the policing of football,       other than to promote the
establishment of a framework of laws within which the police can
operate to control crowds while maintainig crowd safety.

Once again I apologise for the lateness of this reply.     If you
require further information please contact m e .
                                             Yours sincerely


                                              Steve Bilbe
                                              (Fire and Emergency
                                              Plannin^Department)
    TEL;


                                                                             4 'f


                    S DO G Sporh j

                   _fyuyrQ   Cy?ft>
                                      /
                                                   7th January 1991

f^Dear Prime Minister,

 Shortly after your election to the o f f i c e o f Prime Minister, I wrote you
 a letter and enclosed some facts about the Football Supporter's bill, the
 proposed legislation concearning the implementattion of all seater stadia,
 and the opinion of most football fans to that legislation.
 On December 6th, 1990, I received a letter from your correspondence secretary
 informing me that my letter had been received, and that a reply to my letter
 would be forwarded as soon as possible. As yet, I have received no such
 reply, however this gives me the chance to forward to you a copy of an
 article that I have written, and which is relevant to the subject.
 I hope that you will be able to find the time to read this, and my original
 report, and perhaps forward a reply as and when time permits.

 As a further note, I have read in a newspaper that you and you're government,
 intend to honour the original proposed legislation concearning all seater
 stadia. Of course not all newspaper articles should be believed, although
 this piece appeared in one of the more 'stable' publications. Should this
 turn out to be true, I must say that I am very disappointed.  I and I am
 sure millions of other football fans, would be dismayed at such action,
 especially if the chance were available, as it is, to reconsider the whole
 issue, and come to the only sensible solution, not to enforce clubs to
 invest in all seater stadia as a safety measure, whose merits are doubtful,
 and as a measure intended to cure a hooligan problem which does'nt exist*
 If the proposed legislation IS to be pursued, then it will prove all the
 more disappointing if implemented by you, a reknowned Football fan.

 However, I have read and heard that you are a fair person, and therefore
 feel sure that you will not only be able to appreciate the position of
 the 'ordinary' fan, who will never be able to afford the consequences of
 this legislation, and perhaps meet with the FOOTBALL SUPPORTER'S ASSOCIATION
 who represent the fans, and find out the fan's point of view of the
 situation.

 I thank you for the time spent in reading this material.
1                             THE FUTURE FOR SOCCER & THE FANS
                                    A REPORT BY


    In 1985 Liverpool were to play Juventus in the European cup final at the
    Heysal stadium, in Belgium.

    Before the match had begun some 100 odd fans had died as a result of Liverpool
    fans making a charge at the Italian fans, they clambered over a wall, which
    collapsed.

    Of course the world's media, led by the British, condemmed the Liverpool
    fans without restraint.      No one mentioned that before that incident, the
    Italian fans who had firstly injured many policemen and proceeded to pelt
    the English fans for over half an hour before the Liverpool fans reacted
    The match should never^in the Heysal stadium, a ground which had been in
    a state of disrepair 5 years beforehand.      Although strongly advised, no
    segregation whatsoever was employed , thus Liverpool and Juventus fans
    were together on one terrace.

    Though these excuses are no compensation for the deaths, this was the last
    large scale act of violence involving English fans.


    Shortly after the Heysal stadium disaster, the Government announced plans
    to introduce an Idendity card system, with little or no consultation with
    anyone involved in the game.     It was clear that the Government wished to
    become involved in soccer, but this piece of legislation, showed how little
    they knew of the problems.     The scheme was unworkable in concept, and in
    practice would have been expensive to implement and would not have tackled
    the problem that it was primarily devised to combat, hooliganism.

    On 15th April 1989, a catastrophe occured at Sheffield Wednesday's Hills­
    borough stadium.

    The Leppings lane terrace is divided into three sections whose capacity
    is controlled by computor.     Sadly, the computor does not show HOW MANY
people are in EACH section, thus the computor was indicating that there
was plenty of room on the terrace, when in reality, most fans had gathered
directly behind the goal.         The result was that as more fans entered the
middle section, those at the front became crushed against the rigid fencing.
At first the police thought that the fans were trying to instigate a pitch
invasion, of course they realised too late.

The Hillsborough disaster prompted an investigation by Lord Justice Taylor,
who     spoke to all relevant parties, which saw the ID Card scheme condemmed
for what it was, unworkable.

The Taylor report highlighted ,many of the problems within football that
had been known to the fans for years.         The recomendations that Lord Justice
Taylor made were very good, with one glaring exception.          He recommended
that football stadia in Great Britain be converted to all seater as soon
as possible.                                                          CONTINUED
                                          -   2-


The problem with the proposal concearning all seater stadia is, that it
was a recommendation made without any thought as to the consequences, and
by someone who had no experience of the game, and certainly no deep feeling
for it.

It was therefore somewhat of a suprise when the Government responded so
enthusiastically to the proposal.       On reflection however, it was clear
that the Government were using both Hillsborough and the Taylor recommendation
as the excuse that it needed, and had been waiting for to 'get tough'.
It was obvious to all and sundry that soccer had a problem called hooliganism.
But just as slowely as the authorities finally came to terms with the problem,
ie recognising and infiltrating the many semi-organised gangs, so they
quickly lost the initiative by failing to recognise that with a change
in the habits of the hooligan, their tactics remained the same.         Segre­
gation, coupled with Closed circuit television had effectively driven
hooliganism OUT of the stadium.       Since the advent of these two innovations,
almost all football violence occurs OUTSIDE the stadium.         The fans entering
the stadium, and once in it, were and still are, victims of policing that
if attempted in the street, in other circumstances, would lead to a non
stop tirade of condemnation and complaints.
Why is it that all seater stadia nationwide is not a viable proposition?

Whilst it is true that the general standard of stadia in Great Britain
is shameful, terracing is not the culprit.         There are many reasons for
the decline of the British stadium, many relating to the restrictions on
planning and building prevalent in this country, others to the clubs them­
selves and either their inability or reluctance to expand or improve.
However,   only since the advent of   Hillsborough and fanzines,coupled with
an increasing awareness of the fan     not just as a source of matchday revenue,
but as someone who really cares about the club and game, have football
clubs begun to become aware of supporter's needs.

From a purely financial standpoint, many clubs will experience tremendous
difficulty installing seats, even with the help of the Football Trust.
This, together with the inviteable loss in revenue through restricted capacity
may well   finish many less wealthy clubs off altogether.

From the   fan's point of view, all    seater stadia will without doubt, ensure
increased admission prices, thus further decreasing capacity for the club
again,because many fans will not be able to endure such increases.
Furthermore, many fans actually enjoy standing on the terraces, and if
all seater stadia are introduced, their basic right of freedom of choice
will be interfered with.

In relation to hooliganism, it has already been stated that practically
ALL acts of violence now occur OUTSIDE the stadium, and even these cases
                                        -   3-

are now becoming rarer.
All seater stadia will not make any difference to hooliganism whatsoever.
If supporters are going to become excited and react to what is essentially
an exciting game, then seats are not going to hinder fans if they wish
to become violent.   Indeed, as I have stated, the one major incident INSIDE
a stadium, involved supporters (sic), using seats as weapons.
The one thing that all seater stadia MAY achieve, is to destroy any kind
of atmosphere that at present exists.        This theory is built on the fact
that most of the noise at soccer matches, comes from the terraces, not

the seats.


SOLUTIONS.

It is very easy to critiscise legislation, but quite difficult to suggest
any simple solutions, that are both constructive and objective, however
it may be that the solutions is already in place.
As stated, the twin methods of segregation and CCTV have suceeded in largely
eliminating violence from British football stadia.        Together with a change
in the attitudes of football supporters, hooliganism inside our stadia

is largely a thing of the past.
However, there is still violence outside stadia, and it is therefore there

that police efforts should be directed.
CCTV units at BR and underground stations would be a deterrant, as would
cameras trained on the turnstiles outside the ground.        In addition to this,
the evidence of identification through the use of CCTV must be combined
with increased powers and distinct and consistent sentencing by courts.
Anyone convicted of violence related to football, should face a minimum
 of 5 years imprisonment, coupled with fines and a ban on entering a soccer
 stadium for life.   A further ban on travelling abroad if any important
 international game is taking place could also be imposed.
 Football hooligans have tried to destroy our national game and must be

 taught a hard lesson.

 As far as the police are concerned, it would be much more constructive
 if they collectively relaxed their attitudes toward football fans. 99/o
 of supporters are NOT thugs, and feel passionately       for the game.
 It has been noted that racial and obscene chanting is to be made unlawful,
 which whilst in theory is obviously a correct and good move, in practice
 it would seem to be almost impossible to enforce, especially at clubs where

 many thousands join in with chants etc.

 There has been much talk of enticing FIFA to stage another world cup       champion­
 ship in England.    This, at the present time would not be feasable due to
 the state of many of our stadia.   Thus there appears to be an argument

 in favour of all seater stadia.    But, there are many reasons why all seater
                                       -   4-


Stadia should'nt be built, many of them already stated.            One case in particula
comes to mind.   Tottenham Hotspurs F.C. as reported on the TV on 1:1:91,
are supposedly around £12,000,000 in the red, mainly due to attempted
implementation of just some of the recommendations of the Taylor report.
Tottenham are one of the wealthier clubs in the Football League, what happens
to those who cannot sustain such a large overdraft?
Having said all this, there is a case for a wholesale 'revamping' programme,
which should include universal covered terracing, safer terracing and better
facilities such as toilet and eating amenities.            These should be subject
to the same safety and hygene regulations as public conveniences and eating

facilities.
There is also growing support for a programme of building, centered around
our t o p 'class stadia such as Wembley, Old Trafford, Anfield, Villa Park and
perhaps more.    If these stadia were fully seated then perhaps international
matches could be played in this country, of course the clubs concerned
would not only have to agree to the plan, but would need to be subsidised.

Perhaps some of these solutions and remedies are inadequate, and of course
not everyone would agree with these views.             However, almost all fans agree
that all seater stadia legislation, which is being imposed on clubs is
NOT the way forwacdrfor British soccer.           The Football Supporter's Association
are currently conducting a campaign against this legislation, which should
culminate in a petition being presented at some stage.             However, it must
be   obvious that if the game is to continue in any organised and sensible
form, that the proposed legislation should be scrapped as soon as possible.
It was introduced in haste with no real thought into either how it was
to be implemented or    the consequences that              it will bring.
There are solutions to every problem,           that       are acceptablebyall parties
and bodies of people, thus it would seem that the logical solution would
be to   sit down and meet, inviting ALL interested parties,ie The Football
League, The Football    Association, The Fans              (FSA), anyone else involved.
Only will a solution    that is feasable and acceptable then be formulated.
 I 'thank you for the time you have spared to read this.




                 (FSA Member, Fan Magazine Editor, Maidstone United fan).
                                      1333




The Rt Hon John Major MP
The Prime Minister
10 Downing Street
London

                '1
Dear Sir,      j                         v~:-j

although not a conservative voter, but open to persuasion, may I offer
my congratulations to you on your election to office.
I am unfortunately a victim of the employment recession currently sweeping
the country and I am at present without work, possibly terminally (!), but
I hope that situation will change in the near future.

In addition I am a football fan, thus am very disturbed at recent legislation
imposed on the game which I am not alone, or in a minority in thinking
is set to change the face of our national game beyond all recognition.
I have put together a short report on these changes, which encompasses
the wide opinions of many soccer fans, whn.se nnini.ons have been sought
over many months.

I would be pleased if you would do me the kind favour of finding ten
minutes to read and perhaps even digest the content, perhaps then the
proposed legislation could be reconsidered before it damadges our sport,
and possibly others beyond recall.

I am reliably informed that you are a Chelsea fan (never mind)and a football
fan in general, so I would appreciate your thoughts on the matter, should
you have time to reply.




                                                 Yours sincerely
                           GOVERNMENTAL LEGISLATION
                          AND IT'S CONSEQUENCIES FOR
                                   FOOTBALL


Football or soccer has survived many attacks, even Royal condemnation,
but is now facing proposed legislation by Government, that will bring
fourth a new era in the sport, but at the cost of excluding many of the
game's devotees.
The Legislation concerned, is the proposed plans to ensure that all stadia
within this country, and in relation to football, in the Football League,
should be all seater before the end of the century.
The reasons for this proposed legislation seem to be as a preventive measure
to combat hooliganism, and as a safety measure to prevent a repetition
of the Hillsborough disaster.

HOOLIGANSIM

Hooliganism IS the scurge of the modern game, and it's decline in the mid
'70's can be directly related to hooliganism and football related violence.
However, the advent of segregation, closed circuit TV systems and good
and well planned police work, have ensured that football hooliganism is
now virtually extinct from our stadia.
Apart from the Hillsborough and Heysal stadium tragedies, the most well
known incident, and one attributable soley to football hooliganism, was
the one involving Millwall supporters at Luton Town's Kennilworth Road
ground.
The visiting Millwall supporters were all seated and in fact used the seats
as weapons with which to attack the home supporters and police.
This incident alone brings the validity of seats into question.   If they
are not stable enough to resist vandalism, then why is the installation
of all seater stadiums being so vigarously advocated?
Another strange fact, is that fencing is almost universally installed in
front of terracing, yet it is not installed in front of seated grandstands.
The fact remains that the only recorded incident of mass and almost
uncontrollable violence occurred from the seated areas where no fencing
was employed, and the main weapons were the seats themselves!
It would be wrong to state that there is NO violence inside stadia at
the present time, however, it is so rare as to be of little interest, even
to the media, who like to publicise such things at every opportunity.

99?d of hooiganism now takes place outside the stadia, usually at the nearest
British Rail Station and in many cases because there is a lack of policing
present.

TERRACING

Terracing is as safe, if not safer than seating.   Seating is often cramped
and uncomfortable, as well as being very expensive to install, which is
passed on to the spectator through the turnstile and programme cost.
Terracing is cheap, fairly easy to make safe, and ensures that everybody
is able to watch the professional game at a reasonable cost.
If the proposed legislation is carried out, the cost of entrance to stadia
will prohibit spectators who cannot afford such high prices.
Terracing is also easier to evacuate than seating, a point which has been

proved.

POLICING AND ATTITUDES

The general standard of policing at football grounds is becoming sadly

worse.
Unfortunately there exists in the British mentality a 'no middle ground
fixation.   This can be seen with several subjects.
With motorcyclists, one is either a rider with a cork helmet, goggles and
a plastic raincoat or an out and out hells angel, complete with motorcycle
chain belt and greasy jeans.    With soccer fans, one is either a respectable
clean living pillar of society who earns an above average wage and frequents
the grandstand, and thus the seats or an out and out football hooligan
who stands on the terrace singing obscene songs and throwing beer cans
at all and sundry.   In the mentality of many people, the police included,
there is NO middle ground.     There is no such thing as 'an ordinary football

fan'.
The consequences of this mentality are that football fans are treated as
third rate citizens, barely better than animals.      It is as if football
fans do not follow their team away to do anything but cause trouble.         Coaches
are often stopped and searched before they are admitted into the town
boundries and then escorted directly to the stadium with motorcycle outriders
 akin to prisoners being escorted to appear in court.
 Once off the coach, fans are searched once again, which is reasonable,before
 being admitted to the ground, where they become prey to the wim and fancies

 of the police officers on duty.
 At many grounds, celebration of a goal is construed as violent behaviour
 and rewarded with ejection from the ground, and there have been several
 cases of police ejecting fans who have applauded and celebrated when the
 opposing team missed a penalty against theirs.(what was expected?).
 In defence of the police, segregation has proved to be a justified, valuable
 and sound exercise as has closed circuit television, which is responsible
 for many arrests concearned with people throwing objects onto the pitch.



 CONCLUSIONS.

 All seater stadia will not only prove financially impossible to implement
 and maintain, but it is doubtful whether it will serve any other purpose

  than to make our stadia look pretty.
Although it is totally incomprehensible to many people, the majority of
football fans who gather and stand on the terraces, actually ENJOY doing

so .
In Britain we have always enjoyed 'Freedom of choice', which was taught
 to me as a fundemental difference between democracy and other systems.
 But it seems that the freedom to choose is being forcibly taken away from

 football fans.
 This legislation must be reconsidered, even if stadia are allowed to retain
 just 10 or 20 % of terracing, the right to choice will remain.
 Smaller clubs, ie those in lower divisions, have enough trouble attracting
 fans now, but with the increases in turnstile prices that                                                          must come and
1 are inherant with seating facilities, they will be forced                                                         into dire

 financial straits.
 The Football Trust will obviously help to implement this Legislation, but

 who will help clubs afterwards?
 The future of our national game is in the hands of Government.                                                                Please
 do not force this legislation onto a sport that does not want it.
 .o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o o




 OTHER LEGISLATION

  Whilst it is obvious that I personally, am not a supporter of the proposed
  all seater stadia, I must applaud the Government on proposed legislation
  to minimise obscene and racist chanting, the invasion of                                                          pitches and the

  throwing of objects onto the playing surface.
  I do think though that the outlawing of obscene chanting will be a difficult
  law to implement, and indeed will effect smaller clubs rather more than
  larger ones.               For instance, if a big club has 4000 supporters all obscenly
  chanting, it is difficult to see the police either ejecting or arresting
  everyone.            However a small club that might only have a 'choir' of 400 will

  be punished more severely.
