1                                    -T
                                  f l & S -

                                         ? U °

         FOOTBALL TRUST/FOOTBALL GROUNDS IMPROVEMENT TRUST
                       i LIAISON COMMITTEE
                       l
                            Minutes of a meeting
                         held on Monday 5 June 1989
               at Walkden House, 10 Melton Street, London NW1


    Present:             R 0 Faulkner Esq (Chairman)
                         G Endicott Esq
                         Mrs P Finney (Secretary)
                         T Finney Esq
                         Miss G Firth
                         T Wharton Esq OBE

                         C Illing, George Corderoy & Co - by invitation


               Welcome
               The Chairman welcomed Mr Illing attending as
               a representative of the Trusts' surveyors.

               He also welcomed Mr Endicott, newly apppointed Trustee
               of the Football Trust , attending his first meeting of the
               Liaison Committee.

               Apologies
               There were none.

               Minutes of previous meeting
               Minutes of the meeting held on 9 June 1988 were signed by
               the Chairmaji as an accurate record.

               Matters arising

        4.1 National Stadia
               The   location of the          Welsh   National   Stadium
               remained undecided.

               No request for assistance with funding floodlights
               for the recent match at Cardiff Arms Park had been
               received.

        4.2 Middlesbrough Football Club
               Both   Trusts remained extremely    dissatisfied
               with the situation. The Sports Council had written to
               the club requesting a formal statement of the
                              -   2   -




         reasons the Centre remained unopened.  The club's
         response would be reported at the June meeting of
         the Trust's working party chaired by Mr Faulkner.

         Both Trusts continued to withhold grant aid and
         concurred that the Sports Council should take the
         lead in any legal action that ensued.

        Mr Illing reported that the club remained concerned
        that extensive running costs would be incurred once
        the facility was opened to the public.

5.   Maidstone United Football Club
        The Chairman of Maidstone had written to the
        Deputy Chairman of the Football Trust on 10 May,
        enclosing three quotations for work to be done on
        the ground which they now shared under a
        10 year agreement with Dartford.

        Mr Illing advised that the final cost of work to be
        done at the ground on safety and improvements could
        amount to some £120,000, of which approximately half
        related to safety.

         Two meetings had taken place earlier in the year in
         advance of the club's promotion to discuss the work to
         be undertaken if they gained admission to the League.
         Some work was now underway, on the understanding that
         application for grant aid would ultimately be made to
         one of the Trusts.

        The surveyors' report and recommendation was currently
        being drafted and would go to the Football Trust.

        Mr Wharton confirmed to the meeting that FGIT's policy
        was that any club entering the Football League should
        already have a ground up to a safety standard and
        would not be eligible     for   grant aid on ent r y .
        However, FGIT had later been requested by the Football
        League,  and agreed,   to look at each new club in
        conjunction with the Football Trust in order that no
        club should be treated less favourably than any other
        member   on   admission to    the   League.    Average
        attendances after promotion would also be a condition
        of eligibility for grant.

        This had happened in the case of Scarborough where a
        reciprocal arrangement between FGIT and the Trust had
        been accepted.

        At FGIT's meeting on 15 May it had been the unanimous
        feeling of Trustees that the £3M profit,      now on
        deposit from the sale of Maidstone's ground, plus the
        further anticipated £2.7M resulting from the intended
■1




                                        ~   3   ~
              sale of Dartford's ground should be used to      improve
              the ground they now both occupied.

              The Trusts both agreed on the principle that profits
              from the sale of former grounds should be used to
              improve the new ground.     There appeared to be no
              precedent for considering Maidstone as an exception to
              this   rule as it had      been applied already     to
              Scunthorpe, St Johnstone and Weymouth.

             It   was agreed that     the Chairman would respond
             carefully to the club, referring in some detail to the
             reasons that both Trusts were unable to offer grant
             aid for safety work, after consultation on the wording
             of the letter with FGIT and Corderoys.
        '                                     «■
     6 - Hillsborough Enquiry
             The Chairman and Mr Wharton had both given formal
             statements to the police officers appointed by the
             Hillsborough enquiry.

             In view of the significance for FGIT's grant policy of
             changes in legislation affecting seating at grounds,
             resulting from Lord Justice Taylor's report and the
             Football Spectators' Bill and the possibility that
             this could become FGIT's initiative in 1990, it was
             agreed that the Trust would consider setting aside a
             sum on reserve for FGIT if this proved necessary.

             It was mutually agreed that neither Trust would
             respond to requests for assistance with the
             reinstatement of perimeter fencing dismantled
             immediately after the Hillsborough disaster.

     7.   St John's Ambulance Brigade
             The Chairman reported on a meeting with Commander
             Fenton of St John's Ambulance in advance of the
             Hillsborough disaster.

             Mr Wharton reported that the Football League and the
             Scottish Football League were looking at medical
             facilities at grounds in England and Scotland.   The
             likely costs would be in the region of £500,000 and
             FGIT had agreed,    in principle, to offer financial
             assistance towards these costs.

             Mr Endicott reported on his attendance at two recent
             meetings of the League's Anti-Hooliganism Committee
             and the recent Medical Conference at Lilleshall.
             Views had been expressed on the desirability of fixed
             rather than mobile first aid rooms and the restrict­
             ions on club doctors treating members of the public.
       resoonsibf???vtarf °f^ Statf- sub?equently undertook
       around*?     n      i-k          licensing of   designated
                         4= ^ Provir*ce of local authorities  and
       IhUnli          ° L lmProved    medical facilities became
       th^      ?r y V    t0 TrUSt Would need to take account of
            * In whj-ch case a common policy would be adopted.

      Commander   Fenton had requested a meeting with Mr
               f?    would be advised that both Trusts were
      keen to offer assistance.

 Windsor Park, Belfast

      fsn nnn°Jba^     r™*u   had a9reed'a modest grant of
      E50,00° to theu Irish Football Association at its March
      wfnHo119' _Mr, wharton reported on his recent meeting at
      fo?              an?^aKV1Se?
      tor grant aid would          ^hat a to
                            be submitted   further  application
                                             the Trusts.
 Perimeter Fences at Stade des Costieres, Nimes

      p e r ChairS e                                                 ^     ent
          ,             »~ — —   w . v.^. »   %_
      Hillsborough Enquiry. to                                evidence           required        at    the


      six               tubular steel in sequential opening of
      fo ? n t Z sections was not demonstrably more expensive
 V    tor new grounds than conventional fencinq.       It was
 <    ground                     C°St              ln    the re9ion          of     £100,000           per

     r £:..5rnz^'n g ilecfislation were changed, both Trusts would
     FTEZTiL
     Kina a *- ai suitable
                      m?i  P? League
                                 exPe^A.
                                       raentaT~Tnstallation of this
                                      ground.

     Trustees        were            unanimous                 in        their     opinion            that
     injure9                                  d°ne t0 PreVent sll"il“                   disasierS

Any Other Business

     Mr       Endicott, who had recently been in Italy                                      reported
     ground in “m o m ?                             Mlla" 9r°Und Snd in3uries at                        *

Date of next meeting

     H?n«£0       Seu                 rfsP°nse                to     the     outcome        of        the
     reco™^a?Lns                   qUlrY                a"d        L°rd    Justice          Taylor's

     withe«           fuFther business, the meeting                                          closed
     with a vote of thanks to the Chairman.
