                   HOME OFFICE
                   Queen Anne's Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                                 D irect line 01-27 3   258 2
                                                Sw itchb oard 01-27 3 3000



                                                                         Y o u r reference


                                                                         O u r reference

                                                                             FEP/90 35/48/139
                                                                         D ate

                                                                                    May 1990




            Dear

            Thank you for your recent letter to the Home Secretary
            I apologise for the delay in replying to you.

            Your view that all seated accommodation at football grounds is
            not essential to solve the problems of crowd safety and
            control has been noted.  However, it is a view which the
            government does not share and which does not equate with the
            views expressed by Lord Justice Taylor in his Final Report on
            the Hillsborough Stadium disaster.  He recognised that there
            was no single solution to achieve total safety and cure all
            the problems of crowd control.  However, he was satisfied that
            seating does more to achieve these objectives than any other
            single measure.  Furthermore this is in line with the policies
            of both FIFA and UEFA.

                                                                             Yours sincerely




                                                                             MR S BILBE
                                                                             (Fire Emergency
                                                                             Planning Department)




        S 363
DO. 6
                                                    Upminster
                           TREAT                    Essex
                        0 F F IC 5 A U Y            RM14
                                                    28th February 1990
Mr D. Waddington           2 MAR 1990
Home Secretary-                                          IK:™1QE
House of Commons
London
SW1A OAA
                                             * 5MAR1990
                                           n e r - .v.f u - x v s t . ^
                                           C lf’MlL'i Q '^ m c s .
                                           U ia i ■iifiUTiOW UNIT
Dear Sir

I am writing regarding the recommendations of the Justice Taylor
report following the Hillsborough disaster.

I am in agreement with much of this report but along with a great many
football supporters am strongly opposed to the introduction of all
seated stadiums.

You are no doubt aware of the reasons supporters oppose all seats,
which include cost (of seats plus installation),athmosphere,capacity
and convenience, so I shall not expand on these. The major argument
is that terraces are not inherantly unsafe so need not be removed.
The Hillsborough disaster was caused by too many people being
allowed into a confined area but history has shown that provided
capacities are not exceeded terraces are not unsafe. Every week
hundreds of thousands of supporters stand on terraces without
incident yet the Government intends to abolish them. Members of
Parliament should attend some football matches and seek the opinions
of supporters before making changes which will drastically affect
the game.

Yours sincerely




Mr
