           PfiA-
1.   Mj><Lee                                      cc   Mr Ellingford
2.   Miss Eustace                                      Mr Mould - HO




PLANNING POLICY GUIDANCE NOTE ON SPORT AND RECREATION:
FOOTBALL STADIA

1.    Following my minute of 19 February on all-seater stadia, and
having seen the PDC1 draft PPGN, I have the following suggested
re-draft to o f f e r : -

      "The    Government   agrees   with    Lord    Justice   Taylor's
      recommendation in his final report into the Hillsborough
      Stadium disaster that all seated accommodation should be
      introduced at all Football League grounds for reasons of
      safety, public order and spectator comfort.      Licences issued
      by the Football Licensing Authority, to be set up under the
      Football Spectators Act 1989, will require all seater stadia
      - with standing being reduced by stages and eliminated in
      all   Football   League  grounds   by   1999.    Local  planning
      authorities   will  wish to take this       into account when
      considering applications for new or re-developed football
      stadia.

      The move to all seater stadia will mean that football clubs,
      to varying degrees, will need to redevelop their grounds or
      in some cases transfer to new locations.      Many football
      grounds are out dated, lack amenities and are ill placed in
      residential areas offering poor access and public transport
      links and often inadequate parking space.

     Some   football  clubs   in   these  circumstances,   or   where
     substantial redevelopment would be required to convert to
     all seated accommodation, may wish to seek to move to a new
     ground.   Such transfers could bring considerable advantages
     in terms of access and egress, particularly in an emergency,
     and  in minimising    disturbance of    adjoining   residential
     areas.    Clubs will, however, be mindful of the views of
     their supporters, many of whom may be expected to oppose the
     move of their club. Furthermore, clubs will be reluctant to
     re-locate outside their main catchment area.           This is
     perhaps   particularly   true   of  clubs   in  major    cities,
     especially in London.

     Most football clubs, therefore, may be expected to move to
     all seated accommodation by redeveloping their grounds.     For
     some this may mean extensive construction work including
     roofing,     for    others,   attracting   fewer    spectators,
     redevelopment plans may be more modest.
                                                        i
     In considering applications for new and redeveloped football
     grounds, local planning authorities should also take into
     account the communal sports and other facilities associated
     wi t h such development which benefit the local community as a
     whole".
3.   As you know I think the PDC1 draft is a considerable
improvement  on  the  Sports  Council   draft.    I have   a  few
suggestions about structure,   however.     While I can see the
political attraction of putting 'urban open space' up front it
looks slightly odd to come before strategic issues . I would also
suggest that PDC might consider following the strategic issues
section (paras 18-24) with a section entitled 'provision of sport
and recreation facilities in urban and rural areas' which would
be divided into sub-sections on urban facilities, urban open
land, all seater football stadia, rural facilities, noise and
sport and air sports.   Still a rather selective list, are there
no others that need to be mentioned?

'4.   Finally, I still have my no doubt idiosyncratic difficulty
 that for me recreation involves such activities as going to
 concerts, the theatre, art exhibitions and so on as will as
 physical recreation.   No doubt it should be self evident to me
 that a PPGN entitled 'Sport and Recreation' is only concerned
 with sport and physical recreation, but I am afraid that I would
 still find it helpful for this to be spelt out in the text.

JT.  I would repeat my plea for a sight of the new draft PPGN as
soon as it is available.




A R BADEN
SARD C
Rm P3/165
Extn 0675

8 Ma rch 1990
                                                                                                       jzM-
          *#*--     '►


          .        Mr,
                   M r /Lee                                 fM dk5\             cc    Mr Kinghan
         2.        Miss Eustace                                                       Mr Ellingford v''
                                                                                      Mr Mould - HO


         PLANNING POLICY GUIDANCE NOTE ON SPORT AND RECREATION:
         FOOTBALL STADIA
                                                               t
         1.    Following a recent meeting involving PDC3A, SARD C and the
         Football League concerning the difficulties which football clubs
         experience   in obtaining planning permission       for either new
         football   stadia or on site major       improvements,   PDC3A have
         suggested that we provide a contribution to cover these concerns
        Iin   the  draft   Planning  Policy Guidance    Note   on  Sport  and
         Recreation.    Since then of course the need for such guidance has
         become greater in the light of the Government's acceptance of
         Lord   Justice   Taylor's  recommendation that   all-seater   stadia
         should be introduced in all Football League grounds by 1999.       I
         provide a draft contribution below for you to consider and then
         pass to PDC1.         It might fit with the main point made in
         paragraph 34 of the draft.

                    "The Government agrees with Lord Justice Taylor's dg&g&im&oii
                   in his final report into the Hillsborough Stadium disaster
               <r that all seating/sli&uld be i ntro d u c e d ^ . - a ^ l F o o t b a l l League
psa^
                   grounds        for  reasons of   s a f e t y , ^ spectator v comfort              and
                   prev ention— e-f hoo l iganism.  The Government therefore expet
  (
                    local planning authoritiesJfon preparing and reviewing their
                  ~ x d c a r — grans and ln"G'Snsiderina applications for new o
                    redeveloped                              to     take
                             nmeriC s                          snougo            ——.Qij. J .r S G c l'tG ir
               t    a C C 6 f8 R I0 ^ d ^ 4 0 ]
                    F
                    Fou

                    There are two reasons why                     ifttroc                  all-seating
                    may require new stadia sites.

          -NpX Firstly, it may not be possible on an existing site to
          ^     convert  to   all-seater   accommodation while  maintaining
                adequate capacity for any longer term growth in attendance.
                A larger site may therefore be desirable on an edge of town
            0-^-or even green field location.

                   v Secondly, even where adequate capacity at an existing ground
          k         ^ p an still         be provided  after  conversion  to  all-seater
  . tb                accommodation, an edge of town site may be preferable having
                      regard to access, parking space, egress in an emergency and
       \0\jN       * minimising disturbance to adjoining residential areas.        Many
                      football grounds are now out-dated, ill-placed on cramped
                      sites in residential areas and not capable of providing
                      adequate parking space.        Emergency access and egress can be
                      hampered by the constricted nature of these sites with poor
                      road a c c e s s .

                     In considering applications for new and also renovated
                     sports stadia, local planning authorities should take into
                     account the communal sports and other facilities associated
                     with such development which benefit the local community as a
                     whole. »
2.   You agreed that it would be helpful if I made suggestions on
how the draft PPGN might be improved.  I offer three suggestions:

            (i)       the length of this rather v6rbose draft
                      might be cut down by identifying   the key
                      considerations as far.as the Government is
                      concerned (at times the draft reads as a
                       statement of Sports Council policy) which
                       should be drawn to the attention of local
                      planning    authorities   and  developers.
                      These might be culled from paragraphs 12
                       to 37;

            (i i )    a new structure based on national/regional
                       sports facilities,   sport and recreation
                       provision in urban areas,     rural  areas
                       would be an improvement on the rather
                       confused existing structure;

            (iii)     since the guidance is intended to cover at
                       least physical recreation in general as
                       well as sport I would suggest that a more
                       balanced^ approach     is   necessary.     For
                       example, 'the guidance might do even more
                       to address the conflict which can occur
                       between intensive sports provision in the
                       rural    areas    and    enjoyment    of   the
                       countryside (paras 17 to 21).      Perhaps the
                       Countryside Commission and the DTI with
                       its tourist hat on should have an input
                       into this guidance?       It might    also be
                       helpful to make clear what the definition
                       of recreation is, otherwise it remains
                       unclear   why    tourist   activity    is  not
                       considered     recreation     and    why   the
                       provision of arts facilities, museums etc
                       are not addressed.

3.   There are also a number of minor planning inaccuracies which
are of course a matter for PDC, for example the implication that
district plans are not local plans, which of course they are
(paragraph 10).

4.   I would be grateful   for   a sight   of   the   new draft   PPGN   as
soon as it is available.




A R BADEN
SARD C
Rm P3/165
Extn 0675

19 February 1990
PLANNING POLICY GUIDANCE NOTE

SPORT AND RECREATION                                      4th draft January 1990



INTRODUCTION

 1   In 1986, over seventeen million adults in England took part in indoor or
     outdoor sport regularly (once a month or more often) and this number had
     grown from fourteen million in 1977 (1). Social forecasters agree that
     sport is likely to go on attracting more participants, playing more often.
     The Sports Council, as the Government's advisor, has set targets for
     involving two million more sports people by 1993 for England. Likewise the
     Sports Council for Wales seeks nearly 300,000 more players in the ten years
     to 1996 (2). The Government has accepted that sport is of benefit to
     individual   citizens for reasons of physical and mental health, to
     ccmnunities in terms of social functioning and job creation and to the
     nation in terms of international prestige (3). It is a major and diverse
     human activity which requires sane major facilities and is an important
     secondary land user in the countryside. It is of course in competition for
     space with other important functions.

 2   Government policy for sport and recreaticxi (SARD to draft).

 3   There are two other reasons for producing new guidance on planning for
     sport and recreation at this time: first, the introduction of Unitary
     Development Plans (DOE Circular 3/88) and proposals for County Statements
     and District Plans (The Future of Development Plans Qn569 Jan 1989)
     requires up-to-date guidance; secondly, previous guidance was incomplete,
     fragmentary and out-of-date. Many planning officers believe that leisure
     and recreation needs a higher profile in planning (4).

 4   This guidance note supercedes Circulars 33/70, 47/76 and 73/77. PPGN deals
     with Nature Conservation and Planning: tourism is considered in this PPGN
     insofar as it affects sport and recreation.

 5   Paragraphs        of this note are concerned with matters of a larger-than-
     local nature, appropriate to regional guidance or structure          plans.
     Paragraphs      deal with sport and recreation planning at a local level.
     It provides guidance on planning matters necessary to retain existing and
     develop new facilities. Paragraphs      outline the content and subject
     matter of district plans: paragraphs          deal with demographic change;
     conservation; open space; green belts; noise and sport; after use of
     derelict land; and sport and recreation issues in urban and rural areas.

THE PLANNING SYSTEM

 6   The strategic guidance notes issued by the DOE for metropolitan areas have
     only limited mention of sport and recreation issues, usually linked to
     other matters concerning open land. This basis needs to be extended and
     local planning authorities (LPAs) should consult their regional office of
     the Sports Council (or in Wales, the Sports Council for Wales) on what is
     essential and highly desirable in their plans. The broad basis of planning
     for sport in terms of demand and supply, constraints and opportunities are
     set out for England in Sport in the Carmunity : Into the 90s and for Wales
     in Changing Times : Changing Needs. In England, the former is supplemented
     by a strategy for each Sports Council region which the Government intended
     should be considered by each LPA and "carried through into statutory
     planning at the structure and local plan levels" (Circular 73/77).   These
     are produced by the Regional Councils for Sport and Recreation, and are
     backed by an advisory service, including chartered town planners, and often
     a panel of local authority officers in the region.

STATEMENTS OF POLICY

 7   There are sports and recreation facilities which serve a national or
     regional role, either because of the development scale, for example a
     stadium or, they involve scarce/specialist facilities. Identifying such
     provision may benecessary in regional guidance        issued   by    local
     authorities.    This will ensure provision is identified and prevent 'site
     opportunities1 being missed, or provision duplicated. This subject matter
     includes:

     (a)   Locations or areas of search for: arenas; major indoor; outdoor; and
           water sports recreational facilities, which are agreed as priorities
           through consultation with the public or interest groups on the
           regional strategies.

     (b)   Key sites for   outdoor sports and recreation which should be given
           priority for    continued operation and development, including playing
           fields.

 8   In addition, there are policies which need to be applied consistently
     across local authorities to ensure reasonable equity of choice and access.
     This will ensure provision is planned and relates to other forms of
     development. The subject matter for these policies are:

     (a)   Housing - the     scale, location and nature (eg starter hemes, family
           hemes, retirement hemes) of new housing and hew far the demand for
           sport and recreation facilities it generates can be absorbed by
           existing provision, or new facilities needed on site. PPGN & Housing
           Land contains policies on new facilities.

     (b)   Green belt -     policies for green belts which may be areas of
           opportunity for both sport and recreation and for conservation, but
           where there may be sane constraints.

     (c)   Major office or retail developments - of which sport and recreation
           facilities may became a part.

     (d)   Mineral working areas (wet and dry)      -   which   can   provide   major
           recreational areas as an after use.

     (e)   Reclaimed land - which can      also provide a recreational use after
           reclamation and improvement.

     (f)   Countrywide policies - for carmunity use of education, Ministry        of
           Defence or other bodies sport and recreational facilities.

     (g)   Policies for access - to the countryside, especially to open land and
           water for recreation.

DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT PLANS, UNITARY DEVELOPMENT PLANS AND LOCAL PLANS

 9   These are intended to give more detailed guidance than County Statements to
     potential developers, existing landowners, tenants and residents. They can
      e more locational1 r specific about matters referred to in paragraphs 7 and
     d and in addition cover:

     (a)   Specific needs for specialist sports facilities (indoor and outdoor),
           sane requiring large sites (for example local motor or air sports
           sites and orienteering courses).
     (b)   The relationship of visitor and residents needs in areas popular with
           tourists and day trippers: sometimes these needs are complementary;
           and sometimes they compete for time and space.

     (c)   Planning briefs creating opportunities for developments arising frcm:
           new housing settlements, industrial or agricultural change, the
           closure of large hospitals/military establishments, and reclamation
           schemes, for example the planting of new forests.

     (d)   Recreational   policies   for   access   agreements,   rights   of    way and
           bridleways.

     (e)   Specific policies in relation to s52 agreements.

     (f)   Local   issues   of   visual amenity, noise, historic           and    nature
           conservation, in relation to sport and recreation.

10   General guidance on local plans can be found in Planning Policy Guidance
     Note 12. Regional offices of the Sports Council (and the Sports Council
     for Wales) are producing a regionally relevant guidance note on the
     preparation, consultation and monitoring of unitary, district and local
     Plans.

11   In preparing unitary or local plans, policies for sport and recreation
     should be formulated in the context of recreation or leisure strategies or
     policies adopted by the Local Authority. Land-use planning policies should
     treat sport and recreation in their own right, and wherever possible should
     encourage development. Sport and recreation are human activities that are
     delivered only by appropriate management and arrangements for this will
     sometimes need reference, for example for securing access to land, water or
     buildings. Policies should be based on close co-operaticn between the
     Planning Department and the Local Authority Department responsible for
     sport and recreation, and any others with interests, for example social
     services, education and housing.

12   There are two occasions when sport and recreation considerations may
     transcend local or even district planning. These are:

     (a)   When activities are based on scarce natural resources (for example
           lakes, crags, caves) to which people travel extensively; and

     (b)   Provision of specialist indoor or outdoor facilities, sometimes for
           competitions and spectating. The Sports Council will be considering
           criteria for the governing bodies of sport for identifying such key
           sites, which if they are to be invested in adequately and managed
           correctly may need a degree of protection. Issues of competing
           priorities will arise because such sites may be in areas of high
           landscape, nature conservation or informal recreation value in rural
           areas or in areas of pressure for development by other uses.

RECREATION AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES

13   The difference between participation by men and women, plus the young and
     middle age group is closing. Consequently, there is a need to provide
     facilities for age groups and both sexes on an equal basis. The same is
     true of identifying the needs of minority groups, such as aged, disabled
     people or ethnic groups where participation is low but expanding and needs
     further encouragement and development (1, 2 & 4).
RECREATION AND PLANNING AGREEMENTS

14   Planning should recognise the increasing role arid importance of sport and
     recreation provision in meeting the needs of 21st Century society.     Plan
     making and consultations should incorporate these into unitary and local
     plans. Major new developments of housing or jobs will create, however,
     additional recreational needs and planning agreements on the basis outlined
     in PPG Note      will then be appropriate.

STRATEGIC ISSUES

The Impact of Demographic Change

15   Changes in the population structure of England and Wales are having a
     considerable impact on provision for sport and recreation. The decline in
     the school age population in the 1980s (new in the 20-25 group) which
     resulted in significant reorganisation of school facilities is also
     affecting demand for different sports, whilst the projected increase in the
     45-59 age group will bring with it opportunities and problems for sport and
     recreation between 1993 and 2003. This general "ageing" of the population
     may result in the need to change the mix of activities on existing
     recreational sites.     There is evidence, however, that the present 25-40
     year old group, as the first generation to experience a wider range of
     sport and exercise facilities in and outside school are demanding a better
     range and quality of facilities (1,5).

16   The concentration of population growth, substantially from migration in
     small towns and villages south of the Mersey-Trent line has led to
     proposals for new green-field settlements ranging from 1,000 to over 20,000
     people. It is essential that these settlements are provided with adequate
     indoor and outdoor recreational facilities for their evolving populations,
     while the needs of existing rural dwellers are also considered. PPGN 3 on
     Housing Land addresses this issue and provides guidance. Failure to do so
     will lead to an unsatisfactory physical and social environment, and will
     compound similar errors made in various areas through this century.
     Providing adequate cannunal open space for public use is particularly
     inportant (6).     It would be mutually helpful if developers consulted the
     Regional Offices of the Sports Council about the desirable scale and nature
     of provision, so that it can be related to existing public, voluntary or
     comrercial provision.

Sport, Recreation and Conservation

17   The growth of interest in outdoor pursuits has introduced many people to
     the beauty of Britain's landscapes and habitats. On the other hand, sport
     and recreation have been perceived as intensive in requiring buildings or
     car parks, bringing foot and motor traffic (sometimes trespass, vandalism
     and noise) and requiring provision for toilets and litter collection.

18   Thi. conflict has been perceived as strongest where areas have been
     des■nated for historic (Conservation Areas)     landscape (National Parks,
     A          of Outstanding Natural     Beauty,  Heritage Coasts) or nature
     c    .rvation interests (National Nature Reserves, Marine Nature Reserves,
     Sices of Special Scientific Interest) or for preserving open countryside
     (for example green belts).

19   Operational   vzxperience and   recent studies (7)have shown, however, that:

     (a)     Sport and recreation   inpacts are relatively sporadic, localised and
           minor.     Sport usually involves small numbers compared with walking,
           picnicking and sight-seeding.
     (b)   Most can be avoided by planning of the uses of the site, full
           consultation between sport and conservation interests (regionally or
           locally) and devising and inplementing management plans which may
           involve techniques like zoning by time and space. The benefits of
           such a balanced approach will in most cases resolve conflict.  Where
           conflict over sites does arise and cannot be resolved satisfactorily
           these should be identified in strategic terms to ensure balanced
           provision for recreation and conservation.

20   Nevertheless, there are sane sites where a particular use may have to take
     precedence by exclusion, and, when contentious, the matter may have to be
     settled by public inquiry, or even decision by the Secretary of State.
     Further, local routes or sites which are used regularly by large numbers of
     people   may require substantial investment in hard-wearing surfaces,
     carparks, sign posting, walkways. It is the function of district or local
     plans to identify priority sites for such investment.

21   The development of sports facilities can provide opportunities to create
     new habitats: golf rough, the margins of water areas and'*unmown areas of
     any park or recreational area (for example the margins of disused railways
     used for walking and riding routes) can beccme ecologically valuable.

RECREATION AND OPEN SPACE

22   The City of Birmingham Polytechnic report prepared for the Department of
     the Environment identifies provision for sport and recreation for people of
     all ages is an important but not the only open space provision, in
     addition, important issues are      the   maintenance   of   physical   and
     psychological well being for residents and visitors, the visual separation
     of buildings and the sustaining of wildlife. Incidental effects can be to
     provide venues for health, cultral and educational activities and to
     enhance land values through raising the quality and desirability of the
     environment (8).

23   Many inner city areas and seme peripheral housing estates have never
     achieved the open space or sports ground provision intended by LPAs.
     Likewise, as cities change there are pressures to build on open space
     (housing, roads or commercial developments) or to relinquish them if
     particular initial user groups (industrial employers or shcool children,
     for example) decline in numbers.

24   Such developments can ignore the needs of other groups in society for these
     sites, or, their wider functions.      The poor protection against such
     disposal of public, or, private open space is the clear demonstration of
     demand for its use requiring a statutory plan identification for its
     maintenance and function (8). LPAs may wish to designate certain areas as
     sites of strategic open space or recreation (SSOs or SSAs) to discourage
     loss because such loss, once it occurs is irreversible.

Green Belts

25   A prime purpose of Green Belts is to separate urban developments and thus
     to thus preserve the amenities of the countryside.         Providing for
     recreation has always been a secondary but important purpose. Sports and
     recreation can be provided here in ways that cannot be managed within
     towns, and in ways which:

     (a)   can improve rather than despoil landscape; and              - __

     (b)   reduce trip    lengths needed if    they were provided   in the deep
           countryside.     Seme activities,   of course, involve   email scale
           building, for example    club houses and for golf, green keeper's
           houses. PPG2 provides detailed guidance on Green Belts.

Noise and Sport

26   Motorised and sane gun sports (such as clay pigeon shooting) by their very
     nature involve generating noise.    In a society which has grown more
     conscious of noise as a nuisance, it is inevitable that these activities
     can cause concern especially in areas where beauty is equated with
     peacefulness.    However, the    problem of noise is well recognised by the
     governing bodies of the sports concerned andby the manufacturers of the
     equipment which is used in       the sports. As a result, m o d e m day motor­
     cycle, motor-car, boat and aircraft engines together with rifles and
     pistols are much quieter than ever before.         In addition, sports have
     introduced improvements to reduce potential conflict with neighbours at
     their events. Their public image does not always reflect this work. In
     contrast, there are areas in both town and country where agriculture,
     industry or main roads produce a high level of constant or intermittent
     noise.

27   General guidance on planning for noise is available in Circular 89/   . In
     addition, many of the governing bodies of sport have produced codes of
     conduct which are used when organising events, and these should be put into
     practice when new sites are being considered, or, when existing problems
     are being resolved.      Detailed case studies have been undertaken by the
     Sports Council (9).

28   It is important that local planning authorities take a positive attitude
     towards noise generating sports and provide for them rather than seeking to
     divert them elsewhere. Suitable sites can be found (for example, adjacent
     to an existing noise generator such as a main road or in locations screened
     by banks and trees). When provided, they can be used to divert much of the
     existing unauthorised and more damaging use of playing fields, footpaths,
     open land and woodlands.       The potential of land released by changes in
     agricultural practices should be realised for this purpose.

Air Sports

29   Participation in air sports has grown substantially, particularly in those
     disciplines which have developed in the last 20 years (hang-gliding,
     gliding   and microlight aircraft) as low cost alternatives to more
     traditional involvement in flying. However, this period of rapid growth
     has seen also an increase in the amount of controlled/regulated air space.
     This has led to restrictions on air sports, particularly in finding
     suitable new sites for airfields. In the period 1979 to 1986 controlled
     air space in the South East has increased, thus restricting severely the
     operation of air sports in this area (10). The demand for extra air
     passenger flights to the year 2000 AD is very great, and further
     restrictions are feared.      It is important that LPAs are aware of the
     airspace, noise and site constraints on air sports, particularly when they
     are called on to consider the merits of a proposal to relocate an air
     sport, such as a gliding club. The Civil Aviation Authority as well as the
     Sports Council Regional Offices and the governing bodies of air sports
     should be consulted on such proposals.

After Use of Derelict Land and Mineral Workings

30   Sport and recreation offers a wide range of opportunities for intensively
     re-using disturbed, degraded or derelict land or former mineral workings.
     In metropolitan areas derelict land can play a key role in the process of
     urban regeneration. Many derelict or mineral-worked sites in both urban
     and rural areas are particularly well suited for sport and recreational
     uses, which can not be provided easily elsewhere. Grassland management for
     grazing is an expensive and nowadays often an inappropriate after-use. The
     costs of providing sport and recreation are higher than using land for
     informal recreation, but so too are use and incane (11).

31   The after-use potential of such land for various water and land based sport
     and recreation activities, is considerable. Clear policies and development
     briefs are required and in the case of mineral working these should be at
     an early stage, and then followed through in development control decisions.
     Provision can be made to bring sites into sport and recreational use prior
     to completing extraction by appropriate phasing of facility provision and
     management arrangements.

Sport and Recreation in Urban and Rural Areas

32   Sport and recreation opportunities, whilst unable alone to solve social and
     economic problems faced by many ccmmunities in urban or rural areas, are
     important to the social fabric and well-being of people living in those
     areas.

     Areas of social and econauic deprivation in inner cities are often subject
     to strong pressures and yet land for development is extremely limited in
     supply.    Providing indoor sport and outdoor synthetic or other surfaces
     capable of intensive use is a partial compensation for space.      However,
     open grassed space - for walking, sport, children's play and visual
     purposes - is crucial. The loss of valuable sport and recreation provision
     to residential or commercial developments in urban areas will only serve to
     reinforce the social and economic deprivation of communities within these
     areas, unless adequate replacements are made locally.

33   Research commissioned by the Department of the Environment has shown that
     there is little statutory protection for maintaining inner city open space.
     Positive planning policy is one such means of protection. Land in use as
     sports pitches or for other forms of outdoor sport and recreation in inner
     city areas should be maintained and if at all possible extended.       Mary
     residential areas within urban areas were developed without the necessary
     local sport and recreation facilities.    Consequently, there is a high
     latent demand which could be released if appropriate opportunities can be
     provided. Replacement of lost sites on the outer edge of cities is not
     "equivalent reinstatement", because many urban residents lack the money or
     means of travelling to these locations.

34   As the land supply is limited, priority will often have to be given to
     intensive forms of provision - multi-sports provision with indoor and
     outdoor (possibly floodlit) facilities. Such provision will lead to some
     increase in local traffic      and   activity   but   without   sympathetic
     consideration from LPAs to providing facilities in such areas, recreational
     opportunities for local ccmmunities will continue to be restricted.     The
     Department of the Environment has already collated experience of such
     practices (12). There are, of course, some sports, for example, rugby for
     which artificial surfaces are not a practical solution to shortage of
     pitches.

35   In rural areas, there are issues of trying to provide a reasonable choice
     of sport and recreation for smaller and more widely scattered populations
     than in towns. Historically, the problem has been one of remoteness from
     centres of activity; more recently many small towns and villages have
     received new migrants, many of whom have aspirations for facilities to
     match those in towns. Opportunities to provide all rural dwellers with
     traditional facilities such as playing fields, pavilions and indoor
     facilities is best pursued by dual use of school facilities, provision of
                                                                               8

     village halls, or the conversion of farm buildings. All these approaches
     need to be recognised by a more flexible approach to development control.

36   Tourism is a means of ecorcmic regeneration. A minority, but a growing
     number of tourists take part in sport and recreation.     The recreational
     needs of residents and tourists can be complementary or carpeting: demands
     for use may peak at the same or different times of the week and year. This
     may demand different locations.       Together, residents and tourists may
     support facilities in small towns and rural areas that could not otherwise
     be viable.     LPAs should ensure that both tourist and sporting interests
     have been consulted on proposed developments. PPG? provides more detailed
     guidance on planning for tourism.

WORKING WITH OTHER AGENCIES

37   Planning for sport will involve LPAs making contact with many other diverse
     organisations - the Countryside Carmission, the Nature Conservancy Council
     and   voluntary conservation bodies, the Forestry admission, British
     Waterways Board, the National Rivers Authority, the Water PLCs, the
     National Trust, Urban Development Corporations and the many governing
     bodies of sport. The Regional Councils for Sport and Recreation are a
     forum where these interests are gathered and serviced by the Sports
     Council. Local Planning Authorities    should make use of each Regional
     Office of the Sports Council which can provide a valuable means of
     gathering expertise and opinions while plans and proposals are being
     formulated.

CONCLUSION

38   Sport provides enjoyment for nearly half of Britain's population, and
     contributes significantly to gross national product and employment. It can
     provide free standing enterprises such as golf courses, marinas, and sports
     resorts.    More often it will be part of a multiple activity package of
     attractions either on a small scale, as when linked with holiday cottages,
     or on a large scale in major hotel or out-of-town retail projects, marina
     or dockland redevelopment complexes, arena and conference centres. Careful
     planning of sport and recreation to meet all these needs and activities in
     a balanced way is required at national, regional and local level.


DP-PPGN
3.1.90
                                                                                   9




                                                                                       \

REFERENCES

1.   SPORTS COUNCIL (1989): Sport in the Carmunity: Into the 90s,
     The Council, London


2.   SPORTS COUNCIL FOR WALES (1986): Changing Times, Changing Needs,
     The Council, Cardiff


3.   Ministerial letter to Chairman of the Sports Council (1987?)


4.   THE ROYAL TQAN PLANNING     INSTITUTE   (1989):   Planning   for   Choice   and
     Opportunity,
     The Institute, London


5.   K ROBERTS & OTHERS (1989): Community Response to Leisure Centre Provision
     in Belfast, Study 34
     The Sports Council, London


6.   M ELSON (1989): report to the Housing Research Foundation,
     Oxford Polytechnic


7.   R M SIDAWAY (1989): Sport Recreation and Nature Conservation, study:
     The Sports Council, London


8.   CITY OF BIRMINGHAM POLYTECHNIC (1990 forthcoming): Provision and Protection
     of Open Space in the Inner City report to the Department of the Environment


9.   M ELSON & OTHERS (1986): Providing for Motor Sports frcm Image to Reality
     study 28, Motor Sports and Motor Recreation, study 29; (1989) Providing for
     Water Sports study 35,
     The Sports Council, London


10. M ELSON & OTHERS (1989): Providing for Air Sports Study 35,
    The Sports Council, London


11. (1989) report to the Department of the Environment


12. S GLYPTIS & C PACK (1989):
    Department of the Environment, London
APPENDIX 1


Addresses of Regional Councils for Sport and Recreation.


Northern Region
Aykley Heads
Durham DH1 5UU

Yorkshire & Humberside Region
Coronet House
Queen Street
Leeds LSI 4PW

North Western Region
Astley House
Quay Street
Manchester M3 4AE

West Midlands Region
Metropolitan House
1 Hagley Road
Five Ways
Birmingham B16 8TT

East Midlands Region
Grove House
Bridgford Road
West Bridgford
Nottingham NG2 6AP

Eastern Region
26/28 Branham Road
Bedford MK40 2QP

Greater London and South Eastern Region
Crystal Palace National Sports Centre
London SE19 2BQ

Southern Region
51A Church Street
Caversham
Reading
Berkshire RG4 8AX

South Western Region
Ashlands House
Ashlands
Crewkeme
Somerset TA18 7LQ

The Sports Council                     The Sports Council for Wales
16 Upper W o b u m Place               National Sports Centre for Wales
London WC1H OQP                        Sophia Gardens
                                       Cardiff CF1 9SW
                  /
     r*   f   4
                                                                                                         11




                  APPENDIX 2

                  REGIONAL STRATEGIES FOR SPORT AND RECREATION


                           A Strategy for Sport and Recreation in the Northern Region:
                           Projects for the 1990s (1987): Northern Council for Sport and
                           Recreation, Durham
i

                  2.                  A Sporting Change : A Strategy for the Development of Sport and Acti
                           Recreation 1989-1993; Yorkshire & Humberside Council for Sport and
    VP                     Recreation, Leeds


                  3.       Regional Strategy (1980): Currently under revision; North West Council
                           for Sport and Recreation, Manchester


                  4.       A Regional Strategy (1985): West Midlands Council for Sport and Recreation,
                           Birmingham


                      5.   Taking Shape: A Region Recreation Strategy for the 1990s (1988):
                           East Midland Council for Sport and Recreation, Nottingham


                      6.   Sport in the East     (1988   revision):   Eastern   Council   for   Sport   and
                           Recreation, Bedford


                  7.       A Capital Prospect: A Strategy for London Sport (1987): Greater London
                           Council for Sport and Recreation, London


                  8.       Prospect for the Eighties: A Review (1986): South Eastern Council for
                           Sport and Recreation, London


                  9.       Sport in the South (1985): Currently under revision Southern Council for
                           Sport and Recreation, Reading


                  3.0. A Regional Strategy for Sport and Recreation in South West England (1980):
                       Council for Sport and Recreation, Crewkeme
