    Inland Revenue                                           Somerset House
                                                             London
    Business Tax Division                                    WC2R 1LB
                                                             Telephone 01-438

                                                              071-438 6484
                                                             GTN 3541 6484
Mr T Ellingford                                   Your ref
Dept of Education and Science
Sport and Recreation Division                     Our ref
Elizabeth House
York Road                                           n„tp      17 January 1991
LONDON SE1 7PH




              SOUTHAMPTON FOOTBALL CLUB LIMITED


I enclose herewith a draft reply for Mr Atkins to send to Southampton
Football Club, as requested in your note of 9 January.

Please let me know if you require anything further.




                                  Mike Croall
SOUTHAMPTON FOOTBALL CLUB LIMITED


DRAFT REPLY FOR THE MINISTER OF SPORT



Thank you for your further letter of 3 January about the

problems Southampton Football Club are experiencing over the

development of a new stadium.

You suggest that the same industrial buildings relief should

be available for the construction costs of the development

of a new stadium or the redevelopment of an existing stadium

as is currently allowed in development areas. As you are

aware, this is again a matter for Treasury Ministers and I

have taken advice in preparing this reply.

You are presumably referring to the relief available in

enterprise zones and it may be helpful if I say something

about the enterprise zone scheme.

The scheme was introduced in 1980 on an experimental basis,

with a view to seeing how far industrial and commercial

activity could be encouraged in areas of physical and

economic decay. The aim was to reduce or remove certain

tax burdens and relax or speed up the application of

certain statutory or administrative controls. Each zone

lasts for 10 years and the main tax incentive is a special

100% initial allowance for capital expenditure on industrial

and commercial buildings.

However, the early zones are now coming to the end of their

10 year lives and you may be interested to know that in

December 1987 the Government announced that a general
extension of the enterprise zone scheme was not desirable.

As a result, no new zones or extensions of existing zones

will be created, except in exceptional circumstances.

I can assure you that your proposal has been noted and will

be carefully considered in the run up to the Budget. But I

think you will appreciate that it would be inappropriate

to comment further at this time.
