                                      .w
                                   j \wwm QlIoo^
                                        «9m                             [0Hammersmith
                                                                        l&Tulham____

Date:    18th May 1990                                                    Environmental Services


                                                                         London Borough of
         Mr. D a v id Mould                                              Hammersmith and Fulham
         P r i n c i p a l O ffice r
                                                                         Old Town Hall, Fulham Broadway
         F i r e a n d E m e rg e n c y                                  London SW6 1ET
                P la n n in g Departm ent                                Telephone 081-748 3020
         The Home Office                                                 Fax Number 071-381 0079
         50 Queen A n n e 's G ate
l        London S . W . l .                                              Direct Dial:


Our Ref: ES /W 3 M /R M             Your Ref:                            When telephoning please ask for:
                                                                                   Bill Myers
                                                                                   E x t . 3900

         D e ar D a v id ,

         I a t t e n d e d a c o n s u l t a t i o n m e e tin g o r g a n i s e d b y th e    A rts
         Sectio n ( ! ) of            th e AMA on 15th May 1990.                      For      your
         in f o r m a t i o n ,    I     e n c l o s e a s e t of p a p e r s       th at      w ere
         presen ted             on   th e d a y .        P l e a s e f e e l f r e e to        keep
         them ; t h e r e is no n e e d to r e t u r n th e m .

         You w ill see t h a t th e b u l k of t h e d a y                     w a s t a k e n up
         w i th a s e r i e s of q u e s t i o n s . Q uite f r a n k l y ,     I am am a ze d
         a t b o th t h e n a i v e t y a n d p l a i n i g n o r a n c e        e x h ib ite d by
         th e m .    I t seems to me t h a t th e m a j o r i t y of            th e q u e s t i o n s
         w e re v e r y s t r a i g h t f o r w a r d a n d o n ly one         o r two r a i s e d
         a n y s o r t of p o l i c y i s s u e .

         R ob ert      P erkins       spent      some    time  in    the     afternoon
         t a l k i n g a b o u t t h e "G reen G uide" a n d w h e t h e r i t s h o u ld
         be m a n d a t o r y o r a d v i s o r y .    Which e v e r i t i s , he f e l t
         ju stified        th e     ab o litio n    of  th e  Football      Licensing
         A uthority.

         His m a in p o i n t seemed to be t h a t th e F o o t b a l l L i c e n s i n g
         A u t h o r i t y s h o u l d n o t i s s u e c e n t r a l g u i d a n c e to l o c a l
         au th orities         as      in d iv id u a l     circu m stan ces       d i f f e r e d so
         g reatly .        He t h e n w e n t on to s a y t h a t he i n t e n d e d to.
         set      up,      w ith      th e     F o o tb a ll's   F a m ily    F orum ,           some
         tec h n ical       groups         to      issue       central      g u id elin es          to
         local a u th o ritie s !

         My p u r p o s e       in     sending         you         th e s e p a p e r s is j u s t
         to p r o v i d e you w ith th e i n f o r m a tio n - w h ic h co n firm s
         my view t h a t e v e r y b o d y is t r y i n g to "jum p on th e
         b a n d w a g g o n " of i s s u i n g g u i d e l i n e s .



                                                                               /co n tin u ed .. . .




William Myers Director                                                                  Tony Eddison Chief Executive
                                                                     PAGE TWO
Mr. D a v id Mould                                               18th May 1990




I w o u ld             be g r a t e f u l if you c o u ld     l e t me know a s
soon          as       possible       th e  d ates      fo r o u r    m e e tin g s to
be held               in J u n e - e v e n if t h e y a r e g o i n g to be
p r o v i s i o n a l - a s my d i a r y is s t a r t i n g to f i l l u p .




Y ours s i n c e r e l y ,




WILLIAM G. MYERS
DIRECTOR OF ENVIRONMENTAL SERVICES
                                       Association of                   35 Great Smith Street
                                       Metropolitan                              Westminster
                                       Authorities                        London SW1P 3BJ

                                        Secretary: Rodney Brooke          Tel: 071-222 8100
                                        Deputy Secretary: Joan Jones      Fax:071-222 0878

                                  “1                         9 May 1990
f iU X .   ^U\evS

             (A
                     S>€-w tdi&

                                        our ref              HG /PW/ ART.M SZ
                                        yo urref




Dear Colleague


TOWARDS 2000 : CONSULTATION AND CURRENT ISSUES OF MUTUAL INTEREST TO LOCAL
AUTHORITIES AND FOOTBALL AUTHORITIES FOLLOWING THE TAYLOR REPORT


I am writing to confirm your attendance at the Seminar on 15 May at Wembley
Conference Centre, to discuss the implementation of the Taylor Report. A
map of the area is enclosed for your information. If you are travelling by
public transport the easiest routes are to Wembley Park by Underground
using the Metropolitan or Jubilee Lines, or by overground train to Wembley
Stadium Station via Marylebone. If you will be travelling by car there is
an NCP car park in the Wembley Complex which costs approximately £5.00 per
day.

A programme of the day's proceedings is attached plus a synopsis of issues
raised by delegates, for discussion during the day. Lunch will be provided
and will be obtainable on presentation of a lunch ticket which you should
pick up on registration.

If you have any further questions, please do not hestitate to contact me.
I look forward to seeing you on Tuesday.


Yours sincerely




HELEN GOODY
CAR AND COACH ROUTES TO WEMBLEY
                                                              M25/M1 Lufon Airport
                                                              Birmingham & the North
                                                                          y          A1 Hatfield
                                                                                                                                                     North Circular Road



                                   WEMBLEY COMPLEX
                                                  fO R T U M K
                                   — tIVtUHt                                                                                                                      M i l Harlow
                                                        1 ,                                                                                                       Newmarket
                                                       {J
                                      HARROWi2i2
                                             GRIAl
                                         CENTRAl WAY

  A4Q Oxford




                                                                 W IST WAY
                                                                                                                                                 OXfORP S T J iS
     ough &
                                                                 S4£M53
the West
London Airport
(Heathrow)
                                                                                                   5o^^22iS
                                                          g r c a t w k t r o a p ^ .—   ^
Staines &
the South West

               Wembley Stadium Limited,                                       WEMBLEY ARENA RESTAURANT
        ^      Empire Way, Wembley HA9 ODW.                                   The Wembley Arena Restaurant is now open for pre-show bookings with a
               Tel: (01) 902 8833                                             wide and varied menu to suit all tastes. Bookings taken from up to two weeks
lH    r a      Fax: 900 1OSS Telex: 8811735                                   prior to an event. For further information please call 01 -902 8833 Ext. 4321.




                                                                                                        Box Office
                                                                                             M2S        (01)900 1234
                                                                                                        9.30 a.m. to 9.00 p.m. Monday to Saturday,
                                                                                                        10.00 a.m. to 6.00 p.m. Sunday.
                                                                                                        Hospitality
                 / / / iwQtNO»s)                                                                        for all hospitality and entertainment arrangements
                                                                                                        ring Ambro Sports on
                                                                                                        (01) 902 8833
                                                                                                        Wembley Update
                                                                                                        Up to date details on all events ring
                                                                                                        0898 600 500
                                                                                                        I38p pet (nin. peak, ? Jp per min off peak) (obletom frodixtlons.
                                                                                                        What’s on a t Wembley
                                                                                                        To subscribe to the monthly diary of events at
                                                                                                        Wembley please coll the mailing services division on
                                               1*M3 M4 A40M                                             (01} 902 8833 for details.
                                                        F IR ST W A Y




                                                                                           WEMBLEY STADIUM 1
                    m   VMFIC.W'A>
                                                                                                  WEMBLEY
                                                                                                EXHIBITION HAIL
               WEMBLEY ARENA
                                                                                            MULTISTOREY
                                                                                             CARPARK
                                                                                                 PAR


Approx.
10 mins walk
             WEMBLEY PARK
          UNDERGROUND STATION                                                                                              Approx.
                                                  WIRE WAY                                                                 20 mins walk
                                                    f~ YORK HOUSE             WEMBLEY STADIUM                      WeMMEYCMIML
                                                                              8R STATION     =                     81!STATION
                                                                                                                               It
                                                                        BY BUS:
                                                                        Nos. 8 3 ,9 2 & 182 tome lo Wembley Arena 18 comes lo ihe
                                                                        Triangle (5 minuleswalk). 297 (oiighl al Wembley P a r k ^ ^
                                     fnNq c«fit
                                                                        Station) and no. 245 (alight at Bridge Road) serve the c t ^ B x .
                                                                        BY TRAIN:
                                                                        Underground:
                                                                        To Wembley Park by Metropolitan line
                                                                        or Jubfiee (Stanmore) Line.
                                                                        To Wembley Central By Bakerloo Line (peak hours)
                                                                        British Rail:
                                                                        To Wembley Central from Euston or Broad Street
                                                                        To Wembley Stadium from Marylebone
                                                                         Kiytolliw                                   Q Iwwrt^wn Kmw
                                                                                  ^                                  «            tww
                                                                                                       IX JJL tU     A cwtw»in>*wipm
                                                                                                      Wnarit         • cuMitoum


                                                                                                                       zxsssssr.x         .
                                                                                       NutMrn                        t «wumi|i nwmOwnroMftd
                                                                                                                       «h m I>iw iw H tw t

                                                                                                         IRT fleglsterad U u r No. 87/E/388.
                                                             2 fB Al>
                                                             ^AfDED


                           "TOWARDS 2000"

        A consultation between local authorities and football
        authorities following the Taylor Report

                               AGENDA

10.30 - 11.30 am   Football's Family Forum
                   General Meeting (delegates welcome as observers)

11.00 - 11.30 am   Registration and Coffee

11.30 - 1.00 pm    Morning Session

                   Chairman; Rt Hon Denis Howell MP
                   Opening Remarks

                   Contributions from: *Arthur Sandford (Chief Executive)S
                                        Football League               __
                                       *Councillor G Davies (Leader) and?
                                        Mr T Gilbert (Assistant Chief     J
                                        Executive) Wolverhampton MBC -— '
                                       *Councillor D Brown (Chairman)
                                        Football’s Family Forum.

  The Chairman will invite speakers from List A during the session.

2.30 (approx) -    Afternoon Session:
      4.00 pm
                   Chairman: John Greenway MP

                   Contributions from:   *Councillor D Helliwell, Leader,
                                          Calderdale MBC

                                         *Mr R G Perkins, Assistant
                                          Secretary, AMA

                                         *Mr I Stott, Chairman, Oldham
                                          Athletic AFC

  The Chairman will invite speakers from List B, during the session.



Organised by the Association of Metropolitan Authorities (ART Section
on behalf of the AMA, ADC, Football League, and Football’s Family Forum.
Supported by the Football Trust




                               Football’s Family Forum
          Questions/Ideas raised by delegates

                                        LIST-A    (morning session)

          1      Implementation of Taylor Recommendations

              ya)      Will any degree of flexibility be allowed in relation to making
                       allowances for local conditions? (Bury MBC)

              ,/b)     Will the proposals be mandatory?    (Chesterfield MBC)

               / c)    Failure of football clubs/police to implement the Taylor Report
                       recommendations as a Middlesbrough v Leeds this season. (FSA)

        ft.      All-Seater Stadia

               y /)    Further consideration needs to be given to this proposal
                       particularly to Third and Fourth Divisions. (Chesterfield BC)
                       (Liverpool CC).

              ^/^)     What progress, if any, has been achieved between Government a n d / V M A ^
                       the sporting bodies in respect of all-seater accommodation?                                          ■
                       (Wakefield MBC).                                       ^             IL.* \ j

                 c) Should local authorities insist that where seats are to be
                     provided on existing terraces in accordance with Lord Justice
                     Taylor's recommendations, they must be under cover? (LB Richmond)

                 d) Old stadia do not lend themselves to conversion - seated areas can
                     be unsafe and provide a very poor view of the game. (FSA).

              *\/e) Can discretion be given by central government regarding the
              <     re-location of stadia or redevelopment of commercial usage at
                     existing stadium (Watford FC).

                 Perimeter Fences

              ^y/a)    Should a minimum height be stipulated for a perimeter fence as
                       well .as the 2.2m maximum mentioned in Recommendation 15, i.e. can
                       small barriers under 1.2m height be discounted from the
                       requirements for gates and policing/stewarding? (LB Hounslow).

                 b)    Clarification of Recommendation 17 which states: "There must be
* r ?                  provided in any perimeter fence of a penned or other
                       self-contained area, sufficient gates of a minimum width of 1.1m
                       to enable that pen or area to be evacuated onto the pitch in the
                       time prescribed for an emergency evacuation of that [Den or                        ^
                       area". (LB Waltham Forest), (Liverpool                         ^

         4.      Financial Assistance to Clubs

              \y ^ )   Sponsorship - commercial input (Walsall FC) .        c ^ r t U l^   >JlzJL i   d         J     l .
                                                                                                              v^CfcJobJl h j-
                       What S ources of financial assistance are available nowadays for
              J 6'
                       local authorities willing to help football clubs? (Wakefield BC).
                Vc)        How can EEC money be obtained for grounds; would local
                           authorities be prepared to help with improvements to facilities a,t
                           stadia in accordance with the Physical Recreation and Training
                           Act? (Watford FC).

                ■^/d)      Need for re-appraisal of synthetic surfaces for Third/Fourth
                           Division clubs - this would help local authorities/club action in
                           providing resources to comply with Taylor Report. (Chesterfield i              .- *— j*-— >
                           BC ).          C                                                 |cj-

                ^ ^)       Police charges.    (Brentford FC)                        G

                   Staffing/Personnel/ Training Implications                            '"<V"

                va)        In view of the continuing recruitment problems in Building
                ‘          control, what measures do the associations/local authorities
                           consider necessary to make sure there are sufficient personnel with
                           the right skills to be involved in ensuring safety at sports
                           grounds. (Coventry CC).

                     )     The Football Authorities should be asked what they are doing about      . ^
                p. .
                   jjJ-    the training of Ground Stewards. Neither the Police, Fire Service                      i
       ^                   or local.authorities see this as their responsibility and as a                        c\
                           consequence
                                consequence
                                        the majority
                                              tne majority
                                                      of stewards
                                                           or stewards
                                                                  are receiving
                                                                       are receiving
                                                                                littlelittle
                                                                                        or no or no
                                                                                                 v
                                    aj. all> ^ training video from the Football Authorities                '
                           would be better than nothing at all. (Coventry CC).

                ^c)        In Recommendation 66 of the Final Report, what constitutes
                           training in advanced first aid. (LB Hounslow).




                                             List B   (afternoon session)

           6.     Safety/Crowd Control/Ticket Sales.

                           Reduction in turnstile capacities seems unnecessarily restrictive
                           in some circumstances e.g. tickets sold elsewhere and no money
                           collected at turnstiles. (LB Croydon).

                           What is the general policy regarding the sale of tickets at the
                           ground on match day up to three hours before kick-off, when the
                           match for safety reasons has been declared all ticket. (Wakefield
                           MBC)

_ r\                       Balancing crowd safety (Fire Service, local authority                         r^ jL
                           requirements) wi£h crowd control (Police requirements) in the
                           event of a conflict between the two. (Bury MBC).

                  y r f\   Local authorities are entitled to charge a fee for the issue or
                           amendment of safety certificates and this fee shall be
                           commensurate with work actually and reasonably done. This does
                           not take account of all the work not directly involved with the
                           issue and amendment of safety certificates e.g. supervising ground
                           alterations, discussing schemes with architects and engineers,
                    etc. Do the associations intend taking up this matter with the
                    Government? (Coventry CC).                                     .       .          .

           iy       Policing of and accommodation for away fans.   (Liverpool CC)                     *

            iCO     Police accountability in respect of operational orders;
                    (Liverpool CC).

                Licensing of Football Clubs
                                                                                       LA J
                   Do the local authority Associations see the Football Licensing                         <'■
                    Authority as a policy-making organisation or can local authorities ^                  <
                j£v-expect representatives of the FLA to be monitoring the performance
                    of the local authority in the discharge of this function on a day
                    to day basis. (Coventry CC).
                                                                                        w »~tfcrPiLA
                   On the assumption that Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations           >
                                                                                               ■M r
                   should be applied to a National Stadium such as Twickenham RFU
                   equally as to football grounds, how can the reduction in the
                   numbers of standing spectators be achieved, as•Recommendation 3
                   suggests, if the powers of the FLA are limited to Association
                   ■Football grounds only and Home Office Circular 11/1990 states
                   safety certificates should not be amended for this purpose.
                        Richmond).

                    What is the timescale for the licensing of premises for watching
cy~                 designated football matches? (West Yorkshire Police).

                    When will the FLA be given the power to review the discharge of
            > <
                    the functions by local authorities? (West Yorkshire Police).

            ^       Music and Dancing Licences   (Brentford FC).

      8.        The Advisory Group

                    Relationship between club and local authority representation of
                    Club on Advisory Group. (Bury MBC).

                   The Interim Report recommended that representatives of the
                   Football club and of a recognised Supporters' Club be members of
                   the Group it is now suggested that they should not be full members
                   of the Advisory Group. This is on the grounds that responsibility
                   for the safety certificate is the local authority's.
                   Representation of both bodies on the Advisory Group can only be
                   beneficial. (Sunderland MBC).


            X      Reversal of Supporters and Clubs roles on Advisory Safety
                   Committees. (Brentford FC).

                "Green Guide"

                   Has the Body to revise the "Green Guide" been established and when
                   is it expected that the revised guide will be published. (West
                   Yorkshire Police).
TEXT OF ARTHUR SANDFORD* S TALK TO AMA SEMINAR 15th MAY 1990

I feel like the gamekeeper turned poacher having spent 27 years in local
government, the last 12 as Chief Executive of Nottinghamshire County Council
and only 3 months as Chief Executive of the Football League - but what a hectic
3 months they have been.     Just before I took up my appointment Lord Justice
Taylor produced, a report on the Hillsborough disaster.

If it is implemented, I believe that it will prove to be the most influential
externally commissioned report in the history of football, in this country.
I say 'if* because there have been a number of other reports not all of which
have been implemented in full by any means.  I am however optimistic that the
Taylor Report will be implemented.


I|bid
 Taylor was asked to look at football from a narrow perspective - that of safety
      crowd control.  We must all be grateful to him that he sought to set his
task in a wider context.

Many commentators have concentrated on his 76 recommendations or more
particularly, on the 4 recommendations relating to all-seater stadium but I
would commend to each one of you the first two chapters of the report.    There
Taylor proposes a new philosophy for football.   For me this is undoubtedly the
most important facet of the report.       Instead of piecemeal and ever more
repressive measures to combat the hooligan which has produced a hostile
environment for the majority of our law abiding customers who want no more than
an enjoyable afternoon or evening's entertainment, we need to reverse that
trend and cater for that vast majority.     He concludes chapter 1 saying “the
lesson is surely that now is the moment for the fullest re-assessment of policy
for the game".

I believe that to be true.

He concludes chapter 2 by saying "I hope X have made it clear that the patching
up of grounds, of having periodic disasters and narrowly avoiding many others
by muddling through on a wing and a prayer must be over.         A totally new
approach across the whole field of football requires higher standards both in
bricks and mortar and human relationships".

That is the challenge facing all of us and I stress ALL because, whilst the
Football League has accepted and welcomed the Taylor Report it is clear we
cannot effect that change of philosophy on our own.     In particular, we need
the help, support and understanding of local authorities and others.        The
Football League had hoped that Lord Justice Taylor might have left the way open
for some standing facilities to remain, since it is clear that there are many
spectators who prefer to stand rather than to sit-    We did not wish however,
for this aspect to cloud our overall acceptance of the report.         We also
acknowledge that the mood throughout Europe is towards all-seater stadia and
that the government has stated quite categorically their acceptance of Lord
Just ice Taylor1s recommendat ions.

Taylor recommended that the Football Association and the Football League
should jointly establish an Advisory Design Council.            That specific
recommendation was quickly accepted.   We have been seeking a chairman and had
hoped that Professor Maunder who chaired the Technical Working Party to Taylor
would take on this position.   His other commitments however will not allow it
although, he maybe a member of the Council.   Once we have a Chairman, we will
proceed with the appointment of the other members of the Council.        it is’
intended to have a strategic role and be comprised of about 6 - 8 people.   It
•wills

        a. Commission reports
        b. Obtain information on best practices
        C- Disseminate the results of research abd bestpractices
           through seminars and papers
        d. Provide design guidance for practitioners
        e. Assemble a data base on who has done what and where
           so that clubs and practitioners have ready access to
           the expert help which is available.

We quickly recognised however, that little could be achieved without the .
necessary finance.    What was the cost of implementing Taylor?     A figure of I
£130M had been mentioned but I should point out that this was no more than a
desk top exercise undertaken by the League's Quantity Surveyors, Messrs.
Corderoys who had simply been asked to give a cost of putting seats on terraces
and a cover over those seats.     Manifestly, this was not the total cost of
implementing Taylor.   The Football League therefore commissioned Corderoys to
assist clubs in completing a questionnaire setting out their best estimate of
the total cost.   They have been asked to provide a costing for:

          i. Simply putting seats on terxaces with a cover
             {similar to Corderoy's exercise)
         ii.          what realistically they would like to spend' in order
             to implement all of Taylor's recommendations
and most importantly

        iii. What it is they are likely to do in the light of the
             financial constraints upon them.

That information is due back by the end of May and only then will we have some
real guidance as to the total cost of implementing the Taylor report. A figure
of £75M has also been mentioned as a contribution from the Football Trust.
It is most likely that the Football Trust will indeed contribute £75M over 10
years but it must be emphasised that this is not new money.     For a number of
years the Football Trust and the Football Grounds Improvement Trust, both of
whom derived their income from the Spotting the Ball competition, assisted
league clubs.   Just over half of the income from Spotting the Ball went to the
Football Grounds Improvement Trust which was specifically charged with
assisting clubs to meet the requirements of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act.
 The remaining money was distributed by the Football Trust through a wide range
of objecctives to develop the game at all levels.           The Football Trust
specifically provided assistance to clubs in putting in closed circuit
television and in^ meeting police charges.       Even before the Chancellor's
announcement, the Football Trust had indicated that they wished to revise
these arrangements.    A new Trust, the Football Trust 1990 was to replace the
two older trusts and would operate through two committees. Through one of
them, would be administered 75% of the income of the Football Trust and would
go to the professional game in England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.
 This committee would take on responsibility for assisting clubs with closed
circuit television and with police charges.       The other committee would be
responsible for assisting all other aspects of the game down to grass roots
     level and including community projects.  It is anticipated that the committee
     dealing with the professional game will he distributing some £7. 5M per annum
    "which of course, over the next 10 years adds up to £75M.     This money will
     however, need to assist clubs in carrying out the work which is called for in
     the Taylor Report and it seems unlikely that there will be much left over fox-
     contributing to capital projects for- the provision of all-seater stadia and
     the wide range of social provisions called for by Lord Justice Taylor.

  You will all be aware .that in his budget statement the Chancellor of the
  Exchequer announced a reduction of 2%% in the Pools Betting Duty.    This money
  estimated to produce currently approximately £18%M per annum, is to go through
  the Football Trust to assist with the capital works providing greater safety
  and comfort for football spectators. Clearly the new Football Trust 1990 will
  now need to establish a new strategy taking account of the greater resources
  which are now available to it by also taking into account the greater demand
^^ o r expenditure if Taylor's recommendations are to be met.  In addition in his
^^udget statement, the Chancellor offered the assistance of the Inland Revenue
  to clarify the position of tax allowances on capital expenditure. We had hoped
  that the whole of the cost of implementing the Taylor recommendations would be
  tax deductable.      It is however, clear that that is not to be the case.
  Expenditure will have to be brought under one of three headings.

            A.    Revenue expenditure as a repair but note the limitations provided
                  by the Burnley case in 1981.

^            B.   Plant and equipment on which we would be taking specialist
                  advice.

             C.   Work required as a condition of a Safety Certificate or to be taken
                  into account by a local authority in granting a safety
                  certificate.

    Note however that Taylor's recommendations on all-seater stadia are to be
    enforced through the Football Licensing Authority and not through Safety
    Certificates issued by local authorities, hence the limitations on the
    availability of t-His tax provision.    This is a matter we are taking up with
    government who recognise the anomaly of different fiscal consequences arising
    from a decision as to whether Taylor's recommendations are implemented through
    the Safety of Sports Grounds Act on the one hand or the Football Spectators Act
    1939 on the other.

    It is most disappointing that here we are in the closed season, which is the
    time for doing work at football grounds, and the Football Licensing Authority
    has not yet been set up.     We understand that the target date is 1st June.
    We have impressed on the government, and I believe they accept, that the
    Football Licensing Authority should have flexibility in determining the
    timetable for implementation of the Taylor recommendations, particularly those
    relating to all-seater stadia.    We have not asked that the end dates of 1994
    and 1999 should be put back but we have asked that Taylor's strict timetable
    of a reduction of 20% in divisions 1 and 2 and 10% in divisions 3 and 4 of
    standing capacity should not start to run from the beginning of the next
    football season.   I would    thereforeask local authorities not to betoo ready
    to anticipate the timetable.   Strictly, I don't think, you have the powers to
    make provision for going all-seater in Safety Certificates and would ask you
    to await the establishment of the Football Licensing Authority.         Whilst




                                          - 3 -
expenditure on safety requirements may well be necessary, even for short terra
situations, it is imperative that as much, as possible of the money available
should be used for long term improvements.

Whilst speaking of finance, I must mention the possibility of gaining grants
from other sources, from the E.E.C, from other government programmes such as
the Inner City Programme and, dare I say it with the restrictions on local
government expenditure, from local government itself.     Local government has
a wealth of expertise in these areas.   Football does not.   I would therefore
ask that each local authority should make its expertise available to its local
clubs and should assist clubs in formulating grant applications in the most
appropriate way.

All clubs are likely to be involved in planning applications over the next few
years.   Those clubs who are remaining on their present sites will need to carry
out extensive works which they may well not be able to accomplish within the
envelope of the existing ground.      Other clubs, recognising that they are
located in the wrong place, will want to realise the value of their existing,
often town or city centre location, and to re-establish themselves in a more
appropriate location, frequently on the edge of town. Where this is the case,
I would hope that local authorities would be prepared to sit down and consider
with clubs what is the most appropriate location and where the possibilities
straggle district boundaries, I would hope that all the local authorities in
the area would be prepared to participate in this process.      We have pressed
government to issue policy planning guidance to local authorities regarding
the implementation of the Taylor report and we hope and anticipate that this
will be done.

Nearly all clubs now have community development schemes involving such
initiatives as "Football in the Community" and Match Mates.   Local government
has a distinguished record in joint use and dual provision stemming from the
school building programme in the 60's and early 70*s.   The 1990's will be the
decade when football grounds are refurbished or built anew.          There is
therefore a once and for all opportunity to consider afresh community
development in association with the local football club.   All avenues need to
be explored including ground sharing.    The professional game has however set
its face against the use of artificial surfaces in all divisions from the
1995/96 season including those clubs which already have artificial surfaces.

Football clubs provide an attraction in every town and city where they exist.
 They provide an opportunity for developing tourism and economic development.
 I would therefore ask that every local authority should now sit down with its
local football club and develop a 5-10 year development programme.     If is is
not done, then much money will be wasted in seeking to adopt Lord Justice
Taylor's recommendations.    I would ask that opportunities for joint use and
joint provision be explored and the best answer round to suit local
circumstances. If relocation is felt to be the answer, then I would ask local
authorities to sit down with their club and work out where the new site should
be.   I would ask that they should positively assist with planning issues and
putting together a whole package which is financially viable.   I would ask ask
that local authorities should assist clubs in obtaining grant aid from other
sources -

I firmly believe that together we can adopt and implement the Taylor
philosophy.    Football is played in more countries than belong to the United
Nations and we gave it to the rest of the world. It is still the greatest game
in the world and I believe that together we can restore football to its
rightful place as a national institution.
 TOWARDS 2000: CONSULTATION AND CURRENT ISSUES OF MUTUAL INTEREST
           TO LOCAL AUTHORITIES AND FOOTBALL AUTHORITIES
                    FOLLOWING THE TAYLOR REPORT

                        THE MOLINUEUX STADIUM:
                   A CASE STUDY BY WOLVERHAMPTON MBC

INTRODUCTION

The Council has retained consultants to advise on the physical
possibilities offered by the current Molineux site and the means of
securing the redevelopment of substantial parts of the Stadium and
adjoining lands as a fitting home for a First Division Football Club
given the constraints of the report by Lord Justice Taylor.

BACKGROUND

Wolverhampton Borough Council owns the Molineux Stadium, home of
Wolverhampton Wanderers League Football Club. The Council acquired the
Stadium in 1986 from the Receiver appointed to take charge of the assets
of Wolverhampton Wanderers (1982) Limited.

The Stadium was purchased together with the other land and property
assets of the Club as part of a deal designed to ensure the continuation
of League Football in Wolverhampton. Another major participant in that
deal was J J Gallagher Limited which established the new company,
Wolverhampton Wanderers (1986) Limited, to continue League Football.
Wolverhampton Wanderers (1986) Limited was a wholly owned subsidiary of
J J Gallagher Limited.    Sir  Jack   Haywood,   a  Wolverhampton   born
businessman, became the owner of Wolverhampton Wanderers (1990) Limited
on 10 May 1990.

When the Stadium was first purchased in 1986, the Council's primary
consideration was to secure the continuation of League Football but it
also wanted to bring about the refurbishment of the Stadium for a range
of sporting activities for the benefit of the wider community.

Prior to the publication of Lord Justice Taylor's final report of the
Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium disaster, the Controlling Group on
the Council endorsed proposals for the step-by-step refurbishment of the
Stadium with the vast majority of the new accommodation taking the form
of covered terraces for standing.

These plans were re-examined in the light of one of the Taylor report's
prime recommendations, that First and Second Division grounds must
provide only seated accommodation by August 1994.     The outcome of the
re-appraisal has resulted in the Controlling Group on the Council to
re-affirming their commitment to certain key principles:

  (a)   That the current site      is   the   proper   home   for   Wolverhampton
        Wanderers Football Club.

  (b)   That the Stadium should remain in the ownership of the Council.

  (c)   That we    seek to progress      on  a step-by-step basis the
        refurbishment/redevelopment of the Stadium and ground to a
        standard appropriate for a First or Second Division Club.
        (d)   To minimise the cost of redevelopment on the Community Charge
              payer and therefore funding is likely to be from a combination of
              joint development proposals; grant and where appropriate and
              possible, contributions from the Football Club.

      CURRENT CAPACITY

7.    The current Safety Certificate permits the maximum capacity for the
      Stadium of 25,000 spectators. Average gates this season have been around
      18,000 and several games have attained maximum available capacity. The
      South   Bank   accommodates  approximately   16,000   standing  and   the
      John Ireland   Stand   9,000   seated  spectators.    Additionally,   the
      John Ireland Stand currently provides accommodation for private box
      holders, bar, lounge, ticket office, police and first aid, together with
      office accommodation for Wolverhampton Polytechnic. The North Bank and
      Waterloo Road Stands have both been closed for safety reasons for
      4.5 years. The Football Club's administrative offices, hospitality ro
      and players facilities are located on the ground floor of
      Waterloo Road Stand. The attached plan shows the areas covered by the
      Safety Certificate.

      PLANNING POLICY

8.    The Council is currently reviewing the statutory town planning framework
      for the Borough through the preparation of a Unitary Development Plan.
      Shortly, the draft Unitary Development Plan will be published for public
      consultation and include the following policy:-

        "Policy TC 10 Molineux Stadium

        The Molineux Football Stadium will be retained on its present site, and
        the Council will actively pursue its modernisation and redevelopment.

        The largest single spectator sporting facility in the Town Centre is
        the Molineux, home of Wolverhampton Wanderers Football Club. Although
        the first phase of a planned redevelopment of the Stadium was completed
        some years ago, the Council wishes to see further modernisation and
        redevelopment perhaps with some additional sports facilities. Such a
        redevelopment may be associated with appropriate integrated commercial
        development such as offices.       Adjoining land not required for
        development will be used for permanent car parking purposes."

      PURPOSE OF STUDY

9.    The Consultants study will provide the basis for the Council to agree a
       coherent, practical and robust framework for the redevelopment of the
      Stadium for discussion with the Football Club and other interested
      parties.    The Consultants are expected to take on board Lord Justice
      Taylor's recommendations as they relate to First and Second Division
       Football League Clubs.

10.   Subject to the foregoing principles in paragraph 6            (a-d),   the
      Consultant's study will encompass the following elements:-

        (a)   an appraisal of .the existing Stadium, its use and       capacity,
              including the anticipated needs of the Football Club;

        (b)   advise on the appropriate design scheme for a fully seated Stadium
              which will have an eventual capacity of a minimum of 25,000 and a



                                         - 2 -
              maximum of 30,000 consistent with current and projected safety
              standards;

        (c)   provide a practical redevelopment programme which is capable of
              being completed by the 1994/95 football league season whilst
              optimising the ground's capacity during the construction phases;

        (d)   provide an estimate of the costs of the development according to a
              range of assumptions regarding the specification of the spectator
              facilities;

        (e)   advise on the appropriate spectator circulation space, car parking
              and servicing arrangements and their inter-action with any
              commercial uses which may be integral parts of the Stadium;

        (f)   assess the prospects for and type of commercial uses such as
              offices, leisure etc, which could be incorporated into the Stadium
              design and the extent to which uses are capable of subsidising the
              costs of providing seated spectator accommodation;

        (g) identify other potential sources of funding which are or may be
             available towards the new seated accommodation; the eligibility
             rules and timescale for submission etc;

        (h) advise on the potential means open to the Football Club to raise
             income which can be earmarked to finance redevelopment.

      CONSULTANT'S TEAM

11.   To undertake this unique commission, a number of disciplines needed to be
       represented and organised in a consultancy team.         In  selecting a
       consultancy team, we took into account the consultancy team's experience
       in the appraisal of commercial office and leisure developments and
      knowledge of current West Midlands market conditions and its prospects as
      well as their architectural and construction related expertise.

12.   The Consultants are due to report in June.




N68.TG/DS(1)
14 May 1990
 f ji      \\ -';                                                               - 'V >
                      rn   >■*E?. if 1!r 5,,f rSI
                            ■O4---                                         /   /
                                                                                ■




                                                                  /
                                                    ■
                                                    /
   '-f<r
                                                                      1/
r r ; / ~ \ r    /-                                                                      8^




                                                                                                                                                    STAN                                * 0 4*'*'n'
                                                                                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                                                                                             imllT:
                           '‘£
                             XSS8kisi
                                 0$&

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ns       ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ^         v
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         \\              /                \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         \ \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           \\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          /
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ..
                                                                                                                                                                               :”fVp*:e!«^R                                                     \\ ✓—S.                             //
                                                                                    ° ', * \ y.    _» m                                                                    2i—t */'ratPARK
                                                                               llBl^^iJll:          ’.                                                                       '&MM                                                                                                 if
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ■-■- x\                        i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             \\               Ij
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             n                i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             \'                i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             u                 «S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              »'               S«, - -
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              !   1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              *• ,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              • «   • «■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Jj

                                                                                                                                                                          \$l.                                                                                n               a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              n               !i
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          // \ \
                                                                                                                                                                                                      CAR PARK                                           //
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        // ^ \
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1!            I
        5T*ECT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -'
                                                                                                                                                                           T IC K E *                                                • \ \ / / /' i
                                                                                          \9                           ■j',0mg!                     \R 11 .\_J                                                                       '
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ■
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ••//      ' * 1
                                                                                                                                                                             msi&m                                                   ^✓// /i ; i   i
                                                                                                         S ix re                                                                                                                              v „/ '
                                                                                 ; ©           ^   ^ t       12;
                                                                                                                                            EXIT:                                                                                V
                                                                                 .       ^                           S E X tT
                                                                                                                   t'U P P E R
                                                                                                                                  f
                                                                                                                                  2f6iSf3f,O®
                                                                                                                                 TjE JR «
                                                                                                                                            Qgs

                                                                                                                                                                                                      /,   vft   / ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       EMERGENCY SERVICES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RENOEVOUS POINTS AS INDICATED
                                                                                                                                              * o f ; N£•
                                                                                                                                                         ux
                                                                                                                                                                      scaies            date          drawn by   J     <fwgixs                                                             1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         lo c a tio n
                                                        «>s\                                         ■A                                                          V\
                                                                                                                                                                            1:1250          Aug - 89- Tech- Serv-J


                                                                                                                                                                        .Wolverhampton Metropolitan Borough Council
 ‘SAFETY CERTIFICATE'                                          MOLINEUX STADIUM LOCATION PLAN                                                                            R. Lewis C.Eng. M.I.C.E.
                                                                                                                                                                         OirecJor of Technical Services
                                                                                                                                                                         Civic Centre, St. Peter's Square, Wolverhampton WV1 1RP Tel. (0902) 27811
       "SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS"



A Fire Service perspective prepared by   .

Mike Hartland, West Yorkshire Fire Service
SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS
There a re many proverbs and q u o t a t i o n s in t h e English language with which we
ar e a l l f a m i l i a r , one of more commonly used examples i s "S afety in Numbers".

In t h e m a j o r i t y of cases t h i s i s t r u e , but u n f o r t u n a t e l y H is to ry and more
r e c e n t t r a g i c and d i s a s t e r o u s even ts have shown t h a t whenever people g a t h e r
t o g e t h e r in l a r g e crowds t h e r e i s t h e p o t e n t i a l f o r a major c a t a s t o p h e .

One a r e a where people r e g u l a r l y g a th e r in l a r g e numbers i s of course s p o r t i n g
venues - p a r t i c u l a r l y f o o t b a l l s t a d i a . The f i r s t o f f i c i a l r e c o g n i t i o n of
crowd problems was in 1923 a t Wembley Stadium when an over c a p a c i t y crowd gave
cause f o r concern owing t o u n c o n t r o l l e d crowd s u rg e s.

The " S h o r t t Report" i n t o t h i s i n c i d e n t was t h e f i r s t o f f i c a l in q u i r y in crowd
s a f e t y and was published in 1923. The f i n d i n g s of t h a t r e p o r t , i t s
r e c o g n i t i o n of th e problems and recommendations t o overcome them a re as
r e l e v a n t today as they were t h e n . U n f o r t u n a t e l y , complacency and f o r reason s
not q u i t e c l e a r , no o f f i c i a l a c t i o n was ta k e n t o implement any of th e
recommendations or heed t h e le s s o n s l e a r n e d . No s p e c i f i c body was given
powers t o deal with m a tt e rs r e l a t i n g t o s a f e t y in one of t h e main pl a c e s where
l a r g e numbers of s p e c t a t o r s g at h er ed on a r e g u l a r b a s i s f o r t h e i r
e n t e r t a i n m e n t - Football S t a d i a .

A v o lu n ta r y system of c e r t i f i c a t i o n and i n s p e c t i o n of grounds was in tr o d u c e d
by t h e F o o tb a ll A ss o c ia ti o n - i t did n o t , however, s p e c i f y t h e competancy of
t h e person c a r r y i n g out t h i s r o l e .

Between 1923 and 1971 f u r t h e r i n c i d e n t s i n v o l v i n g crowd s a f e t y a t f o o t b a l l
s t a d i a oc cur red - some with f a t a l r e s u l t s .

Hi s t o r y

On 2 January 1971, 66 people l o s t t h e i r l i v e s and many were i n j u r e d a t Ibrox
Park Fo o tb a ll Ground, Glasgow, during a lo c a l derby f o o t b a l l match. The
r e s u l t a n t committee of In q u ir y Report by t h e Wheatley Committee, which was th e
l a t e s t in a long l i n e of such r e p o r t s on s a f e t y of s p o r t s grounds, was
p r e s e n t e d i n May 1972 and was t h e f i r s t s t a g e i n t h e pr oc ess which led t o t h e
S a fe ty of Sp or ts Grounds Act 1975. This was passed in August 1975, 51 y e a r s
a f t e r t h e f i r s t i n v e s t i g a t i o n i n t o s a f e t y a t s p o r t s grounds.

The Wheatley Committee was t h e f i r s t s t a g e , t h e second being t h e e s t a b l i s h m e n t
of a working p a rt y t o produce a s e t of g u i d e l i n e : , c a l l e d t h e "Guide t o S a f e t y
a t Sp or ts Grounds" (o the rw is e known as t h e "Green Code") pu bli sh ed in 1973.
This v o l u n t a r y code, although i t has no l e g a l f o r c e , was r e v i s e d in 1976 and
c o n t i n u e s t o apply g e n e r a l l y t o rugby and s o cce r grounds.

The 1975 Act provid es a system f o r d e s i g n a t e d s p o r t s s t a d i a with a c a p a c i t y
f o r more t h a n 10,000 s p e c t a t o r s t o r e q u i r e a ge ner al s a f e t y c e r t i f i c a t e from
t h e Local A u th o r it y ( u n t i l 31 March 1986 t h e County Council) and t h e S e c r e t a r y
of S t a t e was empowered t o extend t h e Act t o any s p o r t s grounds. In p r a c t i c e ,
however, u n t i l mid 1935 t h e Home S e c r e t a r y had only " de si gn at ed " F i r s t and
Second D iv is io n Football League grounds, t o g e t h e r with a handful of
i n t e r n a t i o n a l s t a d i a , as r e q u i r i n g General S a f e t y C e r t i f i c a t e s . Such a S a fe ty
C e r t i f i c a t e must s p e c i f y t h e g ro u n d 's c a p a c i t y , t h e a c t i v i t i e s f o r which t h e
ground i s used, and many o t h e r c o n d i t i o n s r e l a t i n g t o t h e s t r u c t u r e , e x i t s
e t c . F a i l u r e t o comply with c o n d i t i o n s w i t h i n a c e r t i f i c a t e or not ap plying
f o r such a c e r t i f i c a t e a f t e r th e ground i s d e s i g n a t e d c o n s t i t u t e o ff e n c e s
under t h e Act f o r which p e n a l t i e s a re p r e s c r i b e d .       (A s p e c i a l s a f e t y
c e r t i f i c a t e may a l s o be gr an te d f o r s p e c i f i c e ve nt s eg Pop Concerts which are
not covered by th e ge neral s a f e t y c e r t i f i c a t e s ) .

General emergency p r o v i s i o n s a re a v a i l a b l e under t h e Act f o r a Local A u th o r it y
t o apply t o a Court f o r an Order t o r e s t r i c t or p r o h i b i t t h e admission of
s p e c t a t o r s t o a s p o r t s ground because t h e r i s k t o s p e c t a t o r s i s so g r e a t as t o
n e c e s s i t a t e such a c t i o n u n t i l s t e p s have been tak en to reduce th e r i s k t o a
r e a so n a bl e l e v e l .

In t h e c o n t e x t of t h e Act t h e fo ll o w i n g d e f i n i t i o n s apply:

"Sports ground" - means any p la ce where s p o r t s or o t h e r c o m p e ti ti v e a c t i v i t i e s
ta k e p la c e i n t h e open a i r and where accommodation has been provided f o r                                       M
s p e c t a t o r s c o n s i s t i n g of a r t i f i c i a l s t r u c t u r e s or of n a t u r a l s t r u c t u r e s
a r t i f i c i a l l y modified f o r t h e purpose.

"Sports stadium" - means a s p o r t s ground where t h e accommodation provided f o r
s p e c t a t o r s wholly or s u b s t a n t i a l l y surrounds t h e a re a used f o r a c t i v i t i e s
t a k i n g p la c e on t h e ground.

In o rd e r t o c a r r y out i t s f u n c t i o n as t h e l i c e n s i n g body, each Local A u th o ri t y
formed a S a fe ty Team with d e le g at e d powers t o i n s p e c t and i s s u e Safe ty
C e r t i f i c a t e s t o th o s e grounds f a l l i n g w i t h i n t h e scope of t h e 1975 Act.

This S a fe ty Team comprised of r e p r e s e n t a t i v e s of t h e Local A u th o r it y ,
S t r u c t u r a l Engineers, t h e F i r e S e r v i c e , P o l i c e and B uilding Control O f f i c e r s .

Contact was a l s o made with s p o r t s s t a d i a no t f a l l i n g w it h in th e scope of th e
Act, t o o f f e r s i m i l a r a d v is e and make recommendations f o r improving crowd
safety.

The P o l i c e and B uilding Control O f f i c e r s being " i n t e r e s t e d p a r t i e s " or
" s t a t u t o r y c o n s u l t e e s " f o r th e purposes o f t h e Act a t t h a t time.

Following t h e d i s a s t e r o u s e ve nt s a t t h e Bradford C ity F o o tb a ll ground on 11
May 1985, and s e r i o u s crowd d i s t u r b a n c e s a t Birmingham City Footb al l Ground on
t h e same day, t h e Home S e c r e t a r y appointed Mr J u s t i c e Popp!ewe11 t o head an
i n q u i r y i n t o crowd s a f e t y and th e c o n tr o l of s p o r t s grounds.

I t s terms of r e f e r e n c e w er e: -

      "To i n q u i r e , with p a r t i c u l a r r e f e r e n c e t o t h e e ven ts a t Bradford City and
       Birmingham Fo o tb al l Grounds on 11 May, i n t o t h e o p e r a t i o n of t h e S a fe ty
       of S p o r ts Grounds Act 1975, and t o recommend what, i f any f u r t h e r s t e p s
       should be t a k e n , i n c lu d in g any t h a t may be ne ce s sa ry under a d d i t i o n a l
       powers, t o improve both crowd s a f e t y and crowd c o n tr o l a t s p o r t s
       grounds."

The i n t e r i m r e p o r t of t h e Committee of In q u ir y (The Popplewell Report) was
pu bl is h e d on 24 J u ly 1985 and th e f i n a l r e p o r t was pu bli sh ed on 16 January
1986.




                                                         - 2 -
     A comprehensive l i s t of recommendations from t h e f i n a l r e p o r t recommended
     ex te n d in g t h e p r o v i s i o n s of t h e 1975 Act t o g e t h e r with g r e a t e r powers f o r
     Local A u t h o r i t i e s t o en su re t h e s a f e t y of t h e p u b l i c a t s p o r t i n g e v e n t s .
     Amendments t o extend t h e powers of t h e "1971 F i r e P r e c a u ti o n s Act" and t h e
     "S a fe ty a t Sp or ts Grounds Act 1975" were achieved by t h e " F i r e S a fe ty and
     S a f e t y of Pl ac es of Sport Act 1987".

     In a d d i t i o n t h e f i n a l r e p o r t recommended a Working Pa rt y t o review t h e
     g u i d e l i n e s co n ta in ed in t h e "Guide t o S a f e t y a t Spo rts Grounds" known as th e
     Green Code. This r e v i s i o n was completed in 1986 and formed t h e b a s i s f o r
     s t a n d a r d s t o be a p p l i e d from t h a t d a te .

      Implementing t h e recommendations of Mr J u s t i c e Pop plew ell, and t h e r e v i s i o n of
^ ^ t h e Guide t o S a fe ty a t Spor ts Grounds i t seemed a t l a s t t h a t adequate s t e p s
^ | h a d now been tak en t o ensu re t h a t crowd s a f e t y a t s p o r t s grounds was now being
      monitored and implemented t o                       a g r e a t e r de gree and t h a t Local A u t h o r i t i e s were
      a d e q u a te ly d is c h a r g i n g t h e i r r o l e as t h e L ic e n s in g Body.

     The d i s a s t e r o u s e ve nt s a t " S h e f f i e l d Wednesdays" Hi llsborough ground on
     Saturda y 15 April 1989 s h a t t e r e d t h a t myth and demanded a whole new approach,
     not only t o t h e known problems a f f e c t i n g s a f e t y of s p e c t a t o r s in l a r g e crowds,
     but a l s o an awareness and r e c o g n i t i o n of how a sequence of e v en ts not pr o p e rl y
     a c t e d upon or even re c o g n is e d can e v e n t u a l l y lead t o a t o t a l lack of c o n tr o l
I    or end in t r a g i c c ir c u m s ta n c e s.

     Following t h e d i s a s t e r a t Hi lls b o ro ug h y e t a n o t h e r Committee of In q u ir y had t o
     be convened t o e s t a b l i s h t h e cause and h o p e f u l l y pro vid e answers which would
     en su r e t h e r e could be no r e - o c c u r r e n c e of a tr a g e d y of t h i s magnitude.

     The f i n a l r e p o r t of Lord J u s t i c e Taylor i n t o t h e d i s a s t e r a t Hillsb oro ugh was
     p u b li s h e d on 29 Janua ry 1990 and c o n t a i n s 76 recommendations, t h e s e a re
     summarised as f o l l o w s .

    Recommendations 1 t o 4

    These deal with t h e p r o v i s i o n s of s e a t i n g f o r a l l s p e c t a t o r s             a t d e s ig n a te d
    s p o r t s g r o u n d s , how i t should be achieved and s e t s out a time                          lim it.

    Recommendations 5 and 6

    The p r o v i s i o n of an Advisory Design Council t o h e lp with t h e r e s e a r c h and
    de sign of f o o t b a l l s t a d i a .

    The p r o v i s i o n of a National I n s p e c t o r a t e and Review Body.

    Recommendations 7 t o 12

    Maximum c a p a c i t i e s f o r t e r r a c i n g and t h e need f o r c o r r e c t mon itor ing t o
    pr e v e n t overcrowding by p r o p e r l y t r a i n e d p e r s o n n e l .

    Recommendations 12 t o 21

    Deals with gangways on t e r r a c e s end t h e need t o be kept f r e e of s p e c t a t o r s .
    The need f o r acc ess g a t e s e n a b l in g ev ac u a ti o n of s p e c t a t o r s on t o t h e play ing
    a r e a and t h e removal of s p ik e s and o t h e r o b j e c t s from t h e top of t h e p e ri m e te r
    fencing.



                                                             - 3 -
Recommendations 22 and 23

Deals with i n s p e c t i o n and t e s t i n g of Crush B a r r i e r s (a c o n t r i b u t i n g f a c t o r in
t h e H il ls b o ro u g h d i s a s t e r ) .

Recommendations 24 t o 31

Recommends re - a s s e s s m e n t and review of t h e way Local A u t h o r i t i e s i s s u e Sa fet y
C e r t i f i c a t e s and monitor compliance with t h e i r re q u ir e m e n ts .

Recommendations 32 t o 43

This s e c t i o n d e a l s with d u t i e s of Fo ot ba ll Club Management and t h e way i t
o p e r a t e s t h e ground - in r e s p e c t of t u r n s t i l e o p e r a t i o n s - c o n s u l t a t i o n s with
Su p p o rt er Club - T i ck e t Arrangements - Stewarding e t c .

Recommendations 44 t o 58

Deals s p e c i f i c a l l y with P o l i c e Planning and Control a t S po r ts S t a d i a , and t h e
need f o r e f f e c t i v e communications.

Recommendations 59 t o 63

Deals w ith t h e need f o r e f f e c t i v e communication and c o - o r d i n a t i o n of re s o u r c e s
between a l l t h e Emergency S e r v ic e s .

Recommendations 64 t o 69

Se ts out r e qu ir e m e nt s f o r e f f e c t i v e medical and f i r s t ai d f a c i l i t i e s f o r
spectators.

Recommendations 70 t o 73

Deals w ith m a t t e r s which should be c o n sid er ed as committing an o f f e n c e and
penalties therein associated.

Recommendations 74 t o 76

Recommends a f u r t h e r review of t h e "Guide t o S a fe ty a t Sp o r ts Grounds".

Many of t h e s e recommendations overlapped t h o s e o f Mr J u s t i c e Popplewell and
h i s i n q u i r y , b u t t h e m a jo r it y of them atte mpt t o overcome some of t h e wider
i s s u e connected with th e whole concept of approach both t o t h e game i t s e l f ,
t h e f a c i l i t i e s and am endities f o r s p e c t a t o r s and ways of improving t h e general
atmosphere of s p o r t i n g a c t i v i t i e s .

In r e s p e c t of t h e "Sa fety Team" or "Advisory Group" as i t i s termed in th e
f i n a l r e p o r t , Lord J u s t i c e Taylor made s p e c i f i c r e f e r e n c e t o what he saw as
being i t s s p e c i f i c duty.

Quote - Paragraph 15.3

      "I r e p e a t my recommendation t h a t t h e Advisory Group's terms of r e f e r e n c e
       should encompass a l l m a tt e rs concerned with crowd s a f e t y and should
       r e q u i r e r e g u l a r v i s i t s t o th e ground and a tt e n d a n c e a t matches. There
       should be a chairman from t h e loc al a u t h o r i t y , and an e f f e c t i v e
       pr o c e d u r e . R eso lu tio ns should be recorded and r e g u l a r w r i t t e n r e p o r t s
       should be r e q u i r e d f o r c o n s i d e r a t i o n by t h e l o c a l a u t h o r i t y . "
    * P r i o r t o t h e H ill sb oro ug h tr a g e d y i t i s f a i r t o say t h i s was th e p o l i c y being                    -
      o pe ra te d by t h e v a ri o u s S a fe ty Teams.

       The e v e n t s of H il ls b o r o u g h , however, have prompted a g r e a t e r awareness f o r a l l
       t h e d i s c i p l i n e s concerned, being aware of t h e i r own r o l e and i t s r e l a t i o n s h i p
       with i t s p a r t n e r s - p a r t i c u l a r l y t h e emergency s e r v i c e s .

       On t h i s b a s i s r e g u l a r l i a i s o n meetings a r e held t o e s t a b l i s h more e f f e c t i v e
       c o - o p e r a t i o n f o r coping with p o t e n t i a l d i f f i c u l t i e s , t o p i n p o i n t a r e a s of
       c onc er n, and t h e t a k i n g of e f f e c t i v e measures as a c o r p o r a t e body t o overcome
       them.

       During Performance i n s p e c t i o n s by t h e S a fe ty Teams a t a l l de si g n a te d grounds
       a r e a l s o c a r r i e d o u t t o monitor pro gr ess and a l s o en su re t h a t terms and
       c o n d i t i o n s of S a fe ty C e r t i f i c a t e s a r e being complied w it h .

       The r o l e of t h e F i r e S e rv ic e as p a r t of t h e S a fe ty Team i s t o ensu re t h a t a l l
       m a t t e r s r e l a t i n g t o F i r e P r e c a u ti o n s and F i r e S a fe ty a r e p r o p e r l y d e a l t w it h .

       The wealth of knowledge and e xp er ien ce of t h e F i r e S e r v ic e when d e a l i n g with
       emergency e v a c u a ti o n pro c e du re s, t h e need f o r , and t h e p ro v i s i o n of adequate
       emergency e x i t r o u t e s i s of paramount importance when d e a l i n g with t h e l a r g e
       numbers of people who a t t e n d Sp or ts Grounds.

^      These measures in v o lv e a f u l l i n s p e c t i o n o f . a p a r t i c u l a r s t a d i a and. i n c l u d e
       S p e c t a t o r s Stands, T e r r a c e s , Refreshment Bar Areas and t h e v a ri o u s b u i l d i n g s
       such as Su pp or ter s Club and ground maintenance S t o r e s e t c , whether t h e p u b li c
       have a cc e ss t o them or n o t. Advice i s given and recommendations of
       r e q u ir e m e nt s made t o reduce or remove any p o t e n t i a l f i r e r i s k .

      Another r o l e i s t h e e f f e c t i v e p r e - p l a n n i n g and arrangements made f o r d e a l i n g
      with a l l ty p e s of i n c i d e n t l i k e l y to occur - whether i t i s f i r e r e l a t e d or
      not .

      Contingency Plans pre pared c o n t a i n d e t a i l s of t h e f o l l o w i n g : -

       1    Approach Routes and Access Roads

      2     Access Routes i n s i d e t h e ground

      3     Water S upp li es f o r f i r e f i g h t i n g

      4     The i n i t i a l F i r e S e r v ic e res ponse in terms of manpower                      and a p p lia nc e ^

      5     Deployment of a d d i t i o n a l re s o u r c e s i f a prolonged i n c i d e n t

      6     Rendezvous p o i n t s f o r su p p o rti n g a p p l i a n c e s

      7     Contact p o i n t s f o r l i a i s o n with o t h e r emergency s e r v i c e s

      8     C o n s t r u c t i o n d e t a i l s of t h e s t a d i a

      9     Any e x t e r n a l i n d u s t r i a l or o t h e r ha zards c l o s e t o t h e ground.

      Another a r e a where t h e F i r e S e rv ic e has an imp or tan t r o l e t o play i s in t h e
      area of e du ca ti o n and t r a i n i n g .



                                                                    - 5 -
                                                                                                                          v>


S t a f f employed by Fo o tb a ll and Rugby Clubs need t o be p r o p e rl y educated in t h e
r e c o g n i t i o n of danger a r e a s and mindful of th e need f o r v i g i l e n c e t o remove
any l i k e l y cause of f i r e such as accumulated r u b b i s h , waste m a t e r i a l s e t c .
Stewards a l s o r e q u i r e t r a i n i n g in t h e i r d u t i e s and how t o deal with evacu at ion
of s p e c t a t o r s and t h e use of f i r e f i g h t i n g equipment.

The F i r e S e r v ic e i s of c o u rs e th e b e s t q u a l i f i e d to c a r r y out t h i s t r a i n i n g
and t a k e s a p o s i t i v e s te p in o f f e r i n g t h i s s e r v i c e t o any club or o r g a n i s a t i o n
who r e q u i r e i t or t a k e s t e p s t o achi eve i t .




                                                       - 6 -
                                       TOWARDS 2000

                     A consultation between local authorities and
                   football authorities following the Taylor Report


                                 Delegates List

 Mark Bursnell                               ADC
Dennis Artess                                ADC
 Councillor I Nash                           Blaenau Gwent
 Mr D Nash, Director of Leisure              Blaenay Gwent
 Philippe Agret                              AFP
 Councillor C B Watson                       Babergh DC
kAndrew Benstead, Divisional EHO             London Borough of Barnet
 Jonathan Cox, Architect                     London Borough of Barnet
 Mr F Coldrick, Senior Environmental         Birmingham City Council
  Health Officer (Health & Safety)
 Mr A Tolley, Licensing Officer               Birmingham City Council
 Councillor Peter Finch                       Bolton MBC
 John Pimblett, Asst. Head of                 Bolton MBC
  Building Control
 Mr G A Galilee, Asst. Director of            London Borough of Brent
  Law and Admim.
 Mr J Shaughnessy, Principal Inspector        London Borough of Brent
  Entertainments Licensing,
  Safety at Sports Grounds
 Mr M Gent, Principal Solicitor               Bury MBC
 Mrs S Tonge, Licensing Officer               Bury MBC
 Councillor D Helliwell                       Calderdale MBC
 Mr Sharpies, Director of Leisure             Cambridge DC
 Mr Paul Sheehan, Director, Leisure           Calderdale MBC
  Services
 Mr J B Ackerley, Principal Building          Chester City Council
  Control Officer
 Mr G Cass, Borough Recreation &              Chesterfield BC
  Leisure Officer
 Councillor T Hawkins                         Chesterfield BC
David Giles, Chief Building                   Coventry City Council
  Surveyor
 Sue Elly, Solicitor                          Coventry City Council
Mr J R Nelson, Chief Surveyor                 London Borough of Croydon
  Building Control
Mr B Hand-Davis, Licensing Consultant        London Borough of Croydon
Councillor A Grimson                         Doncaster MBC
Mr D Ochiltree                               London Borough of Enfield
Brian Curtis, Assistant Borough              London Borough of Enfield
  Environmental Health Officer
Sheila Spiers                                FSA
Chris Wright                                 FSA
Chris Whalley                                Football League
Councillor G Gill, Leader                    Gateshead MBC
 P Barnes                                    GJW Government Relations
Mr G Sansom, Asst Borough Planning           London Borough of Greenwich
  Officer Building Control

Mr T England, Senior Trading                  London Borough of Greenwich
 Standards Officer
Mr J Rosseck, Asst District Surveyor          London Borough of Hackney
Bas Williams, Community Football
 Development Officer                  London Borough of Hammersmith & Fulham
Bill Myers, Director of               London Borough of Hammersmith & Fulham
  Environmental Services
Phil Baxter, Asst Director of         London Borough of Hammersmith & Fulham
  Environmental Services
Councillor ?                          London Borough of Hammersmith & Fulham
Mr Henric Thompson, Senior Planning   London Borough of Haringey
  Officer
Mr N C Stanley, Entertainments        London Borough of Hillingdon
  Licensing Officer
Mr P Rogerson, Licensing Officer      London Borough of Hillingdon


                                                                         •
Mr A M Phillips, Chief Building       London Borough of Hounslow
Surveyor
Mr M J Carver, Senior Licensing       London Borough of Hounslow
 Officer
Councillor J Marshall                 Hove BC
Mr D Fisher, Director of Leisure      Hove BC
 Services
Mike Jenkins, Senior Licensing
 Officer                              London Borough of Islington
Mr J D Hehir, Chief Executive         Ipswich Borough Cuncil
Mr D Smith, Chief Building Control    Ipswich Borough Council             ^
 Officer
Mr G Weaver, Building Control Dept    London Borough of Islington
Divisional Officer D Coward           London Fire & Civil Defence Authority
Dep Asst Ch Officer White             London Fire & Civil Defence Authority
?                                     Kings Lynn Borough Council

Mr J Hughes, Chief Building           Knowsley MBC
 Control Officer
Neil Usher, National Youth Officer    Labour Party Head Office
Mr J R Partington, Principal Health   Lancashire County Council
 and Safety Manager
Mr P Tucker, Chief Building Control   Leicester City Council
 Officer
Mr M Bird, Principal Sport &
 Recreation Officer                   Leicester City Council
Bill Gabbett, Borough Environmental   London Borough of Lewisham
 Health & Consumer Services Officer
Kathy Sparks, Head of Environmental
 Health (Commercial)                  London Borough of Lewisham
Councillor Harry Chase                Liverpool City Council
Thomas Smith, Research Officer        Liverpool City Council
Councillor Neil Warren                Manchester City Council
Rodney Burrows, Architect             Manchester City Council
David Mills, Senior Divisional        Greater Manchester Fire & Civil Defence
 Officer                               Authority
David Wheatley, Divisional Officer    Greater Manchester Fire & Civil Defence
                                       Authority
Mr G Waller                           Mansfield DC
Divisional Officer Finnigan, Fire     Merseyside Fire & Civil Defence Authority
 Safety/Ops
Divisional Officer Killoran, Fire     Merseyside Fire & Civil Defence Authority
 Safety/OPS
Robin S Pryke, Chief Surveyor         London Borough of Richmond-upon-Thames
 (Building Control)
Mr G S Rodgers, Asst City             Newcastle upon Tyne City Council
 Engineer
*Tony Tovell, Leisure & Community
  Service Department                       Norwich County Council
 Stewart H Bradshaw, Architectural         Northampton BC
  Division Manager
 Mr Noel Winter, Recreation Director       Nottingham City Council
 Councillor Mrs Crowe                      Nottingham City Council
 Mr Colin Smith, Chief Executive           Oldham MBC
 Councillor John Battye, Leader ,          Oldham MBC
 Councillor Hugh McDonald                  Oldham MBC
 Neil Simpson, Director Leisure Services   Oldham MBC
 Mr E Latham, Chief Planning Officer       London Borough of Richmond-upon-Thames
 Mr L M Handley, Chief Building Surveyor   London Borough of Richmond-upon-Thames
 Councillor R V Morrell                    Plymouth City Council
 Tony Kershaw                              NFFSC
Monica Hartland/Ian Todd                   NFFSC
 Councillor R Scott                        Plymouth City Council
 Mr C Shepley, City Planning Officer       Plymouth City Council
 Mr R Burroughs, Chief Executive's Dept    Plymouth City Council
 Mr R S Le Pla, Chief Executive's Dept     Rochdale MBC
 Councillor Jack Carr                      Rotherham MBC
 Mr R M Chapman, Asst Director, Dept       Rotherham MBC
  of Environmental Health
 Roy Sharpe, Director of Technical         Rushmoor BC
  Services & Deputy Chief Executive
 Frank Woodall, Head of Leisure            Rushmoor BC
 John Maiden, Co-ordinator                 SAFE
 Terry Densham, Consultant                 SAFE
 Richard Parkins                           London Borough of Southwark
 Councillor C Swindell                     South Yorkshire Police Authority

Mr S Walker, Deputy Clerk                  South Yorkshire Police Authority
 to Police Authority
John Williams, Director                    Sir Norman Chester Centre
Adrian Goldberg                            Sir Norman Chester Centre
Barry Grimway, Deputy Chief Building       Southend Borough Council
 Control
Mr M Pregnall, Group Planner               Southend Borough Council
Councillor H S Salt                        South Yorkshire Fire & Civil Defence
                                            Authority
ACO Alan Seaman                            South Yorkshire Fire & Civil Defence
                                            Authority
Division Officer Ryder                     South Yorkshire Fire & Civil Defence
                                            Authority

Councillor F B White                       South Yorkshire Fire & Civil Defence
                                            Authority
Donald Cameron, Principal Environmental    Stockport MBC
 Health Officer

Ron Goldman, Chief Building Control        Sunderland MBC
 Officer
John Swan, Asst. Director ef----------     Sunderland MBC
 Administration
Mr G E Beales, Chief Leisure               Tamworth BC
 Services Officer
Mr R Welburn, Senior Asst. Leisure         Tamworth BC
 Services Officer
W J Derricot, Chief Licensing Officer      Sheffield MBC
Councillor ?                               Sheffield MBC
Mr E D O'Neill, Director of Personnel    Trafford MBC
 & Management Services
Mr A Roberts, Chief Building Surveyor    Trafford MBC
Divisional Officer Barry O'Donnell       Tyne & Wear Fire Brigade
Divisional Officer John Armstrong        Tyne & Wear Fire Brigade
Mr C R Adams, Senior Environmenal        Vale Royal Borough Council
 Health Officer
Mr B Bedford, Asst. Chief Building       Wakefield MBC
 Control Surveyor
Mr T Foers, Building Control Officer     Wakefield MBC
Keith Jackson, Chief Building Control    Walsall MBC
 Officer
Mr Clive Walsey, Chief Building          London Borough of Waltham Forest
 Control Surveyor

Mr Matthew Richards, Safety & Public     London Borough of Waltham Forest
 Protection
Mrs J M Stevenson, Development           Watford BC
 Control Officer
Dudley Swithers, Chief Building          Watford BC
 Control Officer
Ch Supt R A Mills, Uniform Operations    West Midlands Police
  (Football Strategy)
Ch Insp D R Morris, Uniform Operations   West Midlands Police
 (Football Strategy)
Ch Supt J E Ellis, Operations            West Yorkshire Police
 Division
Mike Tracey, Public Safety Liaison       West Yorkshire Police
 Officer

Ian Bell, Senior Building Control        Wirrall MBC
 Officer
Councillor Norman Davies, Leader         Wolverhampton   MBC
Councillor Roger Lawrence                Wolverhampton   MBC
Councillor J A Edwards                   West Midlands   Fire & Civil Defence
                                          Authority
Asst Chief Officer J Palmer              West Midlands   Fire & Civil Defence
                                          Authority
                            FOOTBALL LEAGUE CLUBS


Division One

John Beattie, Stadium Manager              Arsenal FC
Rodney Coulson, Structural Engineer        Arsenal FC
Janet Rainbow                              Chelsea FC
E J Stocker OBE - Director                 Coventry City
G P Hover - Secretary                      Coventry City
D Goodwin - Assistant Company
            Secretary                       Derby   County
C Tunnicliffe - Marketing Manager           Derby   County
Henry Richardson, Director                  Luton   Town
Bill Tomlins, General Manager/Secreytary    Luton   Town
            Secretary
R E Jones, Asst Secretary                   Liverpool FC
(Colin Sayer - Stadium Manager              Millwall)
(Rod Wilson - Consultant Engineer           Millwall)
K Smales, Director                          Nottingham Forest
J M Smith, Director                         1!         !!
R T Chase - Chairman                        Norwich City
L Blackburn - Company Secretary             Norwich City
Miss S F Marson, Secretary                  Queens Park Rangers
FRC Luff, Safety/Security/Supporter
 Liaison Officer                            Queens Park Rangers
B H D Hunt - Director                       Southampton
B P Truscott - Company Secretary            Southampton
Alec King, Commercial                       Sunderland FC
P R Barnes, Club Secretary                  Tottenham Hotspur
S Wood, Maintenance Manager                 Tottenham Hotspur
K T Addy, Vice-Chairman                     Sheffield Wednesday
E Barron, Director                          Sheffield Wednesday
D Barnard - Chief Executive                 Wimbledon
A Cook - Secretary                          Wimbledon


Division Two

Howell Williams, Club/Council               Bradford City
 Liaison Officer
R Pavey, Chief Executive                    Brighton & Hove Albion
A Muddyman, Director                        Fulham
Mrs Y Haines, Club Secretary                Fulham
Frank Broughton - Company Secretary         Hull City
Mr K Hanvey, Commercial Development
                   Executive                Huddersfield Town
D C Rose, Secretary                         Ipswich Town
R Scott, Stadium Manger                     Newcastle United
P D McGeough - Managing Director            Oxford United
M A Brown - Club Secretary                  Oxford United
P Bloom - Chairman                          Plymouth
R Burroughs - Director                      Plymouth
R I Stainton - General Manager              Portsmouth
A R Waterhouse - Company Secretary          Port Vale
D Capper, Company Secretary                 Sheffield United
B O'Callaghan, Community Officer            Stoke City
B Mee - Director                            Watford
Thomas Finn - Secretary                     West Ham United
I Sylvester, Asst Secretary                 Leicester City
Division Three

H J Westmancoat                       Birmingham City FC
G Warburton - Director                Bolton Wanderers
D McBain - Secretary                  Bolton Wanderers
K Loring - Chief Executive            Brentford
Mrs Gill Palin - Secretary            Crewe Alexandra
Mr D Farrall - Admin Manager          Crewe Alexandra
Mr K Hanvey, Commercial Development   Huddersfield Town
 Executive
F Clark - Managing Director           Leyton Orient
F Woolf - Commercial Manager          Leyton Orient

J A Brown - Director                  Mansfield Town
J D Eaton - Secretary                 Mansfield Town
D J Allen - Secretary                 Preston North End
Mr Hilton, Ground Safety Officer      Preston North End
Mr G Higham, Director                 Tranmere Rovers
B Blower - Chairman                   Walsall
D M Craig, Vice-Chairman              York City
B Houghton, Director                  York City
S Sanders, Commercial Manger          Swansea City


Division Four

M A Holladay - Secretary/
               Director               Exeter City
P Carter - Company Secretary/
               Director               Exeter City
G Gannon, Director                    Halifax Town
J C Thompson - Chairman and MD        Maidstone United
W T Williams - Secretary/
               General Manager        Maidstone United
M Lewis - Vice-Chairman               Peterborough United
A V Blades - Secretary                Peterborough United
L Hilton, Director                    Rochdale
R Brierly, Director                   Rochdale
V T Jobson - Chairman                 Southend United
J W Adams - Vice-Chairman             Southend United
W P Griffith - Chairman               Wrexham
D L Rhodes - Managing Director        Wrexham
