                                                                                                               5 0 MAr 1991 I s i l Q
                                                                                                                         m/
                                                                                                                  a .m r        S d (/^


                                                                        c                                               (in '
                                                        ??B A \>
                                                         0 lJfi/DEV


                           THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED
                                              Chief Executive: A. Sandford

       City House, Maid Marian Way, Nottingham, NGi 6BH. Telephone 0602 508720. Facsimile 0602 508621



AS/996                                                                                                     29th May 1991

Mr. Peter Bolton, Home Office
Mr. John de Quidt, F.L.A.
Mr. Peter Lee, Football Trust




Dear
         'A
As promised at our meeting last week, I now enclose draft of a
letter which we are minded to send out to all clubs.

Could I please have your comments on this draft as soon as
possible.

Yours sincerely,




ARTHUR Sftf^DFORD
Chief Executive



                                              A
                                              Av          k ^ - t                                                   ^



                                             if                               *     U
                                             **                                         ^             d-r - r r

                                                                                            /? m           *




                      Registered Office: Lytham St. Annes, Lancs., FY8 IJG   Registered in England 80612
21/05- 91   16111     © 0253   724786              FOOTBALL LEAGUE        NOTTINGHAM OFFIC      0002




    TO M i CUES



     Dear Secretary,



                     Police Charges, the all-seater requirement and the ETA




            On 23rd Stay X f o n e r i s l to yon a cq?y o f th e GOTermanfs re p ly to th e BMe
               C o m itte e R eso rt.   X w o ld now U te to d ra» yoor a tte n tio n to th e
     following items s-


      a) Police Charges

            You will have noted that, regrettably, the Govenment has concluded that
      full econanic costs should be charged for police officers deployed on tb»
      private property of football clubs. A copy of the Hone Office circular to local
      police authorities is enclosed for infoimtioa. The Football League will nc*r be
      entering into discussions with the Home Office on how the calculations for
      charging are to be done.

             The Hone Secretary has said that in view of tte difficulties that may be
       faced by sons dubs, particularly those feeing considerable costs in ireeting
       lord Justice Taylor's other recommendations, he is advising police authorities
       to exercise their discretion and phase in full charges over a period of up to
       five years ^here appropriate. You m y consider it advisable fear dubs under the
24/05 '91   16:42   © 0 2 5 3 724788          FOOTBALL LEAGUE   NOTTINGHAM OFFIC        El 003




                                          -   2   -




   same police authority to join together and meet the local police authority on
   this natter.


        One way of mitigating the effects of increased policing costs is through a
   greater use of competent, well-trained stewards. The Football League, in
   conjunction with the Association of Chief Police Officers, is putting together a
   detailed information pack for dubs an the recruitment and training of stewards
   and this will be sent to clubs as soon as possible.

   b) All-seater requirement


       You will have noted that the Government has said it is not convinced that
  any re-examinaticn of its proposals on all-seated accommodation is necessary.
  Arthur Sandford recently met With representatives of the wnma Office, the
  Department of Education and Science (Sport and Recreation Division), the
  Football licensing Authority and the Football Trust. At this meeting the Hrma
  Office representative made it clear that the Government was most disappointed
  toth. the lack of progress being madfi by dubs on the iinpleffientation of the all—
  seater proposals and had noted that, at a number of dubs, standing repa^-i-h-Foo
  had increased rather than decreased.


       The Government is dearly now looking for dubs to have made progress in
  line with the Taylor timetable, which recommended that standing capacities
  should be reduced annually by 20% (Full Member Clubs) or 10% (Associate Member
  Clubs) with effect from August 1990. This would mean that standing capacities
  should have reduced by either 40% or 20% by the start of next season.


       The 20% or 10% annual reductions remain as a guideline, but the Government
  is encouraging the FEA to look at dub's proposals and the progress they are
  making.
4/05 '91         16:42   © 0 2 5 3 724786                       FOOTBALL LEAGUE   NOTTINGHAM OFFIC   0004




                                                              - 3 -




  c)   3!he Football Licencing- Anfchorxty


       The nine inspectors employed by tile ETA complete their training at the
  of this month- It is envisaged that each inspector will be al1nre+w?
  approximately ten clubs. Clubs can expect an early visit frcm their allotted
  inspector. Each inspector will be experienced in one particular discipline i.e.
  police, fixe, engineering etc., but he will be able to call upon a colleague
  with experience in a particular field if that is required.

         The Football League is informed that the Government will hr-?ng into force
  Section 13 of the Football Spectators Act on 3rd June. This outlines the ELA's
  powers in relation to safety at football grounds, one of which is that the ETA
  nay, by notice in writing to the local authority concerned, require the local
  authority to include in any safety certificate such terns and conditions as are
  specified in the notice. If the FLA is not satisfied with the progress being
  made by a dub, it may seek to exercise its powers, which could resdt in the

       SvtJ i,                      i? cl/W u f ^   <s**-       uU


         Section 13 of the Football Spectators Act is enclosed for information.


       A letter frcsn the EEA will be issued to clubs through the Football League
  in due course, in confirmation of the points mentioned above.


       If you have any queries on the contents of this letter, please do not
  hesitate to contact this office.



                                                    Yours sincerely,



                                                            J.D. Dent,
                                                            SECRETARY.
