                                             9                            )
                                                        BRITISH EMBASSY
                                                        BONN


                                                        18 April 1989



J Wake Esq
CRD
£6o




'bc*~C"J<^AV t


                    ..V
HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL STADIUM TRAGEDY:         FRG REACTIONS


The Hillsborough Football Stadium disaster has inevitably
beertprominently reported in the German media.  Few German
newspapers appear on Sundays, but the electronic media
covered events in depth the day after the tragedy.  The
disaster was headline news in almost all newspapers on Monday
17 April, factual reporting being accompanied by editorials.


2      Most editorials were quick to point out that violent fans
were not to blame for the disaster and speculatedthat the
Police had made mistakes.              Several papers suggested that
Britain had not learned from the experience of previous
tragedies.             One newspaper observed that football clubs spent
m i l l i o n s on players b u t hardly any money on safety of
spectators.              Sheffield, it said, was only the last link i n a
whole chain of shocking incidents in English football.               It
was incomprehensible why the English had not drawn adequate
c o n c l u s i o n s - from these bitter experiences.   Elsewhere there
was speculation in the immediate aftermath about tne ruture
of football in England.              One newspaper suggested that English
t e a m s would face; continued isolation.          But the link between
the tragedy and England's re-entry into European club
 competition has not been a strong theme here.
        ■■      '          - ■- .  -   ■            -           "

                                              /2
                                               , ; :v
           <• ■ -    ‘    ,   i
                            -   2   -




                         ^ gemeine Zeitun9 (FAZ), Germany's
leading daily, comments m an aggressive editorial on the
      5       of or9anisation which led to the tragedy.
Irl
^   «
            fs f9ain POint up the role of the Police.   There
         factual reports of the statement made by Mr Hurd in
brouoh?Sn °f ,Commons* And the human side of the tragedy is
brought out m many papers.

      ■csroC^




C p Burrows



cc P Palmer Esq Consular Dept, FCO

  M Ryder Esq, WED, FCO
