\                        CONFIDENTIAL
                                                                   Q -4 -



                                                   P3/169


                                                            0604
                                !■">}    s-.-O S       -




                         Cc     ('i I W)r             —



26 January 1990


                                j\yY /      ^   V
D Mould Esq
The Home Office
G2 Division
Room 926
Queen Ann,p's Gate
London SW1H 9AT




HOME SECRETARY’S STATEMENT ON TAYLOR REPORT



I attach Q and A briefing on the national membership scheme for
the Home Secretary to use on Monday.     I understand that agreement
has not yet been reached on the wording of the statement itself.
That might have implications for one or two of the answers here
but I hope that they will not need to be changed much, if at all.




NEIL KINGHAN
Sport and Recreation Division
                             CONFIDENTIAL




NATIONAL MEMBERSHIP SCHEME
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS

1.   Isn’t this a major climb down by the Government?

No. The Government has always said that it would take account of
Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations, i have mad© it clear that
the Government does not intend to repeal Part I of the Football
Spectators Act. The effect of today's decision is not to proceed
immediately to establish the Football Membership Authority with
the remit to draw up a scheme. The Government will explore Lord
Justice Taylor's concerns about the operation of a membership
scheme in the light of advice from the specialist      companies who
responded to the ITT on 19 January.


2.   If you accept Taylor,     why not repeal? If you don’t accept
Taylor, why not press on?
Taylor has put forward an extensive package of measures which
could have the effect of reducing hooliganism: all-seater stadia;
better facilities; a better example set by players; restrictions
on ticket touts; three new criminal offences; an extension of
attendance orders; and tagging. They should be given a fair
trail. But experience shows that hooliganism is not easily
defeated. The national membership scheme is a further potentially
powerful    wp.anon against  the   hooligans  and  I t: would ~5e
irrespons-ihlp. to abandon it before experience of theefFecx or
the Taylor proposals has shown that it is not needed.


3.   Didn’t Taylor show that the scheme was inoperable?

All he had to go on was an invitation to tender issued by the
consultants employed by the football authorities. We shall need
to discuss his technical worries with specialist companies who
submitted tenders in response to the invitation, but - although
this is to some extent breaking new ground - our own computer
experts saw no reason to believe that a workable system could not
be devised.


4.   Didn't Taylor say that even if the technology worked,     the
scheme would not deter hooligans?
The arguments in the report on this point were all put forward
-and answered - in the course of the Parliamentary debates. The
Government does not accept that a national membership scheme
would not deter hooligans. However, Taylor has put forward an
alternative approach, and it must be given a fair trial.
                            CONFIDENTIAL


5.   How do you propose to carry the scheme forward?

The Department of the Environment will initiate discussions with
the football authorities and the specialist companies as soon as
possible with a view to devising an effective and tested
membership scheme in the event that Lord Justice Taylor’s package
of measures do not achieve his objectives Of "minimising or
eliminating hooliganism" and it should then prove necessary to
introduce one.


6.   Doesn't   Lord   Justice   Taylor   say   that   testing   would   be
dangerous?
It is the view of the Government the football authorities and
the specialist companies that such testing can be carried out
safely.


7.   Will the Government reimburse the football authorities for
the costs already incurred?

No.  The   football  authorities and  the  Department  of  the
Environment agreed to fund the development work jointly. The
football authorities were fully aware that Lord Justice Taylor
was due to report.

[Department of the Environment paid £132,225 - half the costs up
to Royal Assent]


8.   Surely the measures proposed by Lord Justice Taylor axe
either already in effect or previously ruled out as unworkable?
Some elements of Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations are
already in force. The Government hopes to build on these in
carrying forward the full package. We share Lord Justice Taylor's
view that a move towards all-seater stadia and better discipline
among players would contribute substantially to a reduction in
football hooliganism.
