K H .3.3/FSARESP.DP
                                         cc   Mr Miles
                                              Mr Webb
                                              Mr de Quidt, FLA
Mr K Hopley
F8 Division

FOOTBALL SPECTATORS ACT 1989: RESPONSIBILITIES FOLLOWING CROWD
BEHAVIOURAL INCIDENTS AT FOOTBALL MATCHES
Events at the Birmingham City vs Stoke City football match on
Saturday 29 February when so called Birmingham supporters invaded
the pitch, attacked the referee and taunted Stoke supporters has
brought to light a potential problem for the future once the
licensing procedures are activated.

2.   Although cases such as this have been unusual in recent
seasons, it is clear that the potential for trouble remains.    I
am sure few, if any, really believed the problem had been totally
eradicated - just as similar incidents are likely to take place
in future. The hope is that such episodes will be rare and not
too serious.

3.   However, in this case the FA have moved with commendable
speed to bring charges of misconduct against Birmingham City.
They have the right and duty to do this. We do not know what the
outcome of these charges will be but had the licensing procedures
been in operation (as they should be next season) questions are
raised about where the responsibilities of the FA overlap with
those of the FLA.

4.   Possible 'punishments' which the FA could impose on errant
clubs such as Birmingham are wide ranging. Likely results in the
present case range from a hefty fine, playing behind closed doors
or closing part of the ground, among other measures.      None of:
these are likely to cause difficulty for the FLA. But it is also
possible that in pursuing this or similar cases the FA might
insist on steps such as replacing perimeter fencing which would
be something about which the FLA would have strong views. There
is also a risk that in future, clubs who have similar problems
will claim they are liable to repeat punishment; by the FA on
charges they bring, and by the FLA acting with local safety
advisory groups who will review the measures at the ground.

5.   I am raising this matter now mainly to place it on record
as something to be considered for the (near) future.     I regret
that having so raised it I do not have a solution. But as this
is something in which you have a leading interest I would welcome
your views and any ideas you - or Mr de Quidt to whom I am
copying this note - may have about how it might be taken forward.




                                          D A PETERS
                                          G2 Division

                                          3 March 1992

 hcc   Mr Baden, SARD/d ES
