PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL                                          FILE s 36
  - T ie   rr
                                                                           *




 H/                 C y w Q~t\-



 Hr


 Hr
                        /
PERMANENT SECRETARIES 1 MEETING! w sons son f   ,<t   a /v   ,l   1989



I attach, for your information,     an extract from the last meeting
of Permanent Secretaries.




MARGHERITA CASEY
APS/Permanent Secretary
N16/12
Ext 3600

Date   *        ^            r\J-
      HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

 Sir Clive Whitmore gave an account of events following the
disaster    at the Hillsborough         football  stadium the previous
Saturday.     Lord Justice Taylor, the judge who had been appointed
to conduct an inquiry into the events at Hillsborough and to make
recommendations, had visited the ground the previous day.        He had
indicated an intention to complete an interim report by the end
of June     or early July making          recommendations  for physical
measures to be taken at football grounds, so that football clubs
        h r        ? 6! e b e fore the start of the following season.
Although Lord Justice Taylor was clearly willing to conduct his
               urgently as possible, it would remain to be seen
whether    it would be possible to adhere to           this very tiaht
timetable.     Lord Justice Taylor envisaged that his enquiry would
be completed, and a full report made, within nine to twelve
months.    The impact which the Hillsborough disaster, and the
         6 e    4.       Jus!:ice Taylor's report, would have on the
Football Spectators' Bill was to be considered at a meeting
between the Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for the
Environment later that day, and at Cabinet the following day.
There was considerable Parliamentary pressure to postpone or
abandon the Football Spectators' Bill.

in a brief discussion,    it was noted that there were very
considerable number of witnesses - both football supporters and

police officers - from whom statements would need to be taken
before Lord Justice Taylor could conclusively establish wha t had
happened.    However,  in the case of Mr Justice Popplewell's
enquiry into the Bradford fire,     an interim report had been
published within about a month which had identified one or two
key initial conclusions, and it might be possible to do the same
in the case of the Hillsborough disaster.
