                                                                From: D B W ebb
                                                                      SARD

                                                                Extn:   6084
          G>(X^ —                ^
                                                                Copy: PS/Mr Sproat
                                                                      PS/Mr Phillips
              O ^ ck ^. \               V ^                           M r Ramsay
                                                                      Ms MacLean
              VsKV x^vwm^                                             M r Jones
                                                                      M r Newsom

                                                                Date: 5 September 1994



I.      Miss Stewart,

        Secretary o f State,



HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM                      DISASTER:           CORRESPONDENCE                   FROM
LIVERPOOL C IT Y C O U N C IL


Issue

 I.     On 28 June, M r Peter Bounds, the Chief Executive o f Liverpool C ity Council, w rote to
the Home Secretary (flag A) asking him to meet a cross party delegation o f Councillors and
Liverpool MPs who are pressing fo r a fu rth e r Inquiry into the Hillsborough Stadium disaster
following an edition o f 'The C ook Report'. M r Bounds' le tte r and the reply sent by the Home
Secretary's Private Secretary (flag B) have been passed to D NH to consider.



Background

2.      As you know, the Hillsborough Stadium disaster on 15 A pril 1989 resulted in the deaths
o f 96 Liverpool supporters and over 400 injuries. Since then, fo u r investigations have taken
place in o rde r to establish the causes and cover all the relevant issues:

        (a)     the form al Inquiry by Lord Justice Taylor into the causes o f the disaster;

        (b)     the Coroners' inquest on the deaths;

        (c)     an investigation by W est Midlands Police Force w ith a view to discovering
                 w hether the disaster resulted from , o r was exacerbated by criminal activity on
                 the part o f any individual;
        (d)     an investigation by the Police Complaints A uthority into Police behaviour on the
                day.

3.     However, there have been a number o f attempts in the High C o u rt by relatives o f the
deceased to re-open various aspects of the Inquiry. All have been unsuccessful, on the grounds
that no fresh evidence has been forthcoming.

4.     M r Bounds' letter has been prompted by an edition of 'The Cook Report', broadcast in
June, which alleged that the tim e o f death fixed by the C oroner was wrong, and that some
witness statements were altered under police pressure to conform to the agreed tim e o f death.



5.       A t flag C is copy of the Home Office submission to Ministers, which sets out the
background in full (and also deals w ith representations from Joe Benton MP on behalf o f one of
the Hillsborough families, which also followed the 'C ook Report' allegations). You w ill see from
paragraphs 8 and 9 that Liverpool C ity Council has already sought to reopen the Coroners'
inquest. However, the A ttorney General has informed the Council that there is no basis fo r a
fu rth e r application to the High C ou rt fo r this. A copy o f the A ttorney General's reply to M r
Bounds is attached at flag D.

6.      It now appears that Liverpool C ity Council wishes to seek a further public enquiry. Since
the safety o f sports grounds legislation is now the responsibility o f this Department, it falls to you
to decide w hether o r not to grant this request.



Recommendation

7.     W e recommend that you do not agree to a fu rth e r public enquiry. The terms of
reference given to Lord Justice Taylor were 'to inquire into the events at Sheffield Wednesday
Football Ground on 15 A pril 1989 and to make recommendations about the needs o f crowd
control and safety at sports events'. The matters raised in the 'C ook Report' and subsequently
by Liverpool C ity Council relate to the Coroners' Inquest. You may consider that since this
aspect has been covered fully in the Home Office le tte r and the A ttorney General's response,
there are no grounds fo r a meeting w ith Liverpool C ity Council o r fo r a further publice inquiry.
A draft reply which you may wish to send to M r Bounds is attached.
D B WEBB
P Bounds Esq
Chief Executive
The C ity o f Liverpool
PO Box 88
Municipal Buildings
Dale Street
Liverpool
L69 2DH                                                                           September 1994




As you know, a copy o f your le tte r of 28 June to the Home Secretary, and M r Hudson's reply

o f 25 July have been sent to me in view o f my Department's responsibility fo r safety o f sports

grounds matters.



I can w ell understand your concern. The whole Government was greatly saddened by the

tragedy at Hillsborough. This is why we have tried to ensure that the circumstances which

caused it should be fully and openly investigated. A t least fo u r investigations o f the events have

been undertaken to ensure that all the relevant issues were properly covered.



The firs t of these was, of course, the formal inquiry by Lord Justice Taylor, which was

commissioned by the Home Secretary on the second day after the disaster. The Taylor Inquiry

involved some 440 officers from the W est Midlands Police Force. They to o k some 3,776

statements as well as using video films from three separate sources which provided, in all, some

71 hours o f further material. This vast store o f evidence was carefully sifted, and I think it is fair

to say that Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report gives a very clear picture o f events on the day.



The inquest into the deaths at Hillsborough constituted a second inquiry into these events. The

inquiry to o k over 100 days to examine all the material facts, and to determine the identities of

the deceased and how, when and where they met th e ir deaths.



In a th ird inquiry, which followed up th e ir w o rk fo r Lord Justice Taylor, the W est Midlands
Police Force conducted a fu rth e r major investigation w ith a view to discovering w hether the

disaster resulted from , o r was made worse by, criminal activity on the part o f any indiviadual.

The D ire cto r o f Public Prosecutions concluded that the results did not indicate that anyone

should be made the subject o f criminal proceedings.



The fourth investigation covered complaints which were made regarding Police behaviour. This

investigation involved the taking o f a further 5,341 statements as well as the scrutiny o f all the

material which had previously been examined. It was supervised throughout by the Police

Complaints A uthority. The A uthority subsequently announced that it was satisfied that the

inquiry had been properly and thoroughly conducted.



I understand that you have already approached the A ttorney General following the 'C ook

Report', since the programme contained serious allegations about the conduct o f the Coroner's

Inquest. I also understand that the A ttorney General has made it clear that he would consider

a renewed application fo r a fu rth e r investigation by the C oroner only if this was supported by

significant cogent and fresh evidence in proper form . However, the A ttorney General is not

satisfied that the material presented to the C ity o f Liverpool Council as described in paragraph

A of the minutes constitutes such fresh evidence.



Taking account o f all the previous enquiries, and o f the response you have already received

from the A ttorney General, I do not consider that there is any action which I can properly take

in this matter, and consequently I do not think a meeting would serve any useful purpose.
STEPHEN DORRELL
