                      HOUSE OF COMMONS
                          L O N D O N "SWIAOAA




All- Pa rt y Football Committee.


Evidence to the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry.

The terms o-f re-ference o-f the Inquiry led by the Rt Hon Lord
Justice Taylor are as -follows:
’To inquire into the events at She-f-field Wednesday -football
ground on the 15th April 1989, and to make recommendations
about the needs o-f crowd control and sa-fety at sports
g r o u n d s ’.



Background.

The All-Party Football Committee brings together me mbers o-f
both the House o-f Commons and the House o-f Lords to discuss
issues associated with the game. The aim o-f the Committee is
to support the interests o-f the game whenever it is apparant
that legislators can be o-f assistance to the sport. Over- 120
M P ’s and Lords are now members.


The Committee decided to submit evidence on the second part
o-f the terms o-f re-ference o-f the Hillsborough Stadium
Disaster Inquiry; Committee members who were present at the
roatch on Apri 1 15th have already given their speci-f ic
evidence.



Evidence and views have been submitted -from all parties and
■from both Houses. The evidence -falls into two major areas:
crowd control and sa-fety. Each will be considered seperately,
although they do, o-f course, overlap considerably.


This Report is the unanimous view o-f the Committee.
1. CROWD CONTROL.


1.1  Tick et checks. Supp or te rs should be ’-filtered’ at some
distance -from the ground. For major matches tickets should be
checked in the streets surrounding the ground to -filter out
ticketles s supporters and help prevent turnstile congestion.
All tickets should have a clear map o-f the ground and its
approaches printed on the back.


1.2  Signs. A visually common system o-f signs should be
introduced to all grounds .(and to approach roads) to aid away
support er s in particular and to highlight emergency exits.


1.3  Police training. Police O-f-ficers involved in crowd
control at -football should undergo speci-fic training related
to crowd behaviour at large sporting events, particularly
when new o-f-ficers are assigned to a -football ground. More
sensitive training is needed -for senior o-f-ficers, especially
in the use o-f modern crowd control technology.


1.4  Match O-f-ficial training. Referees and linesmen who
control Football League or major Cup matches should be
trained in ’e v e n t ’ control as well as ’g a m e ’ control.
National guidlines on their co-ordination and interaction
with the Police should be introduced.


1.5  Use o-f the media. The Football Authorities, individual
Football Clubs and the police should work closely with the
local me dia be-fore important matches, particularly in
discouraging ticketless supporters -from travelling.


1.6  Ticket touts. Their operations destroy the aim o-f an
all-ticket ma tc h and they encourage ticketless supporters to
travel to matches in the knowledge that they may be able to
buy a ticket, at whatever price, in order to see the game.
Consideration o-f the activities o-f touts is needed; we hope
the Inquiry will address this problem.

1.7   Supporters* knowledge. Football supporters
repr es en ta ti ve s should be involved in the planning o-f major
match es and should have on input to the ’Local P l a n ’ -for each
ground which co-ordinates Club, Police and Local Authority
act ions.


1.8   Stewarding. More supporters should be encouraged and
indeed employed to steward at matches and to act as stewards
when supporters travel to away games. Regional training
courses are needed -for stewards, where they can learn to work
with the Police in crowd management, along nationally agreed
gui delines.
1.9  S u p p o r t e r s ’ code o-f conduct. A series o-f recomendations
to supporters on their actions and behaviour from their own
representatives should regularly appear in match programmes.


1.10  Away travel.  Detailed maps o-f routes to away games
should appear in programmes, together with speci-fic advice to
supporters not to travel without a ticket.


1.11   Travel by train.    More and more supporters now travel
by car. Train transport to the nearest local station to the
ground should once again be promoted -for speci-fic matches,
perhaps in conjunction with cheaper match tickets. Many
people will still travel by car: proper, signposted parking
■facilit-ies are essential, with an emphasis on out-o-f-town
park and ride schemes.


1.12   C losed-c ircui t screening. The use o-f live large-screen
closed-circuit screening o-f matches at the ground o-f the away
team should be encouraged to prevent ticketless supporters
•from travelling.


1.13   Late arrivals.  Incentives are needed to encourage
supporters to arrive early and avoid turnstile congestion.
Ideas include appropriate pre-match entertainmentand
activities, cheaper prices or -free programmes -for all those
in the ground by 2.15pm and access to the best standing areas
•for the early arrivals alone.


1.14  Improved -facilities. New and improved -facilities,
particularly toilets and re-freshments, are needed to
encourage supporters to arrive earlier.


1.15  Alcohol. It is recognised that the in-fluence o-f alcohol
is a material -factor in crowd control at -football matches. A
thorough review of the sale o-f alcohol is needed, especially
near and on the way to grounds.


1.16   Tannoys. Tannoy messages should be able to be heard at
every point o-f the ground and outside the turnstiles. The
tannoy system should also be capable o-f broadcasting to
speci-fic parts o-f the ground alone and should be used more
widely to con ve y in-formation to the crowd. A national
standard is needed which also takes into account the needs o-f
the su rrounding community.


1.17  Sunday matches. Major games, such as semi-finals,
played on a Sunday, with live television coverage, would ease
the pressure -for tickets.
1.18      Family initiatives. New ’-family’ areas and extensions
to existing ones, creche -facilities at the ground, ’Junior
o n l y ’ seats or terraces and -financial schemes aimed at
families could attract more people to the game in sa-fety.


1.19  New stadia. Major new national out-o-f-town stadia are
needed -for important ma tches and other sports events. Clubs
re-developing their grounds should be encouraged to
appropriate   sites with room -for parking and  space around
the stadium.
2. SAFETY.


2.1   All-seated grounds. The trend should be towards
all-seater stadia. Terraces, however, are not inherently
dange ro us and an all-seater ’s o l u t i o n ’ is not relevant to
many smaller clubs. The First Division clubs should move
rapidly to change the 2:1 standing/seated ratio.


2 .2     Fences. Where possible, -fences should be removed. All
-Fences in -front o-f seats, -family enclosures, junior areas and
disabled -facilities should be removed. Elsewhere, -fences in
■front o-f terraces should ctal lapse/open -fully in an emergency
or should be low enough to act as a deterant, not a barrier.
Access should be possible to the pitch in an emergency. The
provisions o-f the Sa-fety o-f Sports Grounds Act should be
reviewed. The Football Authorities should make clear whether
a result will stand i-f a match is abandoned due to a ’pitch
i n v a s i o n ’.


2.3      Sa-fety checks. Immediate checks on ground sa-fety,
dangerous design -features and obstacles around grounds are
n e e d e d . In particular, the potential deathtraps caused by
tunnels, o-f which Wembley Park tube station is an example,
should be redesigned.


2.4   Turnstiles. Turnstile entrances should be linked to
particular sections o-f the ground where practicable so that
moni toring o-f crowd density is possible.


2.5  Pens. Terrace supporters should not be seperated by
dangerous high -fencing into pens -from which there is no
escape.


2.6  Venues. The semi--finals o-f major cup competitions should
be played at Wembley until suitable capacity is available in
other grounds.


2*7  First Aid. First aid -facilities should be mandatory.
Doctors should be on hand to treat     crowd injuries as well as
those o-f players and should be kept in permanent touch with
ground o-f-ficials through the use o-f modern communications.
Rescue packs -from Local Health Authorities should be on hand.
Rooms within the ground should be designated -for emergency
use.


2.8  Insurance cover. All venues and spectators should be
covered by insurance so that relatives and survivors do not
need to rely on charity in the wake o-f a disaster.
2.9  Tickets. The ticket allocation -for important matches
must re-flect the average home gates o-f the teams involved.


2.10  Closed-circuit television cameras. Such cameras should
be capable o-f viewing the build-up o-f supporters outside
turnstiles, in streets around the ground and even on major
road approaches.


2.11   Sa-fety 0-f-ficer. Every Club should have a designated
sa-fety o-f-ficer responsible -for the well-being o-f spectators
and the state o-f the ground. The o-f-ficer should liaise with
similar postholder in the local Police.
3. OTHER RELATED ISSUES.


3.1  Finance. Improvements in sa-fety and crowd control will
be expensive. An argent re-assessment o-f -finance -for -football
is overdue and account must be taken o-f clubs where urgent
work needs to be done. A genuine debate is needed on how to
re-circulate the money generated by the -football pools
industry within the game -for the benefit o-f the game. In this
context the debate should centre around an enlarged role for
the Football Trust or the suggestions o-f the 1978 Rothschild
Commission Report.


3.2   Community involvement. Existing schemes based upon
Football League Clubs to involve the community and make
exten si ve use o-f ground -facilities. 93% o-f the schemes
initiated by the Professional Footballers Association have
already proved to reduce arrest figures to below average
levels. A comprehensive guide to best practice in this field
is needed.


3.3     Identity cards. Hooliganism cannot be ignored. The
attempts made to combat the potential problem, in particular
fences and ticketing, may in themselves have contributed to
the disaster. The views of the Committee with regard to the
Football Spectators Bill are on the record. This report is
designed to be constructive and in this context the Committee
has felt for many years that a genuine club based membership
scheme which involves supporters and gives them real
benefits, is the way forward. With regard to     identity cards,
the Committee has in the past suggested an away supporter
scheme whereby all those travelling to matches have to be
mem b ers of their own club.
