PS/Secretary of State


LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S INQUIRY AND THE FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL


I understand that the Home Secretary told Cabinet this morning
that he expected to receive the interim report of Lord Justice
Taylor's Inquiry into the Hillsborough disaster next week, (95
Liverpool supporters were killed at the FA Cup Semi-Final between
Liverpool and Nottingham Forest). Taylor was asked "to inquire
into the events at Sheffield Wednesday Football Ground on 15
April 1989 and to make recommendations about the needs of crowd
control and safety at sports grounds".

The Home Office expects to receive the interim report on Monday
or Tuesday and aims to publish it next Friday, 4 August. I
understand that a Ministerial meeting to discuss the Government's
response to the interim report is being set up for Wednesday
afternoon, 2 August.

We do not know what the interim report will say but we understand
that its subject matter is likely to concern what happened at
Hillsborough and the steps which football clubs should take
quickly to reduce the risk of another such disaster. It is very
unlikely that the interim report will comment on the national
membership scheme proposed in the Football Spectators Bill. A
note on the Bill is attached.

If the subject matter of Taylor's interim report is as expected,
it will be primarily for the Home Secretary, as responsible
Minister for both the police and the Safety of Sports Grounds
Act. The Secretary of State for Scotland is also involved because
the Safety of Sports Grounds Act applies in Scotland; (the
Football Spectators Bill does not). The Home Secretary may have
to consider issuing immediate guidance to local authorities about
the safety certificates they issue for football grounds.

Our advice will be that this Department should stay out of any
public arguments following publication of the report, but it may
be impossible to do so entirely, since we are seen as the
"sponsoring Department for football". I am afraid that it is
difficult to give any estimate of what the implications might be
for football clubs in the absence of any clear indications of
what Taylor's recommendations will be. But if he were to
recommend structural changes to terracing at football grounds,
for example, or significant reductions in crowd densities to be
achieved before the beginning of next season, on 19 August, the
report would certainly be controversial.

I understand that Mr Moynihan has been invited to the Home
Secretary's meeting on 2 August. Subject to his views, I would
not have thought that it was essential that the Secretary of
State should also go, especially since he will be out of the
country by the time the report is published. I will let you have
a further note as soon as we have seen the report.




NEIL KINGHAN
SARD


27 July 1989


cc:    PS/Mr Moynihan
       PS/Sir T Heiser
       Mr Owen
       Miss Caines
       Mr McDonald
       Mr Lee
       Mr Newsom (o/r)
FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL


1. The Bill is designed to deal with football hooliganism in this
country and abroad. Part I provides a statutory framework for a
national membership scheme for spectators at designated football
matches in England and Wales. Part II empowers the courts to
impose restriction orders on convicted offenders preventing them
from travelling to selected matches abroad involving English (or
Welsh) teams.

2. The Bill was introduced in the Lords in January. It was about
to receive its Third Reading in the Lords when the Hillsborough
disaster happened on 15 April; it was then delayed for 2 months.
Commons Second Reading 27 June (majority 78; 15 Conservatives
voted against). Committee began 4 July and was completed today,
27 July, following a guillotine. The remaining stages will be in
the spillover. The Bill now allows for two Parliamentary debates
after the final report of Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry on
Hillsborough has been received (expected in December) before the
membership scheme itself is implemented. Since Hillsborough, we
have also added new powers to the Bill in relation to safety and
increased seating at football grounds.

3. The membership scheme will be prepared and implemented by the
Football Membership Authority (FMA) (made up largely by the
Football Association and the Football League, in consultation
with the Secretary of State). The earliest likely date for
implementation of the scheme is the middle of the 1990/91 season.
The FMA will be a private company paid for by football. The Bill
also provides for a new NDPB, the Football Licensing Authority to
monitor the scheme and (subject to Taylor's final report) to
oversee local authorities' performance under the Safety of Sports
Grounds Act. This authority will be paid for partly by football
clubs, partly by the Exchequer - total cost £500,000-£750,000 a
year.
