            HOME OFFICE
            Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H9AT

                                      Direct line 071-273     31 3 3
                                     Switchboard 071-273 3000


        A Baden Esq
        SARD C                                             Your reference
        Department of National Heritage                                     FEP/92 35/48/44
        Room 3.63                                          O ur reference
        Sanctuary Buildings                                                 19 May 1992
        Great Smith Street                                 Date
        LONDON    SW1P 3BT




        DRAFT ANNOUNCEMENT ON REVIEW OF ALL-SEATING POLICY

        Thank you for faxing me yesterday, the revised version of the
        draft announcement.  I have several comments as follows:-


              (i) Third paragraph, first sentence, the word 'however'
                  seems out of place in its present position and
                  possibly  superfluous.     Also,  I think    the word
                  'reconsider' might replace 'review' although it is not
                  really important.

             (ii) Regardless of my suggested changes at (i) above, this
                  third paragraph of the announcement now suggests that
                  the review will only consider the case for changing
                  the all-seater policy for Second Division clubs with
                  very small attendances, rather than presenting the
                  review as a fresh look at whether there are any
                  circumstances in which standing accommodation can be
                  retained at these grounds.      This signals a very
                  different approach to the treatment of clubs in
                  Division Two than the initial draft.   I felt the 4th
                  paragraph of the original draft answer was stronger.

            (iii) Notwithstanding my preference for the earlier form of
                  words, I would suggest that in any case the second
                  sentence of the third paragraph of the redraft should
                  be changed.    It is highly unlikely that a solution
                  will be found which does not create any anomalies.
                  Were the Minister to provide the answer as presently
                  drafted he will lay himself open to criticism when he
                  is unable to deliver. Although you intend all-seating
                  to be a firm requirement for Premier Division clubs -
                  and I endorse this, there will be some who will try to
                  develop the argument about the anomalies that may
                  exist in the Second Division to cover 1st/Premier
                  Division clubs such as Wimbledon (average attendance
                  last season of just under 7,000). I therefore suggest




S 363
     that the 2nd sentence (para     3   of   the   answer)   be
     replaced by the following

          "in doing so I will also consider the position of
          those 2nd Division clubs with very low average
          attendances."

(iv) As  to the review itself,      whatever options    are
     available, I would urge you to recommend something
     that is as simple and straightforward as possible even
     though some anomalies may be thrown up. You will find
     it will be easier to live with a simple formula with
     anomalies than it will be to live with a complicated
     one (which will still throw up anomalies).




                                   D A PETERS
                                   G2 Division
