                      LUTON TOWN FOOTBALL CLUB

                   CURRENT REDEVELOPMENT SITUATION


Luton Town's Kenilworth Road site was purchased by Luton Town
Council last year and the club must vacate the ground when its
lease runs out in six years time.

The club has already been refused permission to build a new
stadium at Sundon Springs to the North of the town, close to
junction 12 of the Ml, following objections from Bedfordshire
County Council.

The Club is currently investigating another site at Butterfield
Green to the east of Luton near Stopsley.

On May 15th a study document was considered by the council's
General Purpose Committee.  The document outlined proposals for
both a 10,000 seat stadium and a 25,000 seat building (which
Luton Town would prefer since they expect average crowds of
15,000). The land is owned by Luton Borough Council although the
development rights are owned by the Crown Estates. The ground
itself would be available for community use and the development
would include multi-use sports and leisure facilities.

A major complication is the proposal to construct a new North-
South By-Pass through Stopsley and a link road from Thame-
Stevenage. Any development in this area is effectively blighted
until a final decision on the road is made. The DTp programme
is for a study to be undertaken which should last for 18 months
from the spring of 1990.  The DTp forecast that work could
commence by the mid-1990s is thought to be too optimistic, given
the need for CPOs and Public Inquiries.

The Committee recommended to    Full Council, on July 10th, that:

     a.   the proposals are noted

     b.   no further action is taken until the routes   of the roads
          are determined

     c. If Luton Town and the Crown Estates wish to continue
        their study, the council, as land owners, will not object

However, Luton Town's proposal met strong opposition from the
public and from Councillors.

Thousands of Stopsley residents have signed a petition against
the proposals even before the plans were shown to councillors.

Labour councillors are urging the council to refuse the
application which they claim would "destroy Stopley". They
prefer a site close to the Ml, at junction 10. This site,
however, is unavailable since the owner, Nicholas Phillips, is
unwilling to sell on the grounds that such a development would
devalue his nearby "Capability Green" Business Park.

There was a feeling within the council that Luton Town should be
told straight away that the proposed site is unacceptable.
Following a packed and heated public meeting, council leader
Vivian Dunnington agreed to abide by the wishes of the residents.

The proposals were rejected at full council and the site at
Butterfield Green has been effectively ruled out.

In the long run, however, the council will have to work with
Luton Town FC to find an alternative site since they face the
prospect of evicting the town's First Division club when their
lease runs out.
