                                                     ^^
                                                      £s
                                                       2S
                                                        *’P
                                                                                                                             -h o




                                                                                                        '2 ~

                                                            0lrNVED ^
                                                                                                                                 L
                              THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED
 Lytham St. Annes, Lancashire, FY8 1JG. Telephone 0253 729421. Telex 67675. Fax 0253 724786.                        Secretary J. D. Dent


2/8205                                                                                                                   22nd July, 1991


R. Atkins, M.P.,                                                                                           [   d     r       e   /   K   ^   P
Minister for Sport,
Department of
Depaixmem: ox the
              tins Environment,
                   riiivj-LuiuiKiiL,                                                                                             ^
2, Marhsam Street,                                                                                       n   [ F __                  lv\
LONDON,                                                                                                  ^ 1
SW1P 3EB.


Dear Minister,


             Guide to the Recruitment, Training and Duties of Club Stewards


     It is my very great pleasure to forward 2 copies of the above Guide which
was sent to our Clubs today.

     Copies have also been sent to the Home Office, Association of Chief Police
Officers, Football Licensing Authority, Football Trust 1990 and other interested                                                                 t
parties.

     It is hoped that the recruitment and training of suitable stewards mil now
move forward with some urgency and that this will lead ultimately, to the
desired reduction in police manning levels within League grounds.


                                                         Yours sincerely,




Enclosure




              All correspondence to be addressed to The Secretary. Registered Office as above. Registered in England 80612

                                       ; . _______                  ... ■!            i .        ■: .
          - SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS -

                   A GUIDE TO THE

       APPOINTMENT, TRAINING, AND DUTIES

                OF FOOTBALL LEAGUE

                   CLUB STEWARDS




The Football League Limited              July,
I am sure all are aware of the need to improve and strengthen the
procedures for stewarding within grounds, none the least being the
serious financial implications for clubs if this is not carried out.

A number of clubs have already gone down this path with seme success
and, based on their experiences, and with the support of the
Association of Chief Police Officers, the Chief and Assistant Chief
Fire Officers1 Association, the St. John Ambulance Brigade and the
British Red Cross Society, this report has been compiled to assist
clubs in developing an efficient stewarding system.

Considerable time and effort has gone into producing this document
which is seen as the ideal for the future.

It is important that we approach this subject in a professional
manner if we are to make progress towards controlling our stadia and,
therefore I urge all clubs to adopt the principles laid down in this
report as soon as possible.




                                                        A. SANDF01
                                                    CHIEF EXECUTIVE
                                 C O N T E N T S


                                                   PARAGRAPH      PAGE


CHAPTER 1

    BACKGROUND                                      1 to 5          1


CHAPTER 2

    STADIUM MANAGEMENT                              6 to 12         2
    SAFETY OFFICER


CHAPTER 3

    STEWARDS                                       13 to 14         3

     3.1    RECRUITMENT                            15 to 19       3 &

     3.2    TRAINING                               20 to 30       4 &

     3.3    TRAINING MODULE                        31 to 32         5

            How training should be carried out          33          5
            Where training should take place            34          5
            Specialist training                         35          5
            Fire stewards                          36   to   38   5 &
            First aid                              39   to   41     6
            Setting up training programme               42          6
            Validation of training                 43   to   49     6
            On the job training                    50   to   51     7
            Refresher training                     52   to   53     7
            Suirmary                               54   to   55     7
            Alternative methods of training        56   to   58     7
            Reccnmendations                        59   to   61   7 &

     3.4    EQUIPMENT AND FACILITIES               62 to 63         8

            Accomodation                           64   to   66     8
            Clothing                               67   to   72     8
            Equipment                              73   to   74     9
            Recommendations                        75   to   78     9

    3.5     SUPERVISION                            79 to 81         9

            Recommendation                              82         10

    3.6     REMUNERATION                           83 to 85        10

            Recommendation                              86         10

    3.7     BRIEFINGS                              87 to 89        10

            Recommendation                              90         11
     3.8    MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS            91 to 93     11

            Reccnmendation                    94 to 95     11

     3.9    SAFETY AND STEWARDING STRUCTURE      96        11

     3.10 ALTERNATIVES TO CLUB STEWARDS       97 to 99     11 & 12


CHAPTER 4

     CONCLUSION                               100 to 102    13


SUMVJARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
                            A P P E N D I C E S


                                                   PARAGRAPH   PAGE
'A'   DUTIES OF SAFETY OFFICER -                                 2
      EXTRACT FROM GREEN GUIDE


'B'   RECRUITMENT OF STEWARDS -                       18         3
      SPECIMEN APPLICATION FORM


      STEWARDS TRAINING MODULE                         31        5


      TRAINING COURSE CERTIFICATE                     44         6


'E'   STEWARDS HANDBOOK (SPECIMEN)                    49         6


'F'   CARD SETTING OUT STEWARDS DUTIES                73         9
      AND EMERGENCY PROCEDURES (SPECIMEN)


      STEWARDS RECORD (SPECIMEN)                       92       11


'H'   SAFETY AND STEWARDING STRUCTURE (SPECIMEN)      96        11
                               C H A P T E R   1



                              BA C K G R O U N D




1- It had been recognised before the disaster at Hillsborough on 15th
   April I 1989, that there was a need to improve the quality and
   training of club stewards to canbat the rising costs of policing
   grounds. The events at Hillsborough and the subsequent Inquiry by
   The Rt. Hon. Lord Justice Taylor emphasised the inadequacies in the
   systems in being at grounds and highlighted the confusion that
   existed between the roles and responsibilities of stewards and police
   officers.

2.   In his Final Report, Lord Justice Taylor made a scathing attack on
     the standard and training of club stewards and one of his principle
     recarmendations states: "Clubs should recruit and retain sufficient
     competent stewards.    They should be fit, active and robust and
     preferably between the ages of 18 and 55 years. Clubs should ensure
     that stewards are fully trained, aware of their duties under Annex B
     of the Green Guide (now Annex E) and under the statement of intent
     and able to perform them."

3.   Since the publication of the Report in January, 1990, we have seen
     the publication of the new Hone Office Guide to Safety at Sports
     Grounds and the report of the Hone Affairs Ccnmittee on Policing
     Football Hooliganism and both spell out the need for good stadium
     management, which inevitably means efficient stewarding. The Hone
     Affairs Ccnmittee report does in fact recctrmend "higher profile
     stewarding supported by low profile policing as the way forward" and
     this is fully endorsed.

4.   It was appreciated that a number of clubs had already moved towards
     providing better well trained stewards at their grounds and indeed
     had seen a reduction in policing levels, but it was clear that what
     was required was an element of standardisation in the recruitment and
     training of stewards. This was raised with the representatives of
     the Association of Chief Police Officers at a liaison meeting in
     July, 1990, with the result that agreement was reached that they
     would assist in the training of club stewards, providing the right
     standard of person was recruited. The Association of Chief Police
     Officers ccnmissioned a report on how they saw the duties and
     training of club stewards and this was published in January, 1991.

5.   Since that date there has been close and continued dialogue with the
     representatives of the Association of Chief Police Officers on this
     subject and, drawing together the best practice and experience of
     clubs already operating effective stadia management and the advice
     and guidance received frcm the emergency services, this report has
     been drawn together to enable clubs to have a recognised standard to
     work to.



                                      -1-
                                CHAPTER



                         STADIUM       M A N A G E M E N T




 6.   The management of stadia on match days is undoubtedly the most
       important aspect of ensuring the safety and control of spectators.
      Without dedicated and effective management there is little'prospect
      of maintaining efficient stewarding.

 7.   The long term aim must be to have a person who can assume
      responsibility for the management of the stadium and all that
      entails.    In effect, a qualified stadium manager who would be
      assisted by a Safety Officer with sole responsibility for the safety
      of the stadium.

 8.   Unfortunately, the appointment of stadium managers appears sane way
      off and, therefore, it is considered that clubs should concentrate on
      appointing a Safety Officer.

 9. Experience indicates that the introduction of efficient and effective
     stewarding at grounds has co-incided with the appointment of a
     suitably qualified person to the post of Safety Officer or Consultant
    with total responsibility for the safety of the ground on match days.     APPENDIX A
    The Hone Office Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds published in
    December, 1990, clearly lays down the duties and responsibilities of
    a Safety Officer. The listrepresents a fearscme responsibility on
     the person holding the post.

10.   At the present time it would appear that Safety Officers/Consultants
      are, in the main, retired senior officers frcm one of the emergency
      services, presumably because there is a dearth of training currently
      available on this subject. Thus the persons appointed to these posts
      have considerable experience in the safety and control of crowds, but
      little experience in actual stadium management and this is a feature
      which is currently being researched.

11*   There is clearly a need for this type of training. Sunderland
      Polytechnic, in association with Sunderland A.F.C. and the local
      police, are currently examining the possibility of setting up a
      course on "Football Stadia Crowd Management" which they see as being
      aimed at senior stewards and above.         This is an interesting
      development and close contact will be maintained with the organisers
      as the scheme progresses.


      KBOCMMEMDfflFICN

12.   Clubs should take active steps to appoint a suitably qualified person
      to act as Safety Officer at their grounds on match days.




                                      -2-
                                  C H A P T E R   3



                                   STEWARDS




13.   Currently, the recruitment and training of club stewards has been 'ad
      hex:' in most cases, with the result being that they have lacked
      credibility despite the fact that many are well qualified and
      dedicated people.

14.   To assist clubs in achieving the desired standard, the following is a
      reccnmended structure for the recruitment, training, supervision and
      operation of stewards which, if followed, will be accepted by the
      local police and will be taken into account when they are deciding
      manning levels.


      3 *1   KBCKDTIMHST

15.          This is considered a crucial area.   The recormendation is that
             all stewards should be fit, active and robust and preferably
             between the ages of 18 and 55 years.       This would tend to
             suggest that stewards are only required to act as 'bouncers'
             but, clearly, stewards at football grounds perform a much more
             important role than this. They need to be very much more
             professional if they are to be responsible for the overall
             safety and control of spectators.

16.          Generally, stewards will be the first representatives of the
              club that spectators will meet and, most likely, the only ones,
              consequently it is suggested that ws should be looking beyond
              the wall built athlete and concentrate on recruiting the right
              person for the job.

17.          The standard of training envisaged and the responsible nature
              of the job not only emphasises ability but also mental
              capacity. Linked to this is the consideration that we should
              be looking to appoint more female stewards in view of the
              changing nature of support for the game with increased seating
             and the growth of family and junior clubs.

18.          It is recognised that, in sane areas, it may be difficult for
             clubs to attract suitable applicants, but it is hoped that with
              improved conditions and training, and a lift in the status of
             the steward, that the type of person we are looking for will
             cane forward. With this in mind, it is intended to place a
             suitably worded advert in a national newspaper inviting people
             interested to contact their local clubs. To enable the status
             and suitability of applicants to be assessed, a standard           APPENDIX B
             application form is being printed and supplies of this form
             will be sent to clubs in due course.



                                        -3-
REOMffiNDEPICN

Clubs should take urgent steps toward the recruitment of
suitably qualified persons to act as club stewards using the
criteria   laid down    and,   to ensure    an element of
standardisation, the standard application form to be used in
all cases.


TRAINING

It must be said at the outset that the responsibility for the
training of stewards rests with the club and it is for this
reason that the importance of appointing a Safety Officer is
stressed in Chapter 2, as he/she is seen as being the person to
oversee the training.

Agreement has been reached with the Association of Chief Police
Officers, the Chief and Assistant Chief Fire Officers, the St.
John Ambulance Brigade and the British Red Cross Society, that
their members will assist with the training where necessary.

It has been suggested that the training of stewards falls into
four modules:

(a)   Elements that are cannon to all crowd situations;
(b)   Elements cannon to a particular sport;
(c)   Local considerations, and
(d)   Special training for supervisors.

Each of these modules throws up aspects and areas of training
which will be discussed in detail later.

Stewards will generally fall into the following three
categories, although it is accepted that locally there could be
variations covering all three and it would be a matter for the
club to decide taking account of the circumstances prevailing
at their particular ground.


(a)   SAFETY STEWARDS

      With prime responsibility for the packing and monitoring
      of spectators on the terraces, pitch perimeter control,
      evacuation procedures, fire prevention and elementary
      first aid.


(b)   GROUND STEWARDS

      Responsible for turnstile security, organisation of
      queues, searching and general security in key areas, i.e.
      membership and family sections.
#
                 (c)   GENERAL STEWARDS

    27.                General duties with little or no responsibility, i.e.,
                       directing spectators, car paries, ticket entrances etc.

    28.         It was considered that there should be three seperate training
                modules for each of the categories, but it is felt that all
                stewards should start by receiving a basic level of training
                that would be cannon to all.

    29,         This would ensure that all stewards on duty would be fully
                aware of the responsibilities of the job and also would give
                supervisors a degree of flexibility.
    30.         Extra training will need to be given to those selected to
                perform duties as supervisors or safety stewards.


          3.3   TRAINING MODULE

    31.         The proposed      training   module   is   fully   explained   in   the   APPENDIX C
                Appendices.
    32,         It is accepted that local circumstances might demand variations
                to this but it is considered necessary for standardisation for
                the basic principle to be maintained.

                HOW TRAINING SHOULD BE CARRIED OUT
    33.         As previously mentioned, the running of the programme rests
                with the club Safety Officer or other representative of the
                club aided by the local police and fire service, a
                representative frcm the local authority and members of St. John
                Ambulance Brigade or British Red Cross.

                WHERE TRAINING SHOULD TAKE PLACE
    34.         It is considered that, wherever possible, training should take
                place at the ground.          This will not only minimise
                inconvenience to trainees but will also give an immediate
                identity with the club.

                SPECIALIST TRAINING
    35.         It is appreciated that seme clubs may wish to train stewards up
                to a higher standard to undertake specialist duties such as
                dedicated Fire Stewards and or First Aid Stewards.

                FIRE STEWARDS
    36,         The Chief and Assistant Chief Fire Officers Association have
                been consulted and they recommend an individual training
                programme, preferably at one of their training centres.
    37,         A list of the subject that would be covered in the programme              APPENDIX C
                are shown in the appendices.
    38.         The advice frcm the representatives of the Chief and Assistant


                                             -5-
      Chief Fire Officers Association is that clubs should send
      either the Safety Officer or the Chief Fire Steward on the
      course and he/she could then train the Fire Stewards as
      required.

      FIRST AID
39.   It is considered that clubs should be wary of attempting to
      train stewards as qualified 'First Aiders' on the basis that 'a
      little learning is a dangerous thing'.

40.   However, the St. John Ambulance Brigade and British Red Cross
      are perfectly willing to train stewards in basic first aid and
      suggest that the minimum would be a three hour session.

41*   No doubt many clubs will already have stewards in situ who are
      qualified to carry out these specialist duties and, it may be,
      that it would be better to follow this line than to undertake a
      specialist training programme.

      SETTING UP THE TRAINING PROGRAMME

42.   Club representatives organising the training should make
      contact with their local police commander, their local contact
      in the fire service and the local authority safety officer to
      agree the programme.

      VALIDATION OF TRAINING
43.   It is considered that the validation of the training will be a
      matter for the club in conjunction with the local police
      commander who will need to be satisfied that training has been
      carried out.

44.   Upon satisfactory completion of the approved training programme
       and a suitable period of 'on the job' training, it is            APFENDIX D
       considered that stewards should be given a signed certificate
       indicating this fact and that this should remain valid for
       three years.

45.   The certificates will be produced by the League office and will
       be sent to clubs immediately they are available.

46.   It is further recommended that, on successful completion of the
      training programme, stewards be issued with a handbook as their
      authority to act as a steward at the ground.

47.   To serve this purpose handbooks should be numbered and bear the
      stewards name and address.

48.   The type of information and advice that might be contained
      within the handbook is left to local discretion but, it is
      suggested that details of legislation affecting football
      grounds and standard ground regulations should be included.

49.   A specimen type handbook is shown in the appendices.              APPENDIX E




                                 -6-
 ON THE JOB TRAINING

There will need to be a period of 'on the job' training agreed
with the local police carrmander to ensure that stewards have
benefited frcm the training given.

The club Safety Officer and his supervisors will have prime
responsibility for this.

REFRESHER TRAINING

It is suggested that there needs to be at least two periods of
refresher training carried out during the season to ensure
standards are maintained.

We are currently examining the possibility of producing a
suitable Video that might be used both as an aid to refresher
training and also a briefing aid.

SUMMARY

There can be no suggestion that ws are training stewards to
carry out the duties of a police officer.          What we are
endeavouring to do is equip stewards to carry out the tasks
within grounds which, of necessity, do net require the expertise
of a police officer.

In this way it is hoped that the number of police officers
required to perform duties within grounds will be kept to the
absolute minimum.

ALTERNATIVE METHODS OF TRAINING

Alternatives to clubs training stewards themselves are either
the use of courses arranged by further education establishments
or to use an outside training agency, of which there are a
number.

In the first instance, it will be seme time before a suitable
course is in being at education establishments throughout the
country. As mentioned at paragraph 11, Sunderland Polytechnic
appear to be the forerunners in this area but they do not
expect to start the course until October, 1991.

The use of a suitable outside training agency is certainly an
option.    However, experience indicates that it vvould be
expensive and, at the present time, there is no guarantee that
the police would recognise the validity of this training when
considering the suitability of stewards.


RE0CHMEM3BTI0MS

Having examined the alternatives it is reccnmended that r?inh«
train their stewards in accordance with the suggested module,
as socn as practicable.
, Upon completion of approved training programme stewards should
  be issued with a handbook as their authority to act as a
  steward at that ground.

 Upon completion of an approved training programme and a
 suitable period of 'on the job' training, stewards should be
 given a signed certificate indicating this fact.

 EQUIPMENT AND ERCILITIES

 It is considered that if ws are to ask people to carry out this
 important task and, in doing so, professionalise the status of
 the club steward, then ws must provide the necessary equipment
 and facilities for them.

 A number of clubs have already made great efforts to do this
 and the following is drawn frcm the experiences and good
 practices of those clubs.

 ACCOMMODATION

 There needs to be a suitably sized briefing/rest room for
 stewards, with basic facilities for hanging inclement weather
 clothing and provision for making hot drinks.

 The roan should ideally contain a large scale map of the ground
 showing emergency points, telephones, etc, and a notice board
 to enable information to be disseminated.

 It is considered that the provision of such a rocm will not
 only improve the overall efficiency of the stewards, it will
 also give them an identity and status within the club
 structure.

 CLOTHING

 It is considered that the long term aim should be for all club
 stewards to have a standard pattern of clothing.

 The most popular appears to be a full length, waterproof,
 fluorescent jacket in a colour other than yellow to distinguish
 them frcm the police officers.

 The following universal colours should be adopted, red for
 safety stewards, orange for others, specialist first aid
 stewards to wear green and supervisors white.

 The jackets should be clearly marked showing the designation of
 the stewards, ie, exit, safety, fire stewards, etc., and should
 bear a number to identify the wearer.

. It is appreciated that clubs will already have stewards
  jackets/tabards which do not meet the recommended standard and
  would not wish to change until replacement was necessary.

 Arrangements have been made with the Football League Services
 Division to assist clubs with the supply of the recommended
 standard jacket.
             EQUIPMENT

73.          Before commencing duty all stewards should be supplied with a
              card outlining the responsibilities of the duty to which they
              have been allocated. This is cannon practice in most clubs but
              it is considered that procedure should be standardised.
              Ideally the card, etc., should be laminated and include details   APPENDIX F
              of ground emergency procedures, telephone positions and exits
              in their area and full details of their duty.

74.          There should be a dedicated personal radio system for use by
              the Safety Officer and his supervisors to enable contact to be
             maintained with the ground control room and with the stewards
              in all areas of the ground.


             RBCXMEMPaTICNS

75.         Hie long term aim should be for clubs to provide a suitable
             briefing/ rest room for stewards, this would improve their
             status and efficiency.

76.         Stevards should be provided with a full length, waterproof
             fluorescent jacket which shows their respective duty and has an
             identity number thereon.

77.         Jackets to be red for    safety stewards and orange for others,
             dedicated First Aid stewards should wear green and supervisors
             white.

78.         Each stevrard should be in possession of a card or booklet which
             clearly outlines his/her areas of responsibility and the ground
             emergency procedures, before ccnmencing duty.

      3.5   SUPERVISION

79.         Good supervision will be the key element to the success of any
             stewarding system and acceptance by the emergency services and
             local authorities will largely depend on the efficiency of
             supervisors. Consideration will, therefore, need to be given
             to the provision of additional training for supervisory staff
             to prepare them for their supervisory and leadership role in
             the event of an emergency.

80.         It is difficult to lay down a standard pattern as to how this
             might be carried out and it may be that, in the ultimate, an
             outside agency might need to be used.          However, it is
             considered that in the immediate, Safety Officers with the aid
             of the local police commander could devise a short programme of
             training.

81.         In the ultimate, the selection of supervisors could undoubtedly
             rest on the skills already possessed by particular stewards.




                                       -9-
REXXM4ENDATI0N

It is reccmnended that Safety Officers liaise with the local
police ccnmander with a view to setting up a short training
programne for supervisory staff.


REMUNERATION

The major criticism of the current systems has been the level
of pay/expenses given to stewards, resulting in a lowering of
the standard of person applying for the job.

Appreciating the fact that the amount paid to an individual
does not guarantee quality, it does have an effect on the
standard of person who is likely to be attracted than has
hitherto been the case. If we are to expect stewards to carry
out theresponsibilities already mentioned, then it is      not
unreasonable for them to expect just reward for their labours.
What needs to be appreciated is that clubs are currently
paying,   on average £90 for each policeofficer presently
engaged    on duties within their grounds which could be
effectively carried out by well trained stewards.

It would not be possible to lay down a hard and fast minimum or
maximum payment for stewards as this will ultimately be
governed by local circumstances. However, in those areas where
stewarding has already been improved and there has been a
reduction in police manning levels, the amount paid to stewards
has varied between £20/30 per match. Clubs have also provided
loyalty bonuses to encourage regular attendance.


RBCCMMENDATICW

It is reccmnended that the amount paid to stewards be
commensurate with the standard of applicant required and the
responsibilities of the position.


BRIEFINGS

All stewards should attend       a   pre-match   briefing   before
commencing duty at the ground.

Ideally, there should be present at the briefing a senior
police officer to observe what is being said and to add to it
if considered necessary. Normally, the Safety Officer should
be present at the police pre-match briefing.

It is also considered that there should be a system of de­
briefing stewards when the ground is cleared. This could be
carried out by supervisors when they dismiss the stewards under
their control.
                RBCOMENDATICN

    90.         There should be pre-match briefing of all stewards and a system
                 of de-briefing before they leave the ground.


          3*8   maintenance   OF RECORDS

    91.         It is suggested that there should be an ongoing record kept of
                 the attendances of stewards at matches, dates of training
                 sessions and exercises attended, as this could be the subject
                 of examination by authorised inspectors.

    92.         A guide as to the type of information that might be recorded is    APPENDIX G
                 shown in the appendices.

    93.         Records should also be kept of emergency exercises carried out.
                 The Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds suggests that they should
                 take place before the start of, and mid way through, the
                 season.


                RBCXMflBiDftTICN

    94.         Clubs should adopt a system of recording details of attendance
                 of individual stewards at matches, training sessions and
                 emergency exercises.

    95.         A special record should be kept of the carrying out of
                 emergency exercises.


          3.9   SAFETY AND STEWARDING STRUCTURE

    96.         Appreciating the fact that all clubs will have their own
                structure and plan for their individual stadium, reproduced in     APPENDIX H
                the appendices is a specimen structure that has been used with
                success at a League ground, for information only.


          3.10 ALTERNATIVES TO C U B STEWARDS

    97.         It would appear that there are just two alternatives to the use
                of fully trained and efficient club stewards.

                (a)   To continue to use police officers in place of stewards.
                (b)   To use stewards frcm a private security agency.

    9®'         In relation to (a), this is not seen as a viable proposition
                not merely because of the cost involved but, more importantly,
                the fact that there is pressure on the police to withdraw as
                far as possible fran private duty at football grounds.

    99.         The use of stewards fran private agencies is already the case
                in many grounds and experience suggests that they have been
                largely successful.     However, there is still grave doubt
                regarding the standard of recruitment and the training that has


                                           -11-
#
been given to the stewards supplied and there is always the
lack of consistency in the stewards attending.       The use of
private agencies can not be discounted if clubs feel this is
the best way forward. The agency used, however, would need to
satisfy that the stewards they were providing were up to the
recruiting standards and training criteria laid down, as it
vrould be unlikely that the match commander, or indeed the
Safety Officer would accept their competence and reliability.
                              C HA P T E R    4



                             CONC L O S I O N




     CONCLUSION

100. ?he initial overall costs of introducing a new stewarding structure
     in accordance with the reccmmendations could outweigh any immediate
     saving on policing costs and, with this in mind, a copy of this
     report has been forwarded to The Football Trust 1990 for grant
     consideration.

101. ^s previously mentioned this report has been compiled after much
     discussion with representatives frcm clubs already operating
     effective stewarding schemes, senior police and fire officers and
     experienced club secretaries and there is a wealth of material held
     at The Football League Conmunity Affairs office, which might assist
     clubs if required.

102. Should further information or advice be required contact should be
     made with either Jack Crawford or Chris Whalley at the Leaque
     offices.




                                   -13-
            SUMMARY      OF     REC O M M E N D A T IO N S



                                                PARAGRAPH    PAGE
SAFETY OFFICER

Clubs should take active steps to appoint           12         2
a suitably qualified person to act as Safety
Officer at their grounds on match days.


STEWARDS RECRUITMENT

Clubs should take urgent steps toward the           19         4
recruitment of suitably qualified persons
to act as club stewards using the criteria
laid down and, to ensure an element of
standardisation, the standard application
form to be used in all cases.

TRAINING

Having examined the alternatives it is              59         7
recommended that clubs train their stewards
in accordance with the suggested module, as
soon as practicable.

Upon completion of approved training                60         8
prograitme stewards should be issued with a
handbook as their authority to act as a
steward at that ground.

Upon completion of an approved training             61        8
programme and a suitable period of 'on
the job' training, stewards should be
given a signed certificate indicating
this fact.


EQUIPMENT

The long term aim should be for clubs to           75         9
provide a suitable briefing/rest room for
stewards, this would improve their status
and efficiency.

Stewards should be provided with a full            76         9
length, waterproof fluorescent jacket which
shows their respective duty and has an
identity number thereon.

Jackets to be red for safety stewards and          77
orange for others, dedicated First Aid
stewards should wear green and supervisors
white.
Each steward should be in possession of
card or booklet which clearly outlines
his/her areas of responsibility and the
ground emergency procedures, before
cctrmencing duty.


SUPERVISION

It is recommended that Safety Officers liaise
with the local police carcnander with a view to
setting up a short training programme for
supervisory staff.


REMUNERATION

It is recoirmended that the amount paid to
stewards be commensurate with the standard
of applicant required and the responsibilities
of the position.


BRIEFINGS

There should be pre-match briefing of all
stewards and a system of de-briefing before
they leave the ground.


RECORDS

Clubs should adopt a system of recording details
of attendance of individual stewards at matches,
training sessions and emergency exercises.

A special record should be kept of the carrying
out of emergency exercises.
A P P E ND I CE S
A
                                                                                                     APPENDIX A


 2. MANAGEMENT RESPONSIBILITY

 Effective ground management is an essential element in achieving safety. Management
 should constantly look to improve safety standards.

 General Duty
 2 8 . The responsibility for the safety of spectators at the ground lies at all times with the ground
 management ie those who stage the event and/or administer the ground. Local authority safety
 officers, police and fire officers will advise management on how to discharge this responsibility and,
 in certain circumstances, may require measures to be taken in order to achieve reasonable safety
 standards. This does not, however, exonerate the ground management from its responsibility for the
 safety of spectators.


 Safety Policy
2 9 . As part of the drive for success of the club, team or individual event, senior management,
directors and board members must devote time, effort and resources to safety management at the
ground, both in its day to day use or for any special event. There should be a written policy of safety
for spectators and employees covering the safety objectives and the means of achieving them. This
should be known to and understood by all staff and voluntary workers who may be involved in
ground operations. This policy should be kept under review by m anagem ent and revised as
necessary. Annex A summarises issues which should be addressed by the policy.

3 0 . The management should require regular, periodic reports on safety measures taken and on pro­
gress on those in hand. They should ensure that they are made aware of details of any minor incidents
(which might suggest underlying problems) and the action taken to rectify them. Such details should be
kept in written form and, together with the policy statement on safety, should be available for inspection.


Safety Officer
3 1 . There should be an appointed safety officer who should be of sufficient competence, status and
authority effectively to take responsibility for safety at the ground and be able to authorise and
supervise safety measures. The safety officer should be accountable to the most senior management
or Board of Directors to whom the right of direct access is essential.

3 2 . The safety officer or an appointed deputy should be in attendance at a central control point
when an event takes place. The sole duty of that person during the course of the event should be that
of safety, and he or she should be easily identifiable. All staff should know the location of the central
control point, who is in charge of safety on the day in question and the line of communication.

3 3 . A programme of checks, inspections, tests, training and remedial work should be drawn up so
as to eliminate or minimise the potential risks to spectators. The safety officer should be responsible
for ensuring that such inspections are carried out on all structures, installations and equipment so
that they are safe and fit for the purpose for which they were intended. The details of any remedial
work carried out including the dates of completion should be recorded. Adequate resources to carry
out these tasks should be made available.


Emergency Plan
3 4 . Plans should be made to deal with emergencies. Consultation between management, police,
fire and ambulance services should take place in order to produce an agreed plan of action, including
access for emergency vehicles, for all foreseeable incidents (see also paragraph 42 vi).



Staffing
3 5 . While the public are in the ground management should ensure that sufficient staff are on duty
to cover entrances, exits (including any emergency exits) and other strategic points or areas.
3 6 . Staff training, particularly for stewards, in carrying out both their normal duties and ensuring
that they are aware of their role in an emergency situation, should be given high priority. All staff
should be capable of undertaking the duties allocated to them. They should be informed in writing
w h at their duties are, how to effect them and from w hom to seek advice if in doubt. These
instructions should be available for inspection. The safety officer should also carry out active
supervision and organise emergency drills to maintain standards (see Chapter 16).


Restrictions
3 7 . Where restrictions on crowd numbers to parts of the ground are required for safety reasons
they must be imposed and enforced. Similarly, if part of the ground is required to be closed, this
must be done, and it must not be opened up for any reason unless measures have been taken
beforehand to remove the dangers which led to its closure in the first place and approval given by
the appropriate authority to re-open it.



Fire safety
3 8 . Management should ensure that structural fire protection of buildings is adequate, and that fire
warning systems are correctly installed and properly maintained in accordance with manufacturers'
instructions or British Standards. Suitable fire-fighting equipment must be provided and maintained
to the standards specified in this Guide (see Chapter 13).


First Aid Provision
3 9 . A properly equipped and staffed First Aid room and suitable medical facilities should be
provided in consultation with the local Health Authority's Chief Ambulance Officer (see Annex B).



Miscellaneous
4 0 . Where a capacity or near capacity crowd is expected for an event, admission should normally
be by ticket only.

4 1 . General repair and maintenance should be undertaken with spectator safety in mind; litter
should not be allowed to accumulate. Minor repairs should be quickly and properly carried out.



Summary of Management Responsibilities
42.   A summary of management responsibilities is contained below:-
       i.     Appoint a safety officer.
       ii.    Where required, apply for and ensure compliance with the terms and conditions of a
              safety certificate or other notice covering the safety at the ground.
       iii.   Draw up and keep up to date plans of the ground; maintain the general fabric of the
              ground, and arrange an annual detailed inspection.
       iv.    Arrange an annual inspection of all crush barriers, handrails/guard-rails and ensure a rep­
              resentative sample are tested, (keeping a record of those tested and results of the tests).
      v.      Maintain and test all electrical installations for emergency lighting, communications and
              fire warning/detection, and fire-fighting equipm ent in accordance with the relevant
              British Standards and Codes of Practice.
      vi.     Prepare in conjunction with the police, fire and ambulance services contingency plans,
              including arrangements for stopping or delaying an event, for:
              a.   various emergency situations including fire;
              b.   possible crowd disturbance;
              c.   coping with an exceptionally large number of spectators arriving at the ground; and
              d.   the failure of any detection, warning, lighting or communications system or other
                   equipment.
       vii.    Devise a clear system of communications inside and outside the ground (including direct
               communication with any police control within the ground).
       viii    Take necessary fire prevention and precautions measures.
       ix.     Consult the fire authority about emergency evacuation, fire risk and provision of fire­
               fighting equipment.
       x.      Consult the police, fire and ambulance services on access for emergency vehicles.
       xi.     Store safely and away from public areas any flammable materials and any accumulations
               of combustible waste which cannot be cleared from the ground before the next event.
       xii.    Provide first aid facilities and first aid staff.
       xiii.   Consult with the police to arrange adequate policing and police facilities and ensure that,
               where the police are to be present at the ground, there is a clear understanding of the
               division of duties and responsibility between them and the management.
       xiv     Recruit, train and deploy stewards and organise and carry out emergency evacuation
               drills using those staff.
       xv.     Staff exit gates at all times when the public are in the ground and ensure that such gates
               can be, and are, opened immediately from the inside in an emergency.
       xvi.    Ensure that all gangways and exit routes are unobstructed and capable of being used to
               their full capacity at all times when the public are in the ground.
       xvii. Provide directional flow, exit and emergency exit signs.
       xviii. Before each event:
               a. test the operation of exit doors and gates;
               b. test lighting, communications and fire warning/detection systems;
               c. check the ground for any accumulations of combustible litter, especially below stands
                  and in exit routes; and for any source of potential missiles;
               d. check security of any container used for storage of combustible material;
               e. check the operation of the turnstiles and metering system;
               f.   check that all entry/exit routes are clear of obstruction;
               g. ensure that there are sufficient stewards for the event and inform the police ground
                  commander before the ground is open to the public.
       xix.    After each event:
               a. carry out a general visual inspection for signs of damage;
               b. liaise with police so as to gain full benefit from any debriefing about crowd control.
       xx.     Keep records of:
               a. attendance figures;
               b. all inspections and tests, any defects noted and the remedial/other action taken;
               c. any accident or reported incident which might have led to an accident;
               d. staff training and emergency evacuation drills.
4 3 . The management should ensure that details of all consultations, arrangements, plans between
them and the police, fire and ambulance services are notified to the relevant local authority if there is
a safety certificate issued in respect of the ground or stand(s) within the ground.




                                                         11
B
                                                                                APPENDIX B




                                                                             w
                                                                          / OXFORD V
                                                                          1 UNITED A




^VDED                         THE FOOTBALL LEAGUE LIMITED

                      APPLICATION FOR POST OF CLUB STEWARD


 I wish to apply for the post of club steward at

 ......................................               Football Club


FULL NAME & ADDRESS                                        D.O.B.
(please print clearly)




              Post Code


OCCUPATION


HAVE YOU EVER BEEN EXCLUDED FROM A FOOTBALL                                   YES/NO
LEAGUE GROUND                                                 (Delete as applicable)


HAVE YOU BEEN CONVICTED OF A SERIOUS                                          YES/NO
CRIMINAL OFFENCE DURING THE PAST FIVE YEARS                   (Delete as applicable)


REFERraS;

Please provide the names and addresses of two people who would be prepared
to support your application, if requested

NAME                                           NAME

ADDRESS                                        ADDRESS

POST CODE                                      POST CODE


                                       Signed

                                       Date     .


FOR CUB USE

INTERVIEWED       /       /
                                      SIGNED
c
                                                                     APPENDIX G


                          RECOMMENDED TRAINING MODULE


PHASE I


MM:       TO FAMILIARISE POTENTIAL STEWARDS WITH CLUB ORGANISATION, GROUND
          STRUCTURE AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF A STEWARD



SUBJECT                       TIME                      PRESENTATION BY

Club Organisation Tour         45 Minutes               Club Director,
of Ground and Explanation                               Secretary,
of Ground Regulations                                   Safety Officer

An Insight Into                30 Minutes               Representative from
Safety Legislation.                                     Local Authority
{Safety at Sports Grounds                               Licensing Department
Act 1975 & Guide to Safety
at Sports Grounds)


Legal Responsibilities         30 Minutes               Representative from
(Citizens Power of                                      Local Police
Arrest, etc.)


The Duties of a Steward       1 Hour                    Club Safety Officer




NOTE:      IT IS EXPECTED THAT PRESENTERS WOULD WISH TO PROVIDE THEIR OWN
           LECTURE MATERIAL, ie VIDEO, HANDOUTS.
                                                                        APPENDIX C


                             recommended training module


PHASE I I


MM:         TO PREPARE STEWARDS FOR THE TASK OF ENSURING THAT THE GROUND IS A
            SAFE ENVIRONMENT FOR SPECTATORS AND TO ASSIST THE EMERGENCY SERVICES
            IN THE EVENT OF AN EMERGENCY



SUBJECT                           TIME                     PRESENTATION BY

Crowd Behaviour                   30 Minutes               Safety Officer &
(Social and Comnunication                                  Representative
Skills)                                                    Fran Local Police

Crowd Dynamics                    30 Minutes               Representative
(Densities, Stress,                                        frcm Local Police
Overcrowding)


Crowd Control Techniques          30 Minutes               Representative
(Searching, Cordons,                                       frcm Local Police
Ejections, etc.)


Major Incidents &                1 Hour                    Senior Police Officer
Emergency Procedures


Panel Discussion                 30 Minutes                Safety Offier
                                                           Senior Police Officer
                                                                     APPENDIX C


                          RECOMMENDED TRAINING MODULE


PHASE I I I


AIM:      TO FAMILIARISE STEWARDS IN BASIC FIRE PREVENTION AND FIRST AID



SUBJECT                         TIME                    PRESENTATION BY


Fire Prevention                 1 Hour                  Representative from
                                                        Fire Service


Introduction to Medical         1 Hour                  Club Crowd Control
and First Aid Provisions                                Doctor, Ambulance
(Not intended to be a                                   Officer, St. John
Training Session in First                               Ambulance or British
Aid)                                                    Red Cross
                                                        Representative


Tour of Ground                  1 Hour                  Safety Officer
to Familiarise Stewards
with Layout, Emergency
Exits and Ground
Searching Procedures
                                                             APPENDIX C


                       EEXXM4ENDEX) TRAINING MODULE


PHASE IV


AIM:   TO TEST AND VALIDATE THE TRAINING GIVEN AND ASSESS ABILITY OF
       STEWARDS


       It is considered that this is best carried out by supervisors in
       match day environment.

       This would be part of the ongoing "on the job" training that would
       be required and it is expected that it would take at least six
       matches before the ability of newly appointed stewards could be
       accurately assessed.
                                                         APPENDIX C


                 RECOMMENDED TRAINING M3DULE



TO PROVIDE SPECIALIST TRAINING FOR DEDICATED FIRE STEWARDS


It is recommended by the Chief and Assistant Chief Fire Officers
Association that dedicated Fire Stewards should be trained in the
following:


(i)    Fire Precautions

(ii)   Human Behaviour in Fire Situations

(iii) Management Responsibilities    Before the Event

(iv)   Management Responsibilities   During the Event

(v)    Staff Training
D
                                                                                                CERTIFICATE NO 00001




                              THE   FOOTBALL        LEAGUE        LIMITED




This is to certify that ...

completed a training course for FOOTBALL LEAGUE CLUB STEWARDS held at ..........

on ....................                                                                is new able to act as a

steward at the said club.




                                                                        SIGNED     .
                                                                                                 CHAIRMAN


                                          ■                                DATE             /          /
E
                                                                             APPENDIX E




            TABLE OF C O N T E N T S


SUBJECT                                                                   PAGE

Introduction      ......................................................     1

General Requirements                 ...................................     2

Communications             ............................................      2

Duties Before the
Commencement of an Event                         .......................     3

Duties During an Event                 .................................     5

Duties After an Event                ...................................     7

Emergency      Procedure             ...................................     7

Training   ...................................................              11

Ground Regulations              ........................................    12
                      INTRODUCTION


 It is the role of Stewards, in conjunction with Club Officials, other
 interested agencies and the Police, to ensure that members of the
 public have an enjoyable visit to Aston Villa Football Club. In order
 to achieve this, Stewards must perform five basic duties, which
 are:-

 1.   Directing members of the public who are entering or leaving
      the ground to help achieve an even flow of people in the
      viewing areas and ensure that no overcrowding occurs in a
      particular section of the Stadium.

 2.   Patrolling the ground to deal with any emergencies arising,
      knowing how to raise the alarm, use a fire extinguisher and
      administer First Aid where necessary.

3.    Manning entrances, exits and other strategic points, especially
      exit gates and doors which are not continuously open whilst
      the ground is in use.

4.    Assisting Police as appropriate to ensure the safety and
      control of all members of the public, before, during and after
      an event.

5.    Undertaking specific duties in the event of a major incident
      which might give rise to evacuation.

Stewards must have this Handbook in their possession whenever
they are on duty.
           GENERAL REQ UIREM ENTS

The General Safety Certificate issued to Aston Villa Football Club
under the Safety of Sports Grounds Act, 1975, requires that all
Stewards are:-

(a)   Fit and capable of carrying out their duties and aged 70 years
      or less.

(b)   Properly trained and instructed in accordance with a scheme
      approved by the Chief Fire Officer and Chief Constable.

(c)   Provided with written instructions approved by the Chief
      Constable and Local Authority as to their duties.


                 C O M M U N IC A T IO N S

Communications to the satisfaction of the Local Authority and
the Chief Constable shall be maintained at all times during an
event.

(a) Between the Chief Steward and all banks of turnstiles; and

(b) Between the Chief Steward and all entry and exit gates; and

(c) Between the Police Control Room and the Chief Steward and
    the first aid room; and

(d)   By Public Address System with an override facility to the
      Police Control Room.
The Chief Steward and the Senior Steward will always be available
on radio. The Senior Stewards shall patrol their areas regularly
to ensure that Stewards are correctly following their instructions,
and shall assist and liaise with the Police, Fire and Local Authority
representatives and the Chief Steward as and when required.

The Club shall ensure that six loud hailers in good working order
are kept readily available at the Stadium for use by Stewards or
Police Officers in directing or instructing spectators.

It is the responsibility of all Stewards to acquaint themselves with
the location of telephones which form the Club's internal network.



                 DUTIES
       BEFORE THE C O M M EN C EM EN T
              OF A N EVENT

1. All Stewards must report to their Senior Steward at the
    prescribed time before an event and shall be required to sign
    a log indicating their presence.

2.   The Stewards are the first line of enforcement of the Ground
      Regulations. They must be fully conversant with these
     Regulations (see page 12).


3.   All Stewards shall be issued with a Duty Sheet detailing their
     duties in the event of an emergency arising during an event.
     (These are issued on the day of each eventh
 (a)   All Stewards shall wear a tabard.

 (b) All Exit Gate Stewards shall wear a tabard displaying
     the number of the Exit Gate for which they are
     responsible — and that number must correspond with
     the exit numbers shown on the Fire Authority plans.

(c)    All Stewards in possession of a radio shall wear an arm­
       band.

The Stewards using radio equipment must make a test-call
to check that the equipment is in working order when it is
handed to them.

Exit Gate Stewards must have the relevant key in their
possession and should be fully instructed in its use. They will
be required to sign a document at the time of receiving their
key to signify their agreement to carry out their duties.

The Stewards designated to the Perimeter Emergency Exits
at the Holte End and Witton Road End shall be in possession
of wire cutters to use in the event of any emergency requiring
fencing to be cut away.

Upon taking up their position, Stewards must ascertain the
location of the nearest fire-fighting equipment and fire alarm
call-point, and ensure that emergency exit routes are
unobstructed. In the event of non-availability of fire-fighting
equipment or obstruction of exit routes, he must immediately
advise the Chief Steward or Senior Steward and any Police
 9.    All Stewards must be capable of dealing with any situation
       likely to arise, but on all such occasions must first contact
       the nearest Police Officer, the Chief Steward or Senior
       Steward.

 10. Any Steward noticing anything untoward, including any loose
     bricks, bars, spars, etc, which may be used as weapons, shall
     report the same to the Chief Steward or Senior Steward who
     shall arrange for its immediate removal and the submission
     of a written report to the Club.

11. Exit Gate Stewards must check the operation of the key when
    they reach their posts and report any defects to the Chief
    Steward or Senior Steward immediately.

12. All chains, padlocks or other locking devices used for securing
    exit doors/gates when persons are not present in the ground
    must be removed to a place agreed with the Chief Fire Officer
    and Chief Constable before the commencement of an event.


          D U TIE S DURING THE EVENT
1.    Stewards must remain at their designated point of duty at
      all times during the event and for at least 10 minutes after
      the end, or if persons are still present, until such time as there
      are none remaining in the ground.

      In particular, Exit Gate Stewards must remain at their
      designated gate at all times, and may only leave that position
      if they have handed their key to a relief Steward who must
      remain in that position during their absence.
Stewards posted to Perimeter Emergency Exits must also
remain at their designated gate and may only leave if relieved
by another Steward. A failure on the part of a Steward to
remain at his/her post during the period of duty shall render
that Steward liable to instant dismissal, and the Club could
be liable to prosecution under the Safety of Sports Grounds
Act 1975.

Stewards will ensure that no one is allowed to use the pitch
perimeter track before, during or after an event, except
authorised personnel who must be wearing a numbered
tabard. Television cameras and portable equipment shall be
restricted to the positions approved by the Local Authority,
and ancillary equipment thereto shall not be allowed to cause
obstruction. Stewards shall inform the Chief Steward or
Senior Steward in the event of any breaches of these
directions.

All Stewards should always be on the alert for possible
disorderly behaviour. Stewards are advised not to become
involved themselves in any fracas or fighting, but to advise
the nearest Police Officer or the Chief Steward or Senior
Steward immediately.

If the event is a football match, it is imperative to enforce
strict segregation of rival supporters inside and outside the
ground. It is a breach of the Ground Regulations for 'home'
supporters to enter the areas designated for 'away'
supporters, and vice versa. Whenever a breach of this
Regulation occurs, Stewards must advise the nearest Police
Officer or the Chief Steward or Senior Steward.
Stewards shall ensure that only emergency vehicles (Police,
Fire, Ambulance) are allowed to park in the Stadium. (Unless
otherwise agreed with the Chief Constable).

In the event of a Steward finding a person requiring first aid
assistance, he should obtain the help of the nearest St John
Ambulance Officer or Police Officer.


          DUTIES AFTER THE EVENT
On completion of their period of duty, all Stewards will log
off and return their distinctive clothing to their Senior
Steward.

A record of the use and/or misuse for any reason of fire­
fighting equipment must be reported to the Stewards' Office
at the conclusion of each event.

A record of all accidents and/or incidents which cause injury
to spectators must be reported to the Stewards' Office at
the conclusion of each event.


      EMERGENCY PROCEDURES
(a)   If a Steward is first on the scene of any incident which
      presents a threat to public safety, he shall:

      i    Operate the alarm point in the nearest refreshment
           bar.

      ii Contact the nearest person with a radio or telephone
         from an Emergency Key Point.
         iii Ensure Police Control are informed of the location and
             nature of the incident.

        iv Fight any fire if possible and if it is safe to do so.

 (b)     If a Steward discovers a suspect package, he should
        not touch or approach it, but contact the nearest Police
        Officer who will inform Police Control and the Police will
        take charge of the incident.

 (c)    In the event of Serious Crowd Disorder, Stewards must
        remain on their posts unless given other instructions by
        their Senior Stewards, the Chief Steward or a Police
        Officer.

(d)    In the event of a Major Pitch Invasion, Stewards must
       assist the Police in ensuring the safe and speedy conduct
       of the Referee, Linesman and Players to the dressing
       rooms, and should be ready to assist the Police in the
       dispersal of unauthorised spectators under the
       supervision of a Senior Police Officer.

On receipt of information that an incident threatening public
safety has arisen, Police Control will raise the emergency
alarm to ensure all Stewards and Police Officers in the ground
are made aware. The Emergency Alarm will be one or more
of the following signals:

(a)    Activation of the audible warning chimes which will
       sound three times over the internal and external public
       address system.
(b) Activation of the Blue Flashing Beacons which will
    illuminate in the centres of the three stands and Holte
    End terrace.

If the emergency arises before the commencement of a
specified activity, turnstile operators will be directed to shut
turnstiles immediately.

UPON HEARING OR SEEING THAT AN EMERGENCY
ALARM IS IN OPERATION

(a)   The AUTOMATIC CONTROL PANEL STEWARD will
      release the electronic locking mechanism of all exit gates
      and await further instruction from Police Control.

(b)   ALL EXIT GATE STEWARDS - HEAD OF SECTION
      STEWARDS supervising exit gates will ensure that the
      electronic locking mechanism has been released on their
      designated gates (red light emitting diode on electronic
      locking bar should show). Exit Gate Stewards will then
      push the panic release bar to check that the exit gate
      will open. If the electronic locking mechanism has not
      released, he will use the emergency override key to
      release the lock and he will re-check by pushing the panic
      release bar of the exit gate.

(c)   TRANSFER GATE STEWARDS will remain at post if safe
      to do so.

(d)   STAND STEWARDS (General Stewards) will take up
      designated positions.
 (e)   TERRACE STEWARDS (General Stewards) will take up
       designated positions.


(f)    CHIEF STEWARD AND SENIOR STEWARDS will ensure
       all Stewards procedures are complied with.


       All Stewards must now look at the Visual Electronic
       Display Board and listen for a loudspeaker broadcast.
       If the following message is seen or heard:


       "(identified area(s) of ground) STEWARDS TO POSTS"
                                                         i




                      For example —
           "NORTH STAND STEWARDS TO POSTS"
          or "WITTON LANE STEWARDS TO POSTS"
                                       ....etc, etc


         AND THE IDENTIFIED AREA IS YOUR AREA:-
         THIS IS THE SIGNAL THAT AN EVACUATION
                     IS TAKING PLACE.


All Stewards, Club Officials, NEC Security Staff, Refreshment
Bar Staff must now refer to the Duty Sheets with which they
have been issued and commence their EVACUATION DUTIES
as detailed.


No Steward will leave the ground without the official 'STAND
DOWN' from Police Control.
                          TRAINING

1.   In the close season every year all Stewards shall receive
     practical instruction and training appropriate to their respons­
     ibilities in case of emergency. Exercises for all staff and
     Stewards shall be carried out regularly to ensure the smooth
     operation of procedures for dealing with an emergency. All
     members of staff and Stewards shall receive refresher training
     at least once during the football season. All training
     instructions and exercises shall be carried out by a competent
     person approved by the Local Authority, Chief Constable and
     Chief Fire Officer.

2.   Aston Villa Football Club shall cause to be kept and main­
     tained a record of all training and instruction given to
                                                      i

     Stewards together with exercises held, such record to include
     the following:

     Date and time of instruction and exercise
     Duration
     Name of person giving instructions and qualification
     Names of persons receiving instruction
     Nature of instruction or exercise




                                 11
       G R O U N D REGULATIONS

All matches are played in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the Football Association and the Football
League.

Play cannot be guaranteed to take place on any particular
day or at any particular time and the Club reserves the right
to change its advertised fixtures without prior notice and
without liability.

No refund of any cash admission charge paid at the Turnstile
will be made.

Refund will be made in respect of seats booked in advance
and paid for where a match is postponed, subject to a time
limitation, details of which can be obtained from the Box
Office.

All children entering the Ground or Stand, must pay for
admission or hold a valid ticket.

Unauthorised persons are not permitted to enter upon the
field of play.

With the exception of authorised press representatives
holding official passes, the taking of photographs or cine
photography inside the ground is prohibited. In addition, no
recording whether for radio or television and whether for
transmission or otherwise is permitted save with a special
authorisation in writing by the Club.
     *
9    ®*    Only persons specifically authorised in writing by the Club
           are permitted to offer newspapers, periodicals or any other
           articles for sale in the ground.

*   9.      Unnecessary noise such as from the use of radio sets and
            behaviour likely to cause confusion, annoyance or nuisance
           of any kind, including foul and abusive language is not
•          permitted in any part of the ground.

     10. The climbing of floodlight pylons, stands or other buildings
#        in the ground is forbidden.

     11. The consumption of intoxicating liquors is permitted only in
         the bars or other authorised places.

     12. Bottles, glasses, flags, banners, metal containers and other
         similar articles including anything which could or might be
#        used as a weapon or to cause annoyance are not permitted
         within the ground.

^   13.    All persons entering Villa Park are admitted subject to the
           understanding that they may be required to submit to search
           to prevent dangerous articles being brought into the ground
           which might be used to cause injury or damage to other
*         persons or property.

    14. Under no circumstances is it permitted to throw any object
m       onto the pitch.

    15. In general, the right of admission is reserved by the Club
^       Management, and no transfers within the ground are allowed.


                                    13
                                                               •
16. All persons entering this ground are admitted only subject
    to the above regulations and to the rules and regulations of
    the Football Association and of the Football League. Entry
    to the ground shall be deemed to constitute unqualified
    acceptance of all these rules and regulations.

17. The Club reserves the right for its servants and agents and
    for members of the Police Forces to remove from this ground
    any person who does not comply with ground regulations
    and with the rules and regulations of the Football Association
    and the Football League or whose presence on the ground
    is or could reasonably be construed as constituting a source
    of danger, nuisance or annoyance to other spectators.
           STEWARDIMG

   Effective stewarding 4 tot4d prevent overcrowding in aectsons
  of tfie ground. reduce the Ukeftfiood and. incidenoe of dieocder
  halp diaperee spectators in auch a way m to ivduoe crowd
  p r w u n Mid provide tfw moans to inveetigete. repor» and take
  aerfy action in an emergency.

       Manning levels and stewarding requirements will vary
 depending upon tho site and configuration of the ground the
 nature of the event and crowd levels, but there ar? five basic
 duties which stewards are called upon to carry out These are:
       •    controlling or directing members of the public who are
             entering or leaving the ground, to help achieve an even
             flow of people to the viewing areas and safe dispersal
             of spectators on the terraces or viewing slopes.
       b    patrolling the ground to deal with any emergencies eg
            raising alarms or extinguishing fires;
      c     manning entrances, exits and other strategic points,
            especially exit doors and gates which are not
            continuously open whilst the ground is in use;
      d.   assisting police as appropriate or as requested with
            crowd control; and
      8    undertaking specific duties in an emergency.

     A more detailed check list of the kind of duties which
stewards are liable to undertake is at Annex B. It should be borne
in mind that this is only an example and not necessarriy an
exhaustive list of duties, (s e e back page)

      Stewards should be fully capable of carrying out the duties
allocated to them. Every steward should be fully appraised in
writing of his duties and responsibilities and should carry on him a
Q iniril check list of them. Where a ground such as one used by
an association football league club has a high police presence.
 s a f e t y m q u u jm sh ts



 Safety Certificate* issued under the Safety of Sports
 Grounds Act require that:


 1.     all Safety Stewards shall be provided with
        written instructions approved by the Chief
        Constable and Local Authority as to their duties


 2.    all Safety Stewards shall be properly trained and
        instructed in accordance with a Scheme approved
       by the Chief Fire Officer and Chief Constable,
       and


3.     all Safety Stewards during a specified period
       each year shall receive practical instruction and
       training appropriate to their responsibilities in
       case of emergency.       Safety Stewards should also
       receive refresher training at appropriate
       intervals (normally at least twice each year).


Stewards must have the Handbook in their possession
whenever they are on duty.




GENERAL



1.     The Police are responsible for the control of
       public order at matches.      The role of Stewards is
       to assist the Police in the execution of this
      responsibility.


2.    There shall be close liaison between the Police
      Ground Commander and the Senior Police Officers
      in charge of each segment of the Stadium and the
      Chief Steward and Senior Stewards.       All
      instructions from the Police will be channelled
      through the Chief Steward and Senior Stewards,
      except where circumstances render such a line of
      communication impractical, in which case
      instructions from any Police Officer will take
      precedence.
 The Chief Steward and the Senior Stewards will
usually be available on radio.       The Senior
Stewards shall patrol their areas regularly to
ensure that Stewards are correctly following
their instructions, and shall assist and liaise
with the Police, Fire and Local Authority
representatives and the Chief Stewards as and
when required.


a)   All Exit Stewards (exit gates) shall wear a
     tabard displaying the number of the exit
     door for which they are r e s p o n s i v e . and the
     exit numbers shown on tabards shall
     correspond with the exit numbers shown on
     the Fire Authority plans.


b)   All Exit Stewards (transfer/perimeter gates)
     shall wear a distinctive armband which will
     be returned to the Chief Steward’s office
     after the game.


Safety Stewards shall be:-


a)   fit, capable of carrying out their        duties,
     and aged 70 years or less;


b)   properly trained and instructed in
     accordance with a scheme approved by the
     Chief Fire Officer and Chief Constable;


c)   provided with written instructions approved
     by the Chief Constable and Local Authority
     as to their duties.


In the close season every year all Safety
Stewards shall receive practical instruction and
training appropriate to their responsibilities in
case of emergency.     Exercises for all staff and
Safety Stewards shall be carried out regularly to
ensure the smooth operation of procedures for
dealing with an emergency.      All members of staff
and Safety Stewards receive refresher
  training once at least during the football
  season.    All training instructions and exercises
  shall be carried out by a competent person
  approved by the Local Authority, Chief Constable
  and Chief Fire Officer.


  The Stewards are the first line of enforcement of
  the Ground Regulations.    They must be fully
  conversant with these Regulations (see
 Appendix ’A 1).


 A record of all accidents and/or incidents which
 cause injury to spectators must be reported to
 the Stewards’ office at the conclusion of each
 match.


 A record of the use and/or misuse for any reason
 of fire-fighting equipment must be reported to
 the Stewards’ office at the conclusion of each
 match.


 Except as indicated on the plans, or otherwise
 agreed with the Chief Constable, only emergency
 vehicles (i.e. Police, Fire, Ambulance) are
 allowed to park in the Stadium.


All Stewards must report to their Area Senior
 Steward at the prescribed time before kick-off,
and take up position as soon as they have been
allocated a place of duty.     They should stay at
their designated point of duty at all timet and
for at leatt 10 minutes after the end of the
game, or if spectators are still pretent until
such time at there are none remaining in the
Ground.     A failure on the part of a Steward to
remain at his/her post during the period of duty
shall render that Steward liable to instant
dismissal, and the Club could be liable to
presecution under the Safety of Sports Grounds
Act 1975.
The Stewards using radio equipment must make a
test-call to check that the equipment is
serviceable when it is handed to them.     Those
Stewards in charge of gates must have the
relevant "key* in their possession and should
check its operation when they reach their posts.
All chains, padlocks or other locking devices
used for securing exit doors/gates when
spectators are not present in the Ground are to
be removed to a place agreed with theChief      Fire
Officer and the Chief Constable before thegame.
Any defects in equipment are to be reported to
the Chief Steward or Senior Steward immediately.
In the event that perimeter fencing is erected
around the playing area, all gates provided in
such fencing may only be locked during a
Specified Activity if those gates are:-


  (i)      fitted with only one lock;
 (ii)      fitted with identical locks;   and
(iii)      manned continuously by at least one Exit
           Steward, who has the correct key for
           opening his gate continuously on his
           person.


The first duty of any Steward upon taking up his
position for a match shall be to verify the
location of the nearest fire-fighting equipment,
fire-alarm call-point, and the availability of
all alternative emergency exit routes.    In the
event of non-availability of fire-fighting
equipment or obstruction of exit routes, he must
immediately advise the Chief Steward or Senior
Steward.


All Stewards must be capable of dealing with any
situation likely to arise, but on all such
occasions must first contact the nearest Police
Officer, the Chief Steward or Senior Steward.
15.   Any Steward noticing anything untoward, including
      any loose bricks, bars, spars, etc., which may be
      used as weapons, shal     eport the same to the
      Chief Steward or Senior Steward who shall arrange
      for its immediate removal and the submission of a
      written report to the Club.


16.   It is imperative to enforce strict segregations
      of rival supporters inside and outside the
      Ground.    It is a breach of the Ground Regulations
      for ’home’ supporters to enter the areas
      designated for ’away’ supporters, and vice
      versa.    Whenever a breach of this Regulation
      occurs. Stewards must advise the nearest Police
      Officer or the Chief Steward or Senior Steward.


17.   All Stewards should always be on the alert for
      possible disorderly behaviour.    Stewards are
      advised not to become involved themselves in any
      fracas or fighting, but to advise the nearest
      Police Officer or the Chief Steward or Senior
      Steward immediately.


18.   a)   No one is to be allowed to use the pitch
           perimeter track before, during or after the
           match, except authorised personnel.


      b)   Members of the Press, Radio and Television
           services having access to public and playing
           areas of the Stadium are identifiable as
           such by numbered tabards, and they are
           restricted to positions approved by the
           Chief Constable.   The aforementioned tabards
           shall be distinguished by colour from those
           worn by Safety Stewards.


      c)   Television cameras and portable equipment
           shall be restricted to the positions
           approved by the Local Authority, and
           ancillary equipment thereto shall not be
           allowed to cause obstruction.
         d)     All persons allowed access to the playing
               area of the Stadium, other than participants
               in or officials of a Specified Activity,
               shall wear a numbered tabard and their
               identity be made known to the Chief
               Constable prior to comnencement of the
               Specified Activity.
                                               •m


 19.     Exit gstes should normally remain closed and
         should only be opened:-


        «)     on the order of the Police Ground Comnander
        b)     on the order of a Police Officer local to
              that gate, or

        c)    for a specific reason by a Gate Steward
              (i.e. personal emergency of a spectator)
              ®*t#r fir*t having obtained the authority of
              * Police Officer wherever possible.


20.     On reporting for duty the Chief Steward, Senior
        Stewards, Gate Stewards and General Stewards
        shall be required to sign a log indicating their
        presence on match days, and on completion of
        their period of duty will log off, at the same
       time Gate Stewards returning their distinctive
       clothing.



       The Stewards responsible for locked doors, exit
       gates and pitch perimeter fence gates will be
       designated ’Key Holder Stewards'.   Such Stewards
       must remain at their positions at all times, and
       may only leave their positions if they have first
       handed their key to a relief Steward who must
       remain in that position during their absence.
       All ’Key Bolder Stewards’ must sign a further
       document at the time of receiving their key to
       signify their agreement to carry out their duties
       in such a manner.
            All ’Key Holder Stewards’ shall hare the
            number of the exit for which they are
            responsible displayed on their tabards, and
            shall ensure that the number corresponds
            with the door to which they have been
            allocated.




EMKBCKMCr PROCEDURES


      In the event of IMJP1T to a spectator
      Stewards should obtain assistance from the
      nearest First-Aid Attendant or Police Officer.


2.              t v m .s i SKEioys g io ro D is o c m ,-
      The Football League has instructed Referees not
      to threaten to abandon the match, but to liaise
     with the Police Ground Commander and then make a
      personal appeal to the spectators using the PA
      System.     For this purpose a radio microphone
      should be permanently available.


      If this action is unsuccessful, the Referee will
     withdraw the players from the pitch until such
     time as the Police Ground Commander and the
     Referee consider that play can be resumed.
I

     All Stewards must remain at their posts unless
     given other instructions by their Senior
     Stewards, the Chief Steward or a Police Officer.


3-   In t h t ev en t o f a M u d r t v m IWVASIOW, -
     Stewards must assist the Police in ensuring the
     safe and speedy conduct of the Referee, Linesmen
     and Players to the dressing rooms as their first
     priority.


     Stewards should be ready to assist the Police in
     the dispersal of unauthorised spectators under
     the Supervision of the Police Ground Commander.
POLICE     ROOM
                                                                                        h a w t h o r n s
                                                                                              INN



                           HALFORDS    LANE


                               M —M                                me    fans



                                                    NEW STAND                       \
D O WN TO S ME T H - I                                                   PLAYERS          TUNNEL
                                   HOME
WI C K A N D R O L F E ^        — 4 FANS
STREET STATION.

                                                                                                                    I HOME
                             VOI D                                                                          ®       ■ fahs
                             STAND
                                                               PLAYINj     AREA
            DOWN
            RAMP
                              AWAY
                               F ANS
                                           *4 -©
                                                                                                       HOME
                                                                                                       FA
                                                                                  HO ME    FANS
                                                   Ri      Q                                                    /
                                                                RAINBOW         STAND          I

     CONTROL
      ROOM


                                                                                 AWAY      CAR     PARK
                                            DOWN R A M P
  In the event of PlSCOraiac       a   PIM


  STAFF SHOULD IMMEDIATELY


  (a)     RAISE THE ALARM

          -   Operate the nearest fire-alarm call-point
              or

        -     Report the incident to Police Control on
              the nearest direct line
              and

        -     Contact the nearest Police Officer who
              has a radio to call Police Control,
              giving exact location and nature of
              incident.


 (b)    FIGHT THE FIRE

        -     Use the nearest extinguisher available,
              if safe to do so.


 Stewards must NEVER use the word 'FIRE* within
 the hearing of the public as this could cause
 panic.


The Police Ground Commander will ensure that the
Fire Services have been called, and be ready to
receive reports from Police Officers at the
incident as to the nature and extent of the fire.


The Police Ground Commander shall decide whether
a Stadium EVACUATION is necesary.


In the event of a partial or total evacuation
being required, the Police Ground Commander will
make an announcement over the Public Address
System.       The appropriate message is
"ALL STEWARDS TO POSTS*
The message will be broadcast twice
  (c)       UPON HEARING THE EMERGENCY ALARM: -
            (i)    ALL GATE STEWARDS - Prepare to open
                   gates when told by designated Police
                   Officer.

            (ii)   STAND and TERRACE STEWARDS - take up
                   designated positions.
            (iii) POLICE OFFICERS - to combine with
                   functions (a) and (b) on foregoing
                   page.
  *         REMEMBER - GATE STEWARDS MOST rmmiM b y
          their gates until the end of the g a t .


        STAND/TERRACE

        After hearing the EMERGENCY ALARM Public
        Announcement, wait for further instructions
        from the Police or your Controller.


        If it is YOUR AREA TO BE EVACTUATED
        -     STAND STEWARDS - ask people to leave,
              starting with those nearest exits.
              TERRACE STEWARDS - using loud hailers,
             ask people to leave, starting with those
             nearest the exits.
        -    POLICE OFFICERS - will assist as directed
             by POLICE CONTROL.

             After •vacuat.ion, assemble at the nearest
             exit gate.


During any evacuation all Stewards must ensure
the prompt obedience of the instruction to
evacuate, even though there may be no visible
evidence of a hazard to them.


Stewards must do nothing to cause panic amongst
the public.


In the event of normal exit routes being blocked
by a hasard, Steward are to direct spectators to
■ppropriate alternative and/or emergency exit
routes.



Once all spectators have been evacuated fro® a
section the exit gates should be closed.
Senior Stewards should then arrange for Stewards
to search all toilet areas, etc. to ensure that
there is no person left in their sections before
reporting to the Chief Steward at the Centre
Tunnel, who will be in possession of the
enrolling sheet.    A Roll Call will follow.


No spectators shall be re-admitted under any
circumstances.




GENERAL
Invalids    -   wheelchair persons to be evacuated
                assisted by able-bodied persons.


Emergency before Kick-Off - Procedure as above,
but turnstile operators to shut turnstiles
immediately.


In the event of a BOMB ALERT:-
Stewards discovering a suspect package should not
touch or approach it, but contact the nearest
Police Officer who will inform the Police Ground
Commander and the Police will take charge of the
incident.


NB   The Police Ground Commander shall have the
     authority in the case of any emergency to
     assume exclusive control of the
     public-address system.
                                   APPENDIX ’A ’


             GROUND RRGOLATIOMS


All matches are played in accordance with the
Rules and Regulations of the Football Association
and the Football League and the Laws of the Game.


Play cannot be guaranteed to take place on any
particular day, or at any particular time, and
the Club reserves the right to change its
advertised fixtures without notice and without a
liability.


No refund of any cash admission charge paid at
the turnstile will be made.


Refunds will be made in respect of seats booked
in advance and paid for where a match is
postponed, subject to a time limitation, details
of which can be obtained from the Box Office.


Unauthorised persons are not.permitted to enter
upon the field of play.


With the exception of authorised Press
representatives holding official passes, the
taking of photographs or cinemaphotography inside
the Ground is prohibited.     In addition, no
recording - whether for radio or television or
for private purposes, and whether for
transmission or otherwise - is permitted, save
with a special authorisation in writing from the
Club.


Only persons specifically authorised in writing
by the Club are permitted to distribute without
charge, or offer for sale in the Ground, any
newspapers, periodicals or any other articles.
                           APPENDIX ’A ’ (Continued)


  Unnecessary noise such as that from the use of
  radio-sets, and behaviour likely to cause
  confusion or nuisance of any kind, including foul
  or abusive language, is not permitted in any part
  of the Ground.


 The climbing of floodlight pylons, stands or
 other buildings in the Ground is forbidden.


 The consumption of intoxicating liquors is
 permitted only in the authorised places and in
 accordance with the Sporting Events (Control of
 Alcohol, etc.) Act 1985.


 Fireworks, smoke canisters, bottles, glasses,
 cans, flags, banners, poles and other similar
 articles or containers, including anything which
 could or might be used as a weapon, are not
 permitted within the Ground, and any person in
 possession of such an article or container may be
 refused entry or ejected from the Ground.


 Under no circumstances is it permitted to throw
any object onto the pitch.


Any person who fails to comply with instructions
from'a Steward or member of the Police Forces nay
be ejected from the Ground.


In general, the right of admission is reserved to
the Club Management.


Any person who remains in a gangway may be
ejected from the Ground.


The Club reserves the right to refuse admission
to, or eject, any person who refuses to be
searched by a Police Officer or Steward.
                          APPENDIX ’A* (Continued)


 All persons entering this Ground are admitted
 only subject to the above Ground Regulations and
 to the Rules and Regulations of the Pootball
Association and of the Football League.      Entry to
 the Ground shall be deemed to constitute
unqualified acceptance of these Rules and
Regulations.


The Club reserves the right for its servants and
agents, and for members of the Police Porces, to
remove from the Ground any person who does not
comply with Ground Regulations and with the Rules
and Regulations of the Football Association and
the Football League, or whose presence on the
Ground is, or could reasonably be construed as,
constituting a source of danger, nuisance or
annoyance to other spectators.


The Club reserves its right for its servants and
agents, and for members of the Police Porces, to
re-possess on behalf of the Club, any membership
card issued under its Membership Scheme from any
person who is liable to be ejected for not
complying with Ground Regulation* and with the
Rules and Regulations of the Football Association
and the Football League, or who is arrested for
any criminal offence associated with hit
attendance at an event on West Bromwich Albion
Football Club property.
                                  Ann«xB
STEWANOIMG

1    All stewards should be capable of carrying out their duties
and should be properly trained to do so

2.    Stewards must be informed in writing of all that they are
expected to know and do The following list gives examples of
typical tasks and duties which stewards should be expected to
carry out and for which they should be prepared. Stewards should:
     i.       Prevent overcrowding by ensuring the crowd limits in
              various parts of the ground are complied with.
     ii.      Prevent spectators, as far as possible. from climbing
              fences and other structures eg floodlight pylons, and
              from standing on seats. Where by virtue of the scale of
              the incident stewards are unable to prevent this, they
              should immediately report the matter to the nearest
              police officer or. if no police officer is present, to the
              chief steward or the safety officer.
     in       Ensure that gangways and exits are kept clear.
     iv.      Identify and investigate any incident or occurrence
              among spectators, reporting their findings to the police
              or to management.
     v.       Know the location of and be able to operate effectively
              the fire-firefighting equipment at the ground.
     vi.      Know the location of the first aid room and any first
              aid equipment kept elsewhere.
     vii.    Be fully conversant with any methods or signals used
             to alert staff that an emergency has arisen.
     viii.   Be capable of recogniemg potential fire hatards and
             suspect packages, reporting such findings immediately
             to the nearest police officer or. if no police officer is in
             the immediate vicinity, the chief steward or the safety
             officer.
     ix.     Comply promptly with any inatruction given in an.
             emergency by a police officer, the chief steword or the
             safety officer.
     x.      Remain at their allocated poets aa inetructed unleaa
             authorised or ordered to da ofhorwiac by a police
             officer, the chief stewerd or the safety officer.
     xi      Report to the safety officer any damage or defect
             which is likely to pose a threat to spectator safety eg a
F
A                                                                                                        APPBTOIX F



              NOTTINGHAM FOREST FOOTBALL CLUB LTD.
                   FIRE EVACUATION PROCEDURE
              STEWARDS A N D SUPERVISORS IN STR U C TIO N CARD
 L "™      e v e n t o f fire     INFO b m t h e n e a r e s t p o l i c e o f f i c e r w h o w i l l i n f o r m m a t c h c o n t r o l
 TO CO-ORDINATE EVACUATION. STEWARDS SHOULD BE AWARE OF THE CODED MESSAGE:

 "THE HEAD STEWARDS PARTY TO TH E ..............................................................................................
 (WHICHEVER STAND APPROPRIATE) WHICH WILL BE BROADCAST OVER THE PUBLIC ADDRESS SYSTEM
 THIS MEANS THE FIRE INVOLVED THE NAMED LOCATION AND ALL AVAILABLE FIRE STEWARDS SHOULD
 ASSIST IN THE EVACUATION OF THAT AREA.                                        ^ bHUULD

 ™ ™ AR£ 0F ™ E NEAREST F,RE P0,NT AND F'RE EXTINGUISHER, AND CHECK THEY ARE IN WORKING
 ORDER. ON HEARING CODED MESSAGE THE SUPERVISOR CONTROLLING THAT PARTICULAR AREA
 SHOULD OPEN THE EXIT GATES AND DIRECT SPECTATORS OUT OF THE GROUND. rAM" LULAH AREA
 BE AWARE OF KEEPING ROUTES FOR FIRE, POLICE AND AMBULANCE VEHICLES CLEAR.


Task No............................   Yellow Jacket YES/NO                     Radio YES/NO


 LOCATION


 DUTIES:- PREVENT OVERCROWDING.
          PREVENT CLIMBING ON STAIRCASES.
          ENSURE GANGWAYS AND EXITS ARE KEPT CLEAR AT ALL TIMES.
         IDENTIFY AND INVESTIGATE ANY INCIDENT AMONGST SPECTATORS
         AND IF NECESSARY NOTIFY NEAREST POLICE OFFICER
         KNOW THE LOCATION OF NEAREST FIRE FIGHTING EQUIPMENT AND
         FIRST AID ROOM.
         COMPLY PROMPTLY WITH ANY INSTRUCTIONS GIVEN IN AN
         EMERGENCY BY POLICE OFFICERS, SUPERVISOR
         OR SAFETY OFFICER.
         REPORT TO THE SAFETY OFFICER ANY DAMAGE OR DEFECT LIKELY
         TO POSE A THREAT TO SPECTATOR SAFETY.
ADDITIONAL
RESPONSIBILITIES:-
         SEE REVERSE OF CARD
                  PLEASE REMEMBER - SPECTATOR SAFETY AND SECURITY IS OF
                  PARAMOUNT IMPORTANCE.

S U J L S f 8^ 015 EMERGENCY ALL STEWARDS IN THE EFFECTED AREA TO BE
GROUND          APPROPRIATE BY MATCH CONTROL AND HELP EVACUATE THE


                       BE RETA,NED UNTIL THE £ND OF THE MATCH AND
THEN RETURNED TO THE HEAD STEWARDS OFFICE.

                                      INTERNAL TELEPHONE NUMBERS
        oe a?         0fflc# 3 H#ad Steward* Office 5 Public Ann. 6 Scoreboard
        85 Police Control Exec. Stand 87 Head Stewards Exec. Stand 93 & 97 First Aid
                                     98 Police Control M/S
            SAFETY IN SPORTS GROUNDS
    FIRE STEWARD - ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITY

 ENSURE YOU ARE IN POSSESSION AND WEARING THE RED FIRE
 STEWARDS JACKET.

 READ AND FAMILIARISE YOURSELF WITH THE DETAILS OF
 EVACUATION PROCEDURES AND CODED MESSAGE CONTAINED ON
 THE INSTRUCTION CARD.

 TAKE YOUR DUTIES VERY SERIOUSLY. NEVER BE COMPLACENT.

 REMEMBER SPECTATOR SAFETY AND SECURITY IS PARAMOUNT

 CHECK YOUR AREA OF RESPONSIBILITY TO ENSURE NO RUBBLE OR
 INFLAMMABLE MATERIAL IS PRESENT LIKELY TO CAUSE DANGER.

REPORT ANY INCIDENTS OR OCCURRENCES IMMEDIATELY TO THE
FIRE STEWARD SUPERVISOR.

DETAILS OF ANY UNUSUAL INCIDENTS OR OCCURRENCES MUST BE
PASSED TO CLUB SAFETY OFFICER, MR. HOLFORD, FOR RECORD
AND SUBSEQUENT ACTION PURPOSES.

IN THE EVENT OF ANY FIRE, ASSIST GENERAL STEWARDS IN
EVACUATION PROCEDURES IN ACCORDANCE WITH WRITTEN
INSTRUCTIONS.

SHOULD YOU BE CALLED TO A FIRE, IMMEDIATELY NOTIFY
SUPERVISOR AND MR. HOLFORD BY RADIO, IF YOU ARE ABLE TO
EXTINGUISH THE FIRE BY MEANS OF EQUIPMENT DO SO, BUT NOT
BEFORE NOTIFYING THE POLICE CONTROL BY RADIO OR NEAREST
POLICE OFFICER.

DO NOT PUT YOURSELF IN ANY UNNECESSARY DANGER.

VIGILANCE WILL BE REQUIRED AT ALL TIMES.

ENSURE YOU ARE IN POSSESSION OF A PERSONAL RADIO.

                      M. F. HOLFORD
              Safety and Security Consultant
               SAFETY IN SPORTS GROUNDS
                SPECIFIC RESPONSIBILITIES
             FOR SUPERVISORS/SECTION HEAPS

1.     ENSURE ALL STEWARDS UNDER YOUR CONTROL ARE SMART IN
       APPEARANCE, COURTEOUS TO SPECTATORS AND ARE WEARING
       APPROPRIATE JACKET FULLY FASTENED.

2.     ENSURE STEWARD IS IN POSSESSION OF HIS EMERGENCY
       EVACUATION AND INSTRUCTION CARD

3.     CONFIRM W ITH THE STEWARD THAT HE FULLY UNDERSTANDS HIS
       ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITIES.

4.     SATISFY YOURSELF HE IS WELL AWARE OF THE CODED MESSAGE
       AND SUBSEQUENT EVACUATION PROCEDURES.

5.     MAINTAIN YOUR VIGILANCE AT ALL TIMES AND REMEMBER THE
       SPECTATOR'S SAFETY AND SECURITY IS OF PARAMOUNT
       IMPORTANCE.

6.     NEVER BE COMPLACENT -    ONLY CONSTANT SUPERVISION WITH
       ELIMINATE THIS FACTOR.

7.     REPORT ANY UNUSUAL INCIDENT TO THE NEAREST POLICE OFFICER
       AND/OR RADIO DETAILS TO MR. HOLFORD.

8.     BRIEF AND DEBRIEF ALL STEWARDS UNDER YOUR CONTROL ON
       BOTH GENERAL AND SPECIFIC MATTERS AFFECTING SAFETY AND
       SECURITY.

9.     LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S FINAL REPORT INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH
       DISASTER IDENTIFIED MANY DEFICIENCIES AND THE PUBLICATION
       OF THIS NOTE HAS BEEN PREPARED TO HEIGHTEN AWARENESS
       AND IMPROVE THE PROFESSIONALISM OF ALL STEWARDS.

10     AT CONCLUSION OF DUTY ENSURE ALL STEWARDS RETURN THEIR
       STEWARDS JACKET AND EVACUATION/INSTRUCTION CARD, WHICH
       SHOULD BE RETURNED TO THE HEAD STEWARDS OFFICE.

 11.   ENSURE YOU ARE IN POSSESSION OF A PERSONAL RADIO.

 12.   REPORT DETAILS OF ANY MATTER RECORDED BY YOU FROM ANY
       STEWARD TO MR. HOLFORD BEFORE RETIRING FROM DUTY.

                            M. F. HOLFORD
                     Safety and Security Consultant
                SAFETY IN SPORTS GROUNDS
                 ROLE AND RESPONSIBILITY
            OF PERIMETER EXIT GATE STEWARDS

 1.   BE IN POSSESSION OF YOUR STEWARDS JACKET, FULLY FASTENED.

 2.   TAKE UP YOUR ALLOCATED POSITION FACING THE CROWD.

3.    DO NOT LEAVE YOUR POSITION WITHOUT THE PERMISSION OF
      YOUR SUPERVISOR.

4.    IN THE EVENT OF A GOAL BEING SCORED AT YOUR END OF THE
      GROUND, DO NOT INDULGE IN CHEERING OR BEING INVOLVED WITH
      CELEBRATING W ITH PLAYER OR PLAYERS.

5.    YOUR SOLE RESPONSIBILITY AT ALL TIMES IS TO MONITOR CROWD
      BEHAVIOUR AND CROWD DYNAMICS.

6.    LOOK FOR ANY SIGNS OF OVERCROWDING IN YOUR AREA OF
      RESPONSIBILITY.

7.    SEVERE OVERCROWDING USUALLY SHOWS ITSELF IN INDIVIDUALS
      WHEN LIPS AND EXTREMITIES OR THE FACE TURN BLUE.

8.    CONSTANT VIGILANCE IS NECESSARY.

9.    SHOULD YOU OBSERVE ANY SYMPTOMS OF OVERCROWDING OR
      CRUSHING EVACUATE PERSONS ON TO THE PERIMETER TRACK
      IMMEDIATELY NOTIFY A POLICE OFFICER WHO IN TURN WILL RADIO
      DETAILS TO POLICE MATCH CONTROL

10.   NEVER BE COMPLACENT - ALSO REMEMBER THE SAFETY OF THE
      SPECTATOR IS PARAMOUNT.

                           M. F. HOLFORD
                    Safety and Security Consultant
#
                             ASTO N VILLA FOOTBALL CLUB
                                    BLUE SECTOR - HOLTE END TERRACES
    ( <      $    7 )
                             STEW ARD POST NO.                                        CARO NO.

                                                                                       STUMPS

     MMNMiO        MAIM EMTNANCI
                                                                                                                 SWAM ft
      MMOfc
                 _ CARRIAOK DRIVK                                     CAR PARK

                                                    R38     R37       R3«   R3S

                      SHOP                             I    I     I         I ...

                  C                            I   a        0- s     s
                                                           NORTH STAND
     YEUOW RVP
                                                            RED SECTOR                                           KORVP




                                         R & S TERRACES
                                           RED SECTOR
                                             r-# -

                                                   pumromiMa
                         TRINITY                                                         WITTON
                          ROAD                                                            LANE           ^
                         STAND                                                                               <325
                                                                                         STAND
                         YELLOW      TRINITY
                                                                                                                     z
                         SECTOR       ROAD                  PLA Y IN G                                               0
                                    ENCLOSURE                                                  —             <324    h
                                                             AR EA                        GREEN                      h
                                     YEUOW                                               SECTOR              <323 ^
                                     SECTOR
                                                                                                                 <322


                                                                                               •J™       ■ »Q21


                                                                                                              >820
                                $                   HOLTE                    HOLTE                            1813
                                                     END                      END          m
                                                   TERRACE                  TERRACE                                TO
                                                                                                             .    ASTON
                                                                                                   818       1   MIWW
                                                                                                                 STATION
                                                    BLUE                      BLUE                 817       |      ft
     ASTON                                         SECTOR                    SECTOR                              auiiNSra
                                                                                                                  PO U C t
                                                                                                                 STATION


                                               : EXIT GATE                        : TRANSFER GATE
         IF THE WHOLE OF                       IF ONLY A PART OF
       THE GROUND IS TO OE                    THE GROUND IS TO OE
            EVACUATED                              EVACUATED




        YOU WILL HEAR OVER THE PUOLIC ADDRESS SYSTEM
                            AND
         YOU WILL SEE ON THE ELECTRONIC SCOREOOARD




       "STEWARDS TO POSTS"                           (Example)
                                              '•HOLTE END STEWARDS
                                                    TO POSTS"




                  IN THE EVENT OP AN EMERGENCY

       IF YOU HEAR              "STEWAROS TO POSTS"
                                   Over Loudspeaker?

       IF YOU SEE               "STEWARDS TO POSTS"
                                 on Electronic Scoreboard

        GQ TO YOUR EMERGENCY POSITION INDICATED ON THE
          BACK PAGE OF THIS CARD AND CARRY OUT YOUR
                      EVACUATION DUTIES




                                          —                                ■   #

       If P A R T IA L evacuation is taking place and is NOT your sector
               R E M A IN OIM P O S T in your sector until rlnployml.
-.nt
                      MATCH DAY DUTIES

 PHASE 1              Familiarise yourself with the position of alarm points,
 BEFORE               fire extinguishers and the nearest key point telephone.
                      Ensure that there are no loose objects i.e. bricks, bars,
 M ATCH               etc in your sector that could be used as weapons.
                      Direct members of the public safely into the Stadium
                      and to their alloted area.
   Briefing        4. Ensure gangways, entrances and emergency exits are kept
      to              clear and unobstructed.
   10 mins
after kick-off




  PHASE 2          1. Prevent the climbing of buildings, fixtures, etc.
  DURING           2. Prevent spitting, the throwing of missiles' and the use
                      of foul and abusive language.
   MATCH           3. Prevent unauthorised persons from entering onto the
                      pitch.
                   4. Mcnitcr crowd densities, reporting to the nearest
    10 mins           police officer or steward with radio any overcrowding
 after kick-off       or signs of crowd distress.
  to 10 mins
before full-time




  PHASE 3
                 1. Take up position as directed by your senior steward to
   AFTER             prevent pitch invasion.
  M ATCH         2 . At the end of the game, direct members of the public
                     to the nearest exit gate.
                 3. Check toilets and refreshment areas are clear.
    10 mins      4. When your sector is completely clear of supporters,
before full-time     book off at stewards reception.
      to
 stand down
       GENERAL STEWARD



YOUR DUTY IN THE EVENT OF AN EMERGENCY


              INITIAL EMERGENCY PROCEDURE

         IF YOU ARE THE FIRST PERSON ON THE SCENE:-
1.   OPERATE ALARM POINT IN NEAREST REFRESHMENT BAR
2.   CONTACT NEAREST PERSON WITH RADIO.
3.   INFORM VILLA CONTROL, LOCATION AND NATURE OF
     INCIDENT
4.   FIGHT FIRE, IF POSSIBLE AND IF IT IS SAFE TO DO SO.
     FIRE FIGHTING EQUIPMENT IS LOCATED IN ALL REFRESHMENT


                     EVACUATION DUTIES

       WITH THE ASSISTANCE OF AVAILABLE POLICE OFFICERS:-

1. Marshal supporters to the nearest exit gate or onto the pitch if
   specifically directed by the police.
2. Check toilets and refreshment areas to ensure the whole of your sector
   is evacuated..
3. Assist the police in containment or safe dispersal of supporters.
4. Render first aid where necessary.
5. When evacuation is ccnplete, report to your Senior Steward in the North
   Stand Car Park outside stewards entrance.




 IF PARTIAL EVACUATION IS TAKING PU C E AND IT IS NOT
 YOUR SECTOR REMAIN ON POST IN YOUR SECTOR UNTIL
                       DEPLOYED
    G




I
                                                                           APPENDIX G


                                       STEWARDS RECORD


    FULL NAME:                                     D.O.B......
    ADDRESS:                                       Telephone No.

    INITIAL TRAINING COURSE      /      /         APPOINTED       /   /



                 ATTENDSiNCES                        TRAINING             EXERCISE

•   DATE       MATCH      GATE       DUTY         DATE     TYPE            DATE




•




•




•




•




•




•




•
H
                                                                                                       APPENDIX H




               SAFETY AND STEWARDIN6 STRUCTURE
                             ‘A     SAFETY OFFICER                              EMERGENCY SERVICES
                                    ST AOIUM MANAGER
                                                                                WM POLICE
                                                                                WM FIRE SERVICE
                             •A    ASST STADIUM MANAGER
                                                                                WM AMBULANCE SERVICE
                                                                                •B


                                                                                VOLUNTARY SERVICES
                                                                                REO CROSS
                                                                                ST JOHNS AMBULANCE
                                                                                •B


                                                                                ANNOUNCER


CATERERS             ELECTRICIAN                                                GROUNOSMAN

SOUTH BANK           •A
JI G/STAND
EXECUTIVE

                                                    CHIEF STEWARD
                                                     •A
                                                          r
                                                     BASE CONTROL
                                                                     *A
                                                     STEWARO         426


                                                   ASST CHIEF
                                                   STEWAROS t2)*A


•A   SECTION    •A    SECTION     *A   SECT IOf*     •A SECTION     *A SECTION
JI G/S          JI G/S            SOUTH BANK         SOUTH BANK     SOUTH BANK

UPPER TIER      LOWER TIER        AWAY FANS          HOME FANS      HOME FANS
                                                     REAR           FRONT



SAFETY          SAFETY.           SAFETY             SAFETY         SAFETY                        •A

STEWARD S       STEWARD S         STEWARD S          STEWARO S      STEWARD S        EXECUTIVE    CAR PARK

                GENERAL           GENERAL            GENERAL        GENERAL          AREA         STEWAROS
GENERAL
STEWARD S       STEWARD S         STEWARD S          STEWARD S      STEWARC S        STEWARDS


     Communication Radios to Ground Safecy Control Centre Base Control Stewaro.
     Telephone link.
     Voluntary First Aid on Ground Service linked to West Midlands Am bulance Radio
     Communication link, based in the Ground Safety Control Centre alongside the Base
     Control Steward.
