           G & v ^ v i r ^oo^s.
                                          T A Ellingford
                                          SARD C
                  ytU O ..
                       2   spr    Date:   23 August 1991

1   .   Mr B
2.      PS/Mr Atkins

1. At the meeting on 19 June between the Minister and Arthur
Sandford and Tony Hutt to discuss the Premier League Mr Sandford
raised two additional issues. He asked the position on the
introduction of legislation to make ticket touting at football
matches an offence. He also asked for the Minister's support in
pressing for the removal of the present requirement under the
Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol) Act that football clubs had
to apply every 5 months to a magistrates court for an exemption
order allowing them to sell alcohol at their grounds. We have
taken up both of these matters with the Home Office and have now
had their response.

Ticket touting
2.   The Home Office did propose to include the ticket touting
offence in Sir John Wheeler's Football (Offences) Bill but the
House authorities ruled that this was not permissible. It has
also been decided not to introduce a Criminal Law Bill in the
next session.
3.   Therefore as there is no vehicle in the programme suitable
for the touting offence and Ministers are unlikely to regard this
as a high priority, the new offence is unlikely to reach the
Statute Book quickly. However the commitment remains to introduce
legislation as soon as Parliamentary time allows.

Alcohol sales at football grounds

4.   Under section 3 of the 1985 Act, the sale or supply of
alcohol at licensed premises inside grounds is prohibited unless
the licensee or club secretary has obtained an exemption order
from a magistrates' court. Section 4 of the Act provides that the
duration of such an exemption order should be 5 months.

5.     The Home Office    recognise   that  the clubs may be
inconvenienced in having to return to the courts every 5 months
to seek renewal of their exemption orders, and the fact that
renewals have been granted fairly readily suggests that there
might not be difficulty were the interval to be extended to 12
months.

6.   Home Office Ministers have not taken a view on this but a
change in the law would seem to be consistent with the views of
Lord Justice Taylor and the HAC that spectators should be better
treated. This would have to be balanced against a need to ensure
that such a move was not seen as a weakening of the Government's
resolve on tackling football hooliganism of which alcohol
restrictions are a major part. Since the courts can revoke the

                                                                1
exemption order at any stage and the police have powers to close
bars if they believe that the sale of alcohol is detrimental to
the orderly conduct and safety of spectators it would not be
difficult to resist this charge.

7.   However as with the ticket touting offence the Home Office
tell us there is no suitable legislative vehicle to make the
necessary amendment to the Act. The best prospect for early
legislation on either issue is through the introduction of a
Private Members Bill.

8.   If the Minister agrees we will write to Mr Sandford at
official level informing him of the position pointing out that he
might wish to identify an MP or MPs who would be willing to
introduce Private Members Bills. We have cleared this with the
Home Office.




T A ELLINGFORD
Room 1/68
Ext 9415




                                                                2
