DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT
SPECIAL GRANTS PROGRAMME
APPLICATION FOR GRANTS 1992-93

Please read the attached description of the Special Grants Programme
before completing this form.   Please give a full answer to each section,
continuing on a separate she6t, if necessary.                   ^

1.     DETAILS OF APPLICANT
1.1    Name of organisation applying
        NATIONAL FEDERATION OF STADIUM COMMUNITIES
1.2    Address for correspondence                 v

                          HILLSBOROUGH, SHEFFIELD | _ _ |
                                                                  *
1.3   Person who may be contacted about this application, and position in
organisation. v
     PAUL WESTON, SECRETARY N.F.S.C.
                  DIRECTOR, HILLSBOROUGH COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT TRUST. .
1.4 Telephone number

1.5 Nature    of  the organisation (eg is it a registered charity, company
limited by guarantee?) Still to be determined but likely to be a
                       Company limited by guarantee.
1.6 Describe briefly your organisation's:
    (a) aims To ensure that the interests of community and neighbourhoods
         existing in the shadow of major sports stadia are recognised and
         that programmes of stadia improvement and urban regeneratipn of
         these inner-city locations are co-ordinated in the best interests
         of the community! the Club; and stadium visitors.

      (b)    main activities
             Meetings/Research/Reports
             Discussions with Sports & Local Authorities
             Encourage pilot projects and development of new initiatives

       (c)    structure (enclose chart if appropriate)
              Member Groups & Associations   —>   Regional Meetings
                                                  Annual National Conference

              Elected Executive Committee
                          serviced by Executive Officers

1.7 Provide brief details of the relevant past experience and achievements
of the person to be responsible for the activities for which funding is
sought. (This will normally be either the person completing this form or the
contact at Section 1.3.)
              Paul Weston - Director, Hillsborough Community
                                      Development Trust (Reg. Charity)
              Chartered Town Planner; worked on urban renewal projects for, 15yr
              lived and worked near major sports stadia eg. Trent Bridge,
              Old Trafford, & Rochdale AFC.


              Has worked for the Hillsborough Community since before
              the Disaster and the Taylor Report.
                               a
                               !



1.8   Have you received funding under the Programme before?
      Please give details.

                              NO                  n
1.9   Where did you learn about this Programme?
                 Department of the Environment


2. ACTIVITIES
It is important that applicants set out precisely their objectives and tha
activities they propose. Please be as explicit as possible.

2.1 Geographical coverage of the organisation as a whole. (Please note that
the Department's grant can be applied only to activities in England.)
          United Kingdom of which 90 per cent of activity
          will be in England
                                                               »
2.2 A brief description of the organisation's recent achievements. (Please
note that, while short pamphlets etc which describe the organisation's work
are useful, the Department does not wish to receive books or lengthy
reports.)                                                    ,
      The NFSC provides a forum at which inner area communiti'es and
      neighbourhoods living in the shadow of major sports stadia can exchangi
      information, views, advice etc.  This exchiahge has.already seen severa
      improvements and new schemes introduced at the instigation of the
      community groups; e.g. traffic management at Hillsborough; improvednev
      stand design at Highbury and Aston; more stringent control over street
      vendors in several towns; and discussions on clubs setting up
      community funds at several locations.



2.3   What is grant needed for ? [please state briefly main objective(s)]:
      To employ a full time worker with administrative support over the
      next three years to establish the organisation on a firm footing;
      secure long term funding; increase the membership base; and help
      achieve the aims and objectives of the organisation.




2.4. How   has   the   need   for  this work been identified?   (eg Research
carried out, client requests)
     The Taylor Report identified the need for major improvements to be
     made to the inner areas that surround over § 0 par esnts a* fch® country's
     football stadia in the interests of crowd safety, comfort and amenity
     for residents.     The Clubs will not relocate.  Many of these old
     residential areas are severely blighted by the existence of the sports
     stadia. Thousands of homes are affected.    Careful investment and
     eTeneitiv© schemes need introducing to remove blight.


                                        2
                                   t*
                                                                             \


z.5 Please give below more detailed objectives of the activity for which
grant is sought and the proposed timetable for their achievement.
       '     ,      Develop database/networking
                    Promote and encourage membership
                    Identify good practice
                    Produce reports; newsletters
                    Liaise with Sports Authorities; Local Authorities and
                                                              Government.
                    Organise National Conference (annual)
                    Service Executive Committee and Regional Meetings
                    Fund Raising.                 ’
           All the above will be on-going throughout the first two years.




2.6   What use will be made of volunteers in this project?
      The majority of member groups and associations are ownedf and run by
      volunteers.  The project will be seeking to support and encourage
      their involvement.




2.7  Proposed  programme   of  work for which grant is sought (applies to
project and management grant applicants).   Please state what you propose
doing and when: we need clearly defined quantified targets. It will not be
possible to offer grants unless such targets are provided. Qualitative
performance measures may additionally be suggested where appropriate.
                                                '.I:
Year 1 1992-93 (April-March)
(Give target dates for targets to be met)
      Dgvelop Database - April-Sept 1992
      Contact lists
      Community Reps/Groups/Associations
      Club information - plans; programmes; initiatives etc.
      LA policies/programmes
      Police Liaison - policies and programmes
      Newsletter - quarterly
      Annual Report
      Meet and Discuss policies and programmes (April 92 - March 93)
         Football Assoc. - super-league proposals
         Football League
         Football Trust - funding priorities
         Football Licensing Authority - policies
         Football Stadium Design Council - good practice.
         Football Supporters Association - publicity
         AMA, ADC, DOE, D of Ed & S.
      National Conference March 1993
      Regional Meetings - establish and arrange first series October- Dec,199
      Executive Committee - 6 meetings
                                   v- •

      Fund Raising and Research - on-going.



                                          3
Yea.   i993-94 (if applicable)


                  . Improve on Data Base - on-going
                   Regional Meetings - 2 per year
                   Executive Committee   - 6 per year
                   Fund Raising - on-going
                   Research - on-going
                   Newsletter - quarterly
                   Good Practice Guide - identifying best practices
                                          promoting co-ordinated programmes
                                          etc.                       Q
                                          published March 1994?

                   Annual Report
         First and Second Division Soccer Clubs are to complete ground
         improvements by this date.  Clubs and the Football Trust should be
         in a position to consider greater investment outside of the stadia,




Year 3 1994-95 (if applicable)


                         to be determined




2.8    Starting date of programme for which grant is sought.
on     -r ,« ,                                 April 1992
2.9    Is this a new programme or the continuation of an existing one?
                             New Programme
2.10 Do you know of other voluntary organisations carrying out similar work?
What consultations have you had with them?
                No organisation exists that represents the interests
                of stadium communities.


                                      4
                                          a
o.   MONITORING AND EVALUATION !
Describe   how     progress     on the project described in Section 2 will be
monitored and evaluated in terms of achieving its aims and providing value
for money, including- arrangements for disseminating results. If applicable,
how will you seek the views of clients/customers?

           Executive Committee will monitor performance against
           targets set.                          •

           A Good Practice Guide for Sports Authorities and Central and
           Local Governments will be published by March 1994.




4.   INCOME
4.1 What financial support from public sources (Government Department or
Agency - eg Commission for Racial Equality, Countryside Commission - or local
authority) does the organisation as a whole receive at present, and from
which organisations?



                              None

                                             .  t
4.2 Please give details of grant you have sought/-from other public sources
(see 4.1) towards the costs set out in 5.1 and 5.2.



                 N/A



4.3 Please state other sources of income, and amounts, to be put towards the
costs set out in 5.1 and 5.2 (including any income from private sponsorship,
trusts, fees or trading activity). Indicate which are confirmed.
         Approaches are being made to; the Football Association,
         Football League, the Football Trust, the Rugby Football Union,
         the Sports Council and appropriate trust funds for matching
         funding to enable the NFSC to become properly established.
        Member groups will pay a subscription where their resources allow.




4.4 Briefly describe the arrangements envisaged for meeting the costs of
continuing your project beyond any period of Special Grants Programme
funding, if appropriate.
         Support funding by the Special Grants Programme over the first two
       • years will enable the NFSC to build up its membership strength
         (potentially over 1 0 0 neighbourhood associations) which would pay
         a levy/subscription.




                                         5
                                                 a
      EXPENDITURE Please state expenditure on the programme of work towards
wh. .1 grant is sought. Use 1992-93 prices for each year's expenditure: do not
include any allowance for assumed future inflation.
         r                  •                                  %
5.1 Expenditure on salaries and National Insurance. For programmes of less
than 3 years' duration please, enter 'nil' as appropriate for future years.

  Year       No of      Job title(s) and             Proportion      Cost
             staff      brief indication             of time spent   of this
                        of duties                    on this work    work
                                                     (ie %age of
                                                     a full time
                                                     post            Ci£



                     Executive Officer              x100%            16 500
                     serve as full-time officer
                     to NFSC representing and
 1992-93        2    furthering its interests.
 (April-
  March)
                     Admin/Research Assistant
                                 (Part-time)           50%            5 400




                                                                     17¥ 400
1993-94         2        ^ As above                 As above

                                                                      5 670




                     to be determined
1994-95




                                      6
    5.   Expenditure on other costs.  For programmes of less than 3 years'
     duration please enter "nil" as appropriate for future years.

                                            *        - Year 1                          Year 2                          Year 3
                                                       1992-93                         1993-94                         1994-95
                                                          £                               £                               £

     Rents, rates, heating,
     lighting, cleaning                                         3000                          3500              to be determine

     Postage, telephone and
     stationery                                                 2500                           2500
                                                                                                                             0
        Travel and subsistence                                  3000                           2000

        Printing                                                200 0                          3000
        Conferences, seminars etc                               1 000                        '2 0 0 0
     Other (including capital                                   6000*                         6000                 \

     items;  please specify)


     TOTAL of 5.2                                             17500 /                   5    19000/                                      *
                                                                                     ■ itu

     Cost of salaries (5.1)                                                                                                                  ♦
                                                              21900      f                   23070/


     Total of spend (5.1 & 5.2)                               39400                          42070 ^                                         •


                                                                                                                                 ¥
                min. (50%)
    Amount of grant sought ^nder
                                                              19700 /                        21035 /
    the Special Grants Programme

        *             y k'i( —vjikVsjtA/f   v cia/^fv-ODoXi6v\ Ko hCD(                                                  ,

6   .       CERTIFICATION

On behalf of the trustees/company/.                     i<?0 .<?f .  W . C9WVP    es
we apply for a grant of £* 7 ,7 3 9 1 ^.......... in respect of expenditure to be
incurred in the financial year ending 31 March 1993 on the activities
specified in Session 2.7.

We certify that, to the best of our knowledge and belief, the statements made
by us in this application are true and the information provided is correct.

I enclose a copy of the organisation's most recent audited accounts and
annual report.

Name (block capitals)                PAU.L. .W
                                             .E.S.T.°.N. ...........................................................................
                                                               SECRETARY
Position lilythe organisation

Signed                                                                        M O bO
                                                                                            27th September 1991.
                                                                                         • • * • • * • • • • • « • « > • • • • • • • «




Please return completed form to the appropriate contact in the Department of
the Environment, 2. Marsham Street, London, SW1P 3EB (aee Form SGP 1).

            f   £«cv?c>o x o.D = in n o
                                                                 7
                                                                                        »■
             National Federation of Stadium Communities



Objectives                                                   W


   To improve on the dialogue and to further the relationship
between community and Club in the interests of all.


   To research and identify and promote instances of good
practice nationally and internationally.               '


   To provide and exchange of information and help for member
and other groups located or effected by major sports stadia.


   To ensure that the existence of communities and
neighbourhoods in the shadow of major sports stadia is
recognised by Government; local authorities and sports
administrators and to ensure that the problems associated with
living and working in such a location are understood.
                                                                 ¥


   To ensure that t>he interests of community and neighbourhood
are properly taken into account when plans and programmes for
sports stadia are made.


   To lobby for sufficient funds to be invested in areas around
major sports stadia to ensure that neighbourhoods and
communities can continue to function despite the presence of
the stadia and the large numbers of visitors they attract.


   To promote the implementation of the Taylor Report with
reference to stadium communities.




HCDT/PAW

September 1991
