                                                                                                                        UT1 d'? d 'J0 b 4 j
FI RE S E R V I C E S I N S P E C T Q R A T E / F E U                          9 5 14,1
                                                                                   ,                         A:J 1 i.              iVJj i u


*■"



              HOM E OFFICE
              Queen Anne’s Gate London S W 1 H 9 A T

                                                         Di/rCl lilSO Q■ I
                                                        SwiU:hbom1 0 / I     17$ K*Xj



                                                                                       Yo»r.rcfcju*cc
      h Baden Fsq
      SARD C                                                                           0 \ r r XC-S>|    r
      Department of National Heritage
      Hoorn 3.63                                                                                        FEP/92 35/48/44
      Sanctuary Buildings
      Great. Smith Street                                                                               14 May             1992
      London     SW1P 3HT




{W,y
      DRAFT ANNOtJNCKMKNT ON REVIEW OF ALL SEATING POLTCif


      Thank you for your farther fax requesting comments on the- draft
      PQ and answer Announcing the proposed review which yon enclo.*-*-*•

      Our commonts ate as follows

      1 . The f o u r t h line of the first paragraph of the draft answer
      should refer to 'Lord Justice Taylor in his Final Report on the
      Hillsborough Stadium disaster'.

      I would also suggest that the phrase           refreshing change in
      at ti tudes by spectators' should be replaced by         ’decline \n
      hooliganism' , given the reports in today's newspapers of the
      pitch invasion at Stoke, and last n i g h t ’s incident at Derby!

      2.    r would omit the final sentence of the third paragraph (which
      is in square brackets). All Football League clubs are aware that
      in exroptional circumstances they may be able to convince the FLA
      that an extension to the 1994 deadline is justified.     To mention
      it here may encourage some clubs to think that there is a lOGP _
      h * jo <’f wh ioh they can take advantage and avoid meeting the
      deadline      We should take care not to send any such signals.

      3   For the fame reason I would omit the first                                                           sentence of the
      fifth paragraph of the answer completely.

      4.    1 do not like the final sentence of your 4th paragraph. 1
      suggest a full stop after 'seating' in line 10, then continuing
      w 11h a new sentonee

            f 'Should               the Government decide that standing may                                                        be
                retained             at some grounds,   we shall also have                                                         to
                consider             whether to provide the FI A with powers                                                       to
                                                                          DV 1l
FR OM FI FE S E R U I C E S INSF'ECTOR h T E / F E U   05 14 1
                                                         ,   ,   .




                    require such qrounds ho bring the terracpd areas up to x
                    standard'
                                       t
          5.  With rftf«ence to the final paragraph, would it be wise to
          be more specific about the likely time scale of the review?      I
          appreciate that it is not possible to say precisely how long it
          will be before an announcement can be made on the o u t c o m e .
          Nevertheless, some indication should be given bearing in mind
          that once football clubs are aware that a review is taking place
          many are likely to 'down tools' until the result of it is known.

          6.   I understand that you intend sending the revised draft to
          John de Quidt.  I should be interested to learn of his comments
          in due course.




                                                                     D A PUTERS
             HOME OFFICE
             Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H9AT
                                       Direct line 071-273
                                      Switchboard 071-273 3000



                                                             Your reference
        A Baden Esq
        SARD C                                               Our reference
        Department of National Heritage
        Room 3.63                                                     FEP/92 35/48/44
                                                             Date
        Sanctuary Buildings
        Great Smith Street                                             14 May 1992
        London    SW1P 3BT




        DRAFT ANNOUNCEMENT ON REVIEW OF ALL-SEATING POLICY

        Thank you for your further fax requesting comments on the draft
        PQ and answer announcing the proposed review which you enclosed.

        Our comments are as follows:-

        1.  The fourth line of the first paragraph of the draft answer
        should refer to 'Lord Justice Taylor in his Final Report on the
        Hillsborough Stadium disaster'.

        I would also suggest that the phrase 'refreshing change in
        attitudes by spectators' should be replaced by 'decline in
        hooliganism', given the reports in today's newspapers of the
        pitch invasion at Stoke, and last night's incident at Derby!

        2. I would omit the final sentence of the third paragraph (which
        is in square brackets). All Football League clubs are aware that
        in exceptional circumstances they may be able to convince the FLA
        that an extension to the 1994 deadline is justified. To mention
        it here may encourage some clubs to think that there is a loop­
        hole of which they can take advantage and avoid meeting the
        deadline.  We should take care not to send any such signals.

        3 . For the same reason I would omit the first sentence of the
        fifth paragraph of the answer completely.

        4.   I do not like the final sentence of your 4th paragraph.  I
        suggest a full stop after 'seating' in line 10, then continuing
        with a new sentence

             'Should the Government decide that standing may                         be
             retained at some grounds, we shall also have                            to
             consider whether to provide the FLA with powers                         to




S 363
     require such grounds to bring the terraced areas up to
     standard'

5.  With reference to the final paragraph, would it be wise to
be more specific about the likely time scale of the review?      I
appreciate that it is not possible to say precisely how long it
will be before an announcement can be made on the outcome.
Nevertheless, some indication should be given bearing in mind
that once football clubs are aware that a review is taking place
many are likely to 'down tools' until the result of it is known.

6.   I understand that you intend sending the revised draft to
John de Quidt.  I should be interested to learn of his comments
in due course.




                                               D A PETERS
