                                      vA'W IAaJ V ^
R.
                                              cc   -          /
                                                   Mr Boirbon--
                                                   Mr Smith
                                                   Miss Jago
                 2 6 APR 199®


 Mr Goddard

 Following his meeting with representatives of the NFFSC and the
 FSA (note of the meeting attached) Lord Ferrers, in view of the
 various comments raised at that meeting about inconsistencies in
 the policing of football crowds, said that it might be worthwhile
 his having a short meeting with Mr Anderton.

 You said that Mr Anderton would be coming to QAG to meet with
 officials although a date had not yet been fixed. I would be
 grateful if when fixing the meeting you would consult this office
 so that a date can be fixed when Lord Ferrers is available.
 Lord Ferrers' meeting will take place either before or after yours
 - whichever suits better.




                          BARBARA NICHOLSON (Miss)
                        Assistant Private Secretary

 6 April 1990

 Private Office, QAG.
                               'd°&
E.R.
   NOTE OF A MEETING HELD ON 30 MARCH WITH MEMBERS OF THE FOOTBALL
   SUPPORTERS ASSOCIATION (FSA) AND THE NATIONAL FEDERATION OF
   FOOTBALL SUPPORTERS CLUBS (NFFSC)


   Present:   Lord Ferrers       Mr J Kershaw   }
              Mr Goddard         Mrs M Hartland }   NFFSC
              Mr Bolton          Mr I Todd      }
              Mr Mould
              Miss Nicholson     Mr A Goulbourn }
                                 Mr M Jones       } FSA



   PURPOSE: The meeting had been requested by both organisations in
   order to discuss the role football supporters could play in
   implementing the recommendations made in the Taylor Report.

   All Seated Accommodation

   Mr Todd said that, in order to achieve 20% reduction in standing
   in the first year with minimum inconvenience to home supporters
   some clubs, were proposing to ban the admission of away fans. One
   of the difficulties associated with this concept would be how to
   stop such fans turning up and thereafter mixing with the opposing
   supporters.

   2.   Asked if this would be regarded by the Secretary of State as
   an acceptable way of achieving all seating Lord Ferrers
   acknowledged the difficulty which such a solution might present.
   But that it was a policy which the Secretary of State might have
   to consider on its merits with full regard to all the
   circumstances. Mr Goddard added that such a policy from a police
   point of view could be argued either way.


   Police Handling

   3.   Mrs Hartland spoke of an inconsistency in the policing of
   football matches. She mentioned one particular incident which she
   had witnessed when supporters had been pulled from the terraces
   without having done anything wrong. The incident had involved
   2 dozen police. The terrace had not been congested, and the crowd
   was well behaved. She could not understand what instigated the
   police action. She claimed that the police officers actually
   involved in removing the spectators were themselves subsequently
   apologetic for the action taken, but were required to obey orders
   from their superior officers who were positioned in the control
   centre at the ground. Mrs Hartland was now in the process of


                                                /taking action

                                   1
E.R.


   taking action against the Chief Constable (Humberside). This
   matter was in its early stages and she asked that reference to
   that action should not go outside today's meeting. She had
   initiated proceedings against the Chief Constable because the fans
   concerned were in danger of losing membership to their clubs for
   no good reason.
   4.   Lord Ferrers, while not wishing to comment on this particular
   incident recognised that there could be inconsistencies in the
   police' handling of matches and some over-reaction. This was
   perhaps inevitable given the criticism which the police had
   received in Lord Justice Taylor's interim report. It was an
   important point though and it was some thing he would draw to
   ACPO's attention* Lord Ferrers told the delegation that he knew
   from personal experience that the police, as much as anyone, were
   anxious to get the balance right. Indeed, more training was being
   undertaken by the police with regard to the policing of football
   crowds.

   5.   Mr Kershaw suggested that their might be some merit in
   issuing supporters guidelines (he had written to ACPO on this)
   either by the police or the clubs. This suggestion did not seem
   to have the support of the FSA. He said that the practice at some
   grounds was to regard an umbrella as an offensive weapon and fans
   would not be allowed to carry one into the ground. This,
   Mr Kershaw, found difficult to take seriously, although he
   recognised that in the wrong hands it could be considered to be
   so. The problem was though that fans didn't know what to expect.
   Lord Ferrers said that much could be achieved at a local level in
   sorting out such matters and that was perhaps the way for
   supporters to iron out any difficulties they perceived.
   6.   Mrs Hartland spoke of what she considered to be the
   intransigence of some Chief Constables. She suggested that in
   some cases it was wrong for one man, as she put it, to have so
   much say in what should happen at a particular ground. An example
   she gave involved her own club where a particular part of the
   ground was allocated to members only. It was her view that the
   perimeter fences at this particular part of the ground should come
   down. Anyone who invaded the pitch in the absence of the fence
   would simply have their membership to the club withdrawn. This
   she believed was a better deterrent to the would be invader rather
   than a perimeter fence. But the Chief Constable for the area
   would not give his agreement to the fences coming down. This
   stance seemed totally unreasonable.




                                            /Dialogue involving...




                                   2
Dialogue involving Supporters
7.   Mr Goulbourn said that it was important to create a dialogue
between Local Authorities and supporters and asked whether the
Government considered anyway in which this could be achieved. He
mentioned Lord Justice Taylor's interim report which said that
supporters should be members of the Advisory Group on safety
(recommendation 17 of the Interim report refers). Whereas, in the
Final Report this recommendation was changed. Mr Goulbourn and
his colleagues believed it important that they should have a seat
on such committees. They were not asking for a right to vote
merely to be in a position to advise in the process of decision
making. Lord Ferrers acknowledged the importance of proper
consultation with supporters. He referred to paragraph 152 of the
final report in which Lord Justice Taylor had made clear that
having taken account of advice received since his interim report
he (Lord Justice Taylor) had come to the view that supporters
should not be full members of the advisory group. The issue of
safety certification was the responsibility of the Local
Authority, which was statutorily required to consult the police
and the fire service with regard to such matters.

8.   Mrs Hartland claimed that some local authorities did allow
supporters representatives to sit around the table and again this
was an inconsistency. Lord Ferrers indicated that this was really
a local issue and the Government could not direct to local
authorities on how they should carry out their statutory
functions.

Football Licensing Authority


9.   Mr Todd asked what progress was being made with the Football
Licensing Authority. How may members would it consist of; would
a supporters representative have a seat; and finally would the
FLA have a sub-structure? In reply Lord Ferrers said that the FLA
would consist of a Chairman and say seven or so members; he could
not guarantee that a supporters representative would be one of
those members but suggested that the FSA and the NFFC were free to
submit names for consideration and, finally it would not have a
sub-structure.

10. Mr Goulbourn mentioned that the FSA, in view of the
forthcoming World Cup, were setting up an Advice Centre in
Cagliari for the benefit of English supporters. He asked whether
the Home Office would see fit to help finance this initiative*
Lord Ferrers while complimenting the FSA on this initiative did
not hold out any prospect of funding it, nor did he see the



                                         /Department of.
E.R


      Department of Environment doing so. It was Lord Ferrers' view
      that if financial assistance was to be given it should be from the
      Football Association.


      Specific Offences in the Ground

      11. Mrs Hartland mentioned Lord Justice Taylor's comments on
      ticket touting. Lord Justice Taylor has made specific mention of
      this practice in regard to football and the problems such practice
      created. As long as this habit continued people would always turn
      up at grounds (at all ticket games) in the hope of getting a
      ticket thus creating the same difficulties as those which were
      experienced at Hillsborough. Lord Ferrers noted the concerns and
      said that the matter was still under consideration.
      12. With regard to the other forms of unruly behaviour, for
      example, chanting of obscene or racist abuse and going on to the
      pitch without reasonable excuse which Lord Justice Taylor
      recommended to be made a specific offence at sports grounds
      Lord Ferrers said this were also under consideration.

      13. In concluding the meeting Lord Ferrers thanked the delegation
      for having let him know of their concerns. He had taken on board
      what they had had to say and with regard to the inconsistency of
      policing at football grounds. He reiterated that he would
      certainly draw this particular matter to the attention of ACPO.




                               BARBARA NICHOLSON (Miss)
                             Assistant Private Secretary


      6 April 1990

      Private Office, QAG.




      cc   Mr Bolton
           Mr Goddards
           Mr Moulds

                                          4
