     HOME OFFICE
           G2 DIVISION
 Fire and Emergency Planning Dept
Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
          Tel; 071- 273
          Fax: 071-273 3964
        With Compliments




             Fire. Dont give it
                 a chance
h s •1.29/seminar.rjm


                                         cc   Mr Turney
                                              Mr Peters
                                              Mr Vaughan, DES

Mr Hopley
F8



"SAFETY IN NUMBERS" SEMINAR - 27/28 JANUARY 1992

As you know, I attended this seminar and gave the opening address
in place of Lord Ferrers.   The seminar was jointly sponsored by
the Football Association and the Football League, and the
delegates were in the main, safety officers from First and Second
Division clubs.   In response to my presentation of Government
action since the Taylor report, the delegates made a number of
points, two of which fall to your Division.    They were:

1.   Ticket touts

     There was a strong feeling that the fourth offence
     identified by Taylor, namely selling tickets for and on the
     day of a football match without the authority of the home
     club, should be introduced as soon as possible. Some clubs
     have used bylaws in an attempt to control traders outside
     their  grounds   but   this  was   not  considered   wholly
     satisfactory.

2.   Police charges

     There was a strong call for more consistency across forces
     and although Malcolm George of Greater Manchester Police
     spoke very effectively, he was not able to satisfy the
     audience.

You will also be interested to know that the seminar made a good
deal of progress on the subject of steward training and more
effective use of stewards as replacements for police officers.

The FA and FL intend to organise a similar meeting for Third and
Fourth Division clubs later this year and I expect we shall be
asked to contribute again.




                                         R J MILES
                                         G2 Division


29 January 1992
