                                             I S 13.0 J 4    f* * '


CPPU




BRIEFING FOR QUESTION TIME: LORD TAYLOR'S FINAL REPORT
1.     I attach:

       - a copy of the Home Secretary's statement of 29 January
         following publication of Lord   Justice Taylor's final
         report;

       - HMG's response to Lora Justice Taylor's recommendations;
       - Q and A briefing on the      nationalmembership scheme;
       - Q and A briefing on the tax issues raised by the report;
       - Q and A briefing for     the Home    Secretary covering other
         aspects of the report.

2,   I confirm that the Home Office are not intending to supply
any briefing themselves.




A R BADEN
SARD
Rrn P3/165
Extn 0675
1 February 1990


cc   Mr Lee (covering minute only)
NOTES FOR QUESTIONS ON LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S FINAL REPORT ON THE
HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY


NATIONAL MEMBERSHIP SCHEME


1.   Isn't this a major climb down by the Government?
No, The Government has always said that it would take account of
Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations, The Government has made it
clear that there is no intention to repeal Part I of the Football
Spectators Act. In the light of Lord Justice Taylor's report the
Government has decided not to proceed immediately to establish
the Football Membership Authority with the remit to draw up a
scheme.    Work will continue to establish how Lord Justice
Taylor's anxieties about the scheme can be m e t , should it be
needed in the event of Lord Justice Taylor's alternative strategy
for combatting football hooliganism not working.

2.   if you accept Taylor, why not repeal the scheme?     If you
don't accept Taylor, why not press on?
Taylor has put forward an extensive package of measures which
could have the effect of reducing hooliganism: all-seater stadia;
better facilities; a better example set by players; restrictions
on ticket touts; three new criminal offences; an extension of
attendance orders; and tagging. They should be given a fair
trial. But experience shows that hooliganism is not easily
defeated. The national membership scheme is a further potentially
powerful   weapon  against   the hooligans    and  it would    be
irresponsible to abandon it before experience of the effect of
the Taylor proposals has shown that it is not needed.

3.   Will the Government reimburse the football authorities for
the costs already Incurred?

No,  The   football  authorities and the Department of the
Environment agreed to fund the development work jointly. The
football authorities were fully aware that Lord Justice Taylor
was due to report.

[Department of the Environment paid £132,225 - half the costs up
to Royal Assent]
