                                                     ^ SEP 18S3

                                CC     IW K°Uj-vr


Chris Lightbown Esq
The Sunday Times
1 Pennington Street                                   Rwul
LONDON
E1 9XW

                                             10 August 1989




Dear Mr Lightbown


Thank you for your letter of 2 August to Mr Whalley enclosing
your briefing document together with a copy set of articles.  Mr
Whalley is currently on leave, but I shall ensure that the
material is passed on to him and Lord Justice Taylor in due
course.

I am grateful to you for your offer of assistance and should the
need arise, we shall not hesitate to contact you.

                                        Yours sincerely




                                        JONATHAN C SWEET
                                        Hillsborough Inquiry
                       THE SUNDAY TIMES
1 Pennington Street, London El 9XW Telephone: 01-782 5000 Telex: 262139



2nd August 1989

Robert Whalley,
The Hillsborough Inquiry,
50, Queen Anne' Gate,
London, SW1H 9AT.



Direct lines; 01-782-5718/9
Home;         01-987-8264




Dear Mr Whalley,


I am the journalist co-ordinating The Sunday Times' sports
department coverage of the Hillsborough disaster.   As you
will see from the enclosed set of articles, we have
concentrated on the wider problems of safety and on measures
that could be taken to such an event occuring again.

We are anxious to assist in any way possible with the work of
the second stage of the inquiry.  To this end, I have also
enclosed a copy of the briefing document we submitted to Fifa
on the occasion of our Sports Editor's visit there on July
17. Fifa invited The Sunday Times to Zurich to discuss issues
of safety, after receiving a copy of our first article -
 We Must Act Now.   As you will see, this document contains
much information which has not been published.

Would it be possible to forward a copy of this document and
of our other pieces on the issue, to Lord Justice Taylor?
If there is any way we can assist in the inquiry's work, I
can be reached at the above phone numbers.   In my absence,
please contact Chris Dighton or Chris Nawrat, the Sports
Editor, on the work numbers. I hope you find the enclosed
helpful.


Yours Sincerely,

C f
Chris Lightbown.




   Registered Office: Times Newspapers Limited, P.O. Box 495, Virginia Street, London El 9XY
                                 Registered No. 894646 England
   THE SUNDAY TIMES
   INTERIM REPORT
   ON HILLSBOROUGH
    Introduction
^ N in e ty -fiv e people died in the Hillsborough disaster at the FA Cup semi-final between Liverpool and Nottingham Forest on April
W ] 5>The youngest was 10, the oldest was 65. Two more people, one a young boy who is not expected to survive, are being kept
     alive on life support machines.                                               '                       . .      .
     The picture that has emerged since the disaster shows that safety has never been treated as a major issue in English football,
     that the action that has been taken on safety has only come in response to previous disasters, and that the roots of
      Hillsborough lie within the framework of English football.
     The disaster is being investigated by a public inquiry, headed by Lord Justice Taylor. The first part of his report dealt with the
      immediate causes and recommended immediate safety measures for dubs. The second and final part of his inquiry w ill.
      present recommendations to prevent such a disaster occurring again. The report from this stage is expected towards the end
       of the year.


     Safety Before Hillsborough
     Until 1975 safety at British football grounds was outside the scope of legislation. The FA sent League dubs a pre-paid card,
     with panels to be filled in saying that the dub had been checked for safety by the police, fire and ambulance services, and the
     local authority. When dubs returned this card to the FA, with the four sections endorsed, they were presumed to have a safe
     ground. There were no safety criteria for any of the four agendes to work to, and no check on whether they had in fact
     undertaken any form of inspection.
     In 1973. checks on crush barriers at 50 grounds revealed that 75% fell below the standard subsequently set by the Safety of

      Thefiret legislation on safety at sports grounds was the 1975 Safety of Sports Grounds A ct This was introduradas a resultof
      the 1971 Ibrox disaster in which 66 people were crushed to death. This A ct amended after the 1985 Bradford City fire. is me
      only safety legislation applied to football grounds. Clubs have to obtain safety certificates from local authorities. To gain a
      certificate, dubs have to satisfy a set of very specific, technical points known as the Green Code.
       But this code is voluntary. It has no legal force. The most a local authority can do is recommend that a dubcam esout tne
       provisions of the A ct Moreover, local authorities do not have the expertise to check the standard of any safety work dubs
       carry out Neither the Football Assodation nor the Football League have staff responsible for safety.
       The 1974 Hearth and Safety at Work Act is believed by authorities on safety to be the best
       world. The safety experts consulted by The Sunday Times believe this legislation applies to football grounds. (Sea May z i

                       Office, which oversees the A c t through the Hearth andjSafety^Executive.
       Hillsborough, it believed that the voluntaryprovisions of the Safety ° f Spots Act were
       executives Inspectorate —600 inspectors for afl of Britain —are only able to visit premise# once every seven years, ana tne
       government is not interested in expanding this organisattonfor the sake oftootbal.                         P o e tt-l c v ta rt
       £70m has been spent on safety by footttiB dubs since the Ibrox disaster. (£40m from the Focibal Trust and F o ctta l u ro iro
       imorovement Trust). But most of this has been on anti-hooligan measures.                                       hm  lrrm
       The^nterim report of the Popplewei inquiry into the Bradford City f t* recommended
       were granted safety certificates, and that adherence to these conditions be made com pifccry.          presaue from tfw FA
        and the Football League, these proposals were deleted from the flnai version of the Poppiewe* report
       Therefore, by the time of Hilstocrough:
        □ No single body had responsibly for safety at foctbal grounds.
        □ Responsibility was spread among local authortes. who had no legal means nor staff expertise to enforce it
        □ The government had refused to apply the best safety and enforcement procedure in the world, to football grounds.
        □ The football authorities had blocked proposals for compulsory safety measures at football grounds.
    Blunders at Hillsborough
  □ th e police warned Sheffield Wednesday in 1981 that the capacity of Leppings lane had been set too high. The club failed to
  pass on the warning letter from the police to the consultant engineer responsible for safety barriers.
  □ The fire brigade discovered in 1985 that there was no control over how fans were distributed between the six pens on the
  terrace once they were let in. The dub denied knowledge of this information.
   □ The technical recommendations of the Green Code were breached at Hillsborough in respect of the capacity of spectator’s
  pens, crush barriers, perimeter gates and the tunnel on to the terrace.
   □ Liverpool were given the smaller end of the ground in spite of having a much higher average home attendance. The police
   insisted on this allocation of terradng because, otherwise, the two groups of fans could cross each other’s path on the way to
   the ground.
? □ Only seven out of 23 turnstiles were in operation at the Leppings Lane end.
    □ Police radios broke down, so messages from outside did not reach the police inside.
    □ It took the police two minutes to persuade the fire service to send cutting equipment to the ground because the fire service
    operator did not know where the ground was, or understand why wire-cutting equipment was needed.


•
    □ When the fire brigade arrived, the first two policemen they met said they knew nothing about an accident and the third
    asked why they had come.
1   □ The police believed there would be no problem with fans moving from the tunnel on to the terrace because that area was out
    of sight of their crowd-control cameras, which they assumed monitored all areas of concern.
    □ The microphone in the police room at Hillsborough did not work.
    □ The only entrance high enough for ambulances at Hillsborough was at the opposite end of the ground from Leppings Lane.
I   The Leppings Lane entrance was too low.
    □ Stewards and police both thought the other was responsible for safety in the Leppings Lane terrace. Sheffield Wednesday
    stewards had refused to steward the end for the previous three years at cup semi-finals, because of the abuse from visiting
    fans.
     □ Sheffield Wednesday’s dub doctor said he had not realised the dub’s safety certificate required him to attend the first-aid
     room at the ground, or that he should notify the police control room of his whereabouts during the game.


     Reaction to Hillsborough
  i The Hillsborough disaster dominated the media for nearly a month. None the less, the prevailing attitude was that this was a
* • single, unfortunate event which, once mourned, should be forgotten.
    The Sunday Times sports department disagreed. We believed this disaster was the logical culmination of the way football is
    administered in England, and the result of our cultural attitudes towards watching football. We felt the right response was. anger
    and a committment to change. Anger at the administrative and cultural attitudes which had brought Hillsborough about, and a
    committment to changing these attitudes and policies.
    While the rest of the media concentrated on the events at Hillsborough itself, we saw Hillsborough as a catalyst for much-
    needed changes in English football. We believed that the best way to mourn the victims was to research, publish and advocate
    measures which would change the structure of English football in such a way that it could never happen again.
    We suspended our coverage of football on April 23. the Sunday after Hillsborough, and devoted the space instead to a
    package of radical measures to re-shape English football, with safety as a paramount concern.


     The Sunday Times’ Proposals
     □ A single administrative body for Engllsfffootball, with draconian powers to build new grounds, enforce safety measures and
     develop a national strategy for the gamerWe cited the London Docklands Development Corporation as a model.
     □ The appointment as head of this body p f a politician with a proven track record of initiating radical changes in run-down
     drcumstances. We suggested Peter Walker, the Secretary of State for Wales.
     □ The building of all-seat stadiums jon .new, spadous sites away from the inner city. We got Ron Labinski, of HOK
     International, one of the leading stadium designers in the world, to design two models, for large and smaller clubs.
      □ Various measures to raise the finance for new stadiums, while at the same time, creating financial viability for English
     football. These induded a Football Levy Board, on the lines of the Betting Levy Board, the purchase by fans of permanent
      season tickets, ground sharing, and the live TV transmission of all-ticket matches.
      In order to stimulate debate on the issues raised by Hillsborough The Sunday Times sent copies of this page tp, among others,
      every Football League dub, leading members of the FA and League, the other UK football authorities, the Prime Minister, frie
      Minister of Sport, the Heatth and Safety Executive, the Football Trust, and the Football Grounds Improvement Trust. (Covering
       letter endosed.)
   Response to The Sunday Times’ Proposals
  The response to this letter and to further Sunday Times articles on Hillsborough has been enormous, and is continuing. The
  response has included:
  □ A major financial consortium involved in the regeneration of inner cities, who have offered to finance and construct new
  stadiums. (Letter from PROBE attached.)                                                              *
  Q A number of major civil engineering and construction firms expressed interest in building such stadiums, offering to work in
   conjunction with HOK or any other suitable architects. We are still in the process of vetting these approaches, before putting
   the companies in touch with the FA and Football League. Attached is the initial letter from the Dew Group, with whom we have
   had the closest contact
   □ Several firms of architects expressed willingness to work with HOK, or with construction firms involved in the building of
    new stadiums. We have put a number of these firms m touch with the FA and League, notably the company who re-designed
    Bradford City’s stand after the fire of 1985, (tetter attached.)
    □ Public response was very positive, with all but two letters commending us on our stance and strongly advocating that we
    should continue campaigning for as long as was necessary.
    □ The response from politicians was cautious. Virtually all said they did not want to commit themselves to new measures in
    advance of the Taylor inquiry’s recommendations. The replies from the Home Office, replying on behalf of the Prime Minister,
     and the Minister for Sport are attached.
     □ Four rugby league dubs made contact expressing interest in the second HOK stadium, and asking to be put in touch with'
     the architects. Only one dub (Salford) was willing to be publicly quoted. The others were only at the initial planning stage. We
^    learnt of the interest of one dub (Barrow) through contact from the town’s chief executive, who said the second HOK stadium
      had galvanised long-standing plans to house the town’s football and rugby league dubs under one roof with local authority
      support and as a result this project would now go ahead.
      □ The response from football dubs was disappointing. Of the 92 League dubs, only six replied, (Bournemouth, Colchester,
      Luton Reading, Sunderland and Watford.) Others, contacted through our regular journalistic work, intimated support for some
      sort of action to be taken in the light of Hillsborough but felt leadership should be provided by other dubs or by the League or
      FA, and in the absence of such leadership did not want to take a public stance.


     General Reaction to Hillsborough
     There were other constructive reactions to Hillsborough. But to appreciate the signficance of these, two points have to be
     made. First that in the opinion of one leading Football League official, The Sunday Times has itself exerted an influence on
     reactions to Hillsborough. By presenting the first and most wide- ranging proposals for change, he believed that The Sunday
     Times has stimulated some of the measures outlined below, measures which have no ostensible connection to our campaign.
        Second, that Hillsborough brought about a wide consensus that most of the key problems in English football, induding those
     of safety, could be traced back to the game’s stucture. For instance, it was widely felt after Hillsborough that if the FA and
     League had been one body meaningful safety restrictions could have imposed on dubs.
        But because the structure of English football is so outmoded and diffuse, many prominent individuals working for the FA or
      League as well as many dub offidals, felt limited in what they were able to say publicly. Several were at pains to tell us privately
      that some of the steps detailed below are the limit of what they believe is feasible to achieve now. None the less, they believe
      Hillsborough has produced the first concerted shift in thinking in English football for years. Some of the measures outlined
      below have to be seen as the lim it of what can be acheived by individuals working within a constricted and illogical framework.
      □ The FA and League established a joint committee of officers to submit proposals to the second stage of the Taylor inquiry.
      The main recommendations of this committee were:
      1) the phased introduction of a high percentage of seating at all League grounds, culminating in 75% of first division grounds
      capacity being seats by the 1998/9 season;
      2) a reducion in the taxation of pools money, in return for which the untaxed money would be spent on new stadiums and
      safety measures at existing ones:
       3) goverment financial help for such ground improvements:
       4) the Green Code for safety to be made mandatory.
       The FA undertook to seek sponsorshipjtor the FA Cup. with each period of sponsorship lasting five years. A condition of
       sponsorship would be that payment would be made in advance in the form of an interest-free loan, which would be used to
       finance the building of new stadium s;--—; —
       The committee's report pointed out that apart from Wembley, no English ground could meet Fifa’s requirements for seating in
       the World Cup finals. Conversion to ail seats would bring nine dubs up to Fifa’s first-round seating requirements.
       This committee interpreted its brief in the widest possible way, induding, for instance, a visit to Ntmes. the French second
       division dub. to examine their electronically-controlled fendng. A version of this fence will be built and erTected at Walsall’s new
       stadium when it is completed.
       Members of this joint committee have continued to meet on both a formal and informal basis since completing their submission
       to the Taylor inquiry, and several have told The Sunday Times that such liaison could form the basis of a unified FA and
       League.                                                                                                                 •
       A group of dub chairmen discussed the idea of a single governing body for English football, entitled the English Football
        Federation, to supplant both the FA and League. Such ideas surface periodically in English football. But the significance of this
        proposal was that although its proponents induded some of the most vociferously anti-FA chairmen in the League they
        envisaged the Federation as a means of uniting the bodies on terms acceptable to both. One of their concerns was that such a
        body would be able to tackle issues raised by Hillsborough. Such thinking would not have ocurred before Hillsborough.
 The five leading dubs who have threatened to break away from the Football League - Arsenal, Everton, Liverpool,
 Manchester United and Tottenham — decided to drew up a blueprint for the future of English football. The intention is to
 present this blueprint as an ultimatum, and if serious steps are not taken to implement the proposals the dubs will carry out
 their threat to break away. This is the first time the big five’s threat to break away has been qualified, and with the exception of
 the idea of uniting the FA and League, many of the points echo The Sunday Times’ proposals.
 Reg Burr, the chairman of Millwall, was elected as a first division management committee representative, defeating Ken Bates
 of Chelsea. Burr stood as a condliator between the big five dubs and the rest, a position that would have held little credence
 before Hillsborough. His election significantly altered the balance of the League's management committee—in the absence of
 a chief executive a very powerful body — and made a breakaway less likeiy.
 Norman Tebbit, the former cabinet minister and confidant of the Prime Minister, approached the Football League about the
 possibility of becoming their chief executive. Before Hillsborough and the widespread consensus for radical change that it
 created, someone of Tebbit’s statue would not have considered the job.
 A number of dubs announced plans or intentions to move to fresh stadiums on the outskirts of their towns. Others, who had
 shelved such plans as unrealistic, renewed them. Below, is a list of the dubs known to The Sunday Times to be planning new
 stadiums. This list is confidential and more extensive than any other in Britain, induding that held by the Football League:
 Bournemouth
 Bristol Rovers
 C hester



  Millwall
  Oxford
  Reading
  Rochdale                                                                                   .
  Southend
  Stockport County
  Swansea
  Walsall
- Wigan
  Wimbledon
  Wrexham
  (16 dubs)
  Football safety is to be made the prerogative of a government department probably the Department of the Enviroment which
  will have a full-time office dealing with safety at sports grounds. This has not been announced.
  The government’s public position remains that there will be no government funds for new stadiums. The Prime Minister
  believes football already has the money and is misusing it by spending it on transfers. They believe fans should pay more to
  finance stadiums.
  Anfield is to become an all-seat stadium by 1992, the club's centenary year. The Kop will probably become all-seat the season
  after next The total cost is estimated at £6m.
  The Gallup poll showed 77% of people think football should be all-seat
  All-seat stadiums would mean ticket prices of about £8, against the £5 average now.
  The government accepts that fans should have closer links with dubs, and is looking at ways this could be created through the
  Football Membership Authority, which will administer the membership scheme. The scheme will be enacted in the early months
  of the 1990-91 season.
                                                                                                 Chris Nawrat and Chris Lightbown
