      HOME OFFICE
      Queen Anne’s Gate London SW1H 9AT
                                    Direct line
                                                  071 273 3099
                                   Switchboard    071 273 3000

Mr D P Evans                                       Your reference
                                                        refere
Secretary                                         DPE/JCC
Welsh Rugby Union                                  Our reference
PO Box 22                                         FEP/90 35/47/4
CARDIFF                                            Date
CF1 1JL                                           7 August 1990



Dear Mr Evans


Thank you for your letter of 31st July. This is just to thank
you also for your hospitality when we met recently and to
enclose a copy of my note of our discussions.

A copy of the correspondence goes to the Welsh Office for
information.

                                                  Yours sincerely




                                                  D J MOULD

                                                  (Fire and Emergency
                                                  Planning Department)


cc   Mr Cooper, Welsh Office
NOTE OF MEETING OF 18 JUNE:     RUGBY FOOTBALL UNION OF WALES/HOME
OFFICE


Introduction

1.   With colleagues from the Welsh Office, Mr Cooper and Mr
Wynn, I met Mr Evans, Secretary of the Rugby Football Union of
Wales (WRFU) together with Mr Siddall, Consultant Adviser to the
WRFU for the National Stadium, Cardiff and Mr Price, Chairman of
WRFU ground committee for the stadium on 18 June. The meeting
was to explore the WRFU's response to the Final Report by Lord
Justice Taylor and in particular the possible application of
recommendations 1 - 4 of the Report on seated accommodation to
WRFU grounds, including the National Stadium, Cardiff Arms Park.

2.   Home Office (HO) opened by explaining that the present
legislation, the Football Spectators Act 1989 (FSA), did not
extend to rugby grounds. The Government had indicated that
before considering extending the scope of that legislation
discussions would be held with the representative bodies of the
sports concerned.  It would clearly wish to make its decision in
the light of the progress being made on the implementation of
other recommendations by Lord Justice Taylor including the WRFU's
policy on seated accommodation at the National Stadium. HO
recognised that the starting point for achieving safety at such
grounds was probably different from soccer in that crowd disorder
of the kind experienced at association football matches was not a
feature of Rugby Union. The WRFU recognised that many of the
Final Report recommendations applied to rugby grounds and
supported their implementation.

National Stadium, Cardiff A r m s Park

3.   The WRFU advised that the National Stadium held 56,000:
39,000 seated, 17,000 standing (see diagram annexed to this
note). Space constraints meant that conversion of the two
standing areas would probably mean an approximate 6,000 reduction
in the capacity should the standing areas be converted to all­
seated. Cost apart, the WRFU were reluctant to attempt
conversion to all-seated accommodation for these areas.   They
explained that pressure for tickets for international matches was
already considerable and to reduce the stadium capacity would add
to that pressure and result in criticism throughout the game.
Welsh rugby clubs already complained of inadequate ticket
allocations. Rugby in Wales was the 'peoples game' more so than
in either England or Scotland. The WRFU did not wish to price
out ordinary supporters whose allocation of an international
ticket was often a reward for service to the game through their
particular club. Moreover, the WRFU did not wish to reduce the
present scope to provide cheap admission for school children (in
organised parties) whom they wished to encourage into the game.
4.   The WRFU recognised that many of these considerations could
well apply to soccer grounds, where attendances were often
considerably lower than those for international matches at the
National Stadium. Even so they recognised that any plans to
relocate or redevelop the existing stadium should reflect the
all-seater recommendations made by the Hillsborough Inquiry -
especially since the stadium was used for other events including
a trend to stage international soccer matches (when the terraces
would have to remain unused).

5.   The WRFU advised that the safety recommendations of the
Inquiry were being applied to the stadium. The admission of
spectators and the numbers within sub divisions of terraces were
carefully monitored. The packing density for the terraces was
42.5 per 10 square metres. This reflected the barrier
configuration.  Computerisation of the turnstiles was being
carried out. The flow rate of turnstiles was being measured (up
to 1,250 per hour for all ticket matches). The ground had a
 statement of intent1 with the police. They had ongoing training
for stewards with the aim of constantly improving and upgrading
standards of stewarding. Arrangements with the police to control
the approaches to the grounds so as to reduce congestion at the
turnstiles were working well. New signposting was being
introduced and was almost completed.  Improvements were being
made to the police control room, its equipment and CCTV
provision. The installation of land lines to key points had been
completed.  For international matches 70 first-aiders from St
John's Ambulance were in attendance together with 3 doctors.
First-aid facilities had been upgraded and first-aid points
established in different parts of the ground.
National Inspectorate

6.   The WRFU felt that a national body to assist standardise the
requirements of local authorities on safety certification would
be helpful even if it were done on a voluntary rather than
statutory basis. HO pointed out the awkwardness of legislation
which created a statutory body but which at the same time did not
extend the scope of legislation relating to all-seated
requirements. The WRFU recognised this. They felt a voluntary
system might succeed. HO noted these points for consideration".
Other rugby grounds in Wales

7.   Whilst the WRFU welcomed, and were willing to encourage
improved safety at rugby grounds by implementation of the Final
Report recommendations at Welsh grounds they did not support the
introduction of all-seated accommodation for reasons of cost
(Football Trust funds were not available to the WRFU), and need
given the behaviour of rugby crowd, the open nature of some
grounds and the less restricted movement of spectators at them.
HO recognised that, as in England, there were differences in
crowd patterns and in the operation of rugby grounds, but
emphasised the need for their safe operation bearing in mind that
in ™any cases they were attended by more spectators than at some
football grounds.  The WRFU recognised this. They had received

                                2
no reports of excessive demands on Welsh rugby grounds by local
authorities or police.

Conclusion

8.    The WRFU made plain their commitment to spectator safety at
Welsh rugby grounds, including the National Stadium. They
supported the implementation of the relevant safety
recommendations made by Lord Justice Taylor. They were not
opposed in principle to all-seated accommodation for the National
Stadium (already almost 70% seated) and any future plans for the
stadium, or any relocated stadium, would take full account of the
Final Recommendations in this respect. HO noted their support
recognised the difficulties and constraints in relation to the7
National Stadium and expressed the hope that a solution would be
found. HO expected to consult further* on these issues with
relevant local authority associations and hoped to come back to
the WRFU in the not too distant future once Ministers had made
decisions on sports other than association football.




                                       D J MOULD

24 July 1990


dm6.7




                               3
