                                            4138




Leeds                                       FEP/91   35/48/37
LS28
                                            27 August 1991


Dear Mr

Thank you for your recent letter to Colin Moynihan MP which has
been forwarded to this Department in view of our responsibilities
for safety at sports grounds.

Home Office interest in sports ground safety really began after
the Ibrox disaster in 1972 and the subsequent Report by Lord
Wheatley which led to the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975. The
main principle of this Act is that the Home Secretary can
designate any sports ground which in his opinion has accomodation
for over 10,000 spectators as a ground requiring a safety
certificate to be issued by the relevant local authority.     The
terms  and   conditions   of   a  safety   certificate   are  the
responsibility of the local authority although they should comply
with the advice contained in the Home Office Guide to Safety at
Sports Grounds (the Green Guide).

Initially the Home Secretary only designated the national stadia
and grounds in Division 1 of the Football League. This was later
extended to include grounds in Divison 2 and then all other
grounds with accomodation for over 10,000 where football, rugby
union, rugby league and cricket are played.

Following the Bradford fire on 11 May 1985 where 56 people died
Lord Justice Popplewell held an inguiry into events that took
place there and at Birmingham City on the same day when a boy was
killed following the collapse of a wall after an afternoon of
crowd disturbances.   Popplewell's Final Report recommended the
extension of designation under the 1975 Act and also the need for
further controls to be exercised over smaller sports grounds.

The Fire Safety and Safety at Places of Sports Act 1987
determines that any stand at a sports ground, not desiganated
under the 1975 Act, which can accomodate at least 500 people
under cover should become a regulated stand and as such require
a safety certificate to be issued by the local authority.

In addition, Popplewell made a number of recommendations for
improving safety standards at sports grounds and these were
incorporated in a revised version of the Green Guide in 1986.

Following the Hillsborough Stadium disaster on 15 April 1989 in
which 95 people died Lord Justice Taylor carried out an Inquiry
into the events that took place.   His Final Report contained 76
recommendations.  Many of these, including the reduction in the
allowed level of density of spectators on terraces and the
removal of spikes from the top of perimeter fences were included
in a revised edition of the Green Guide in 1990.

In accordance with another of Taylor's recommendations, the
Government determined that all grounds in Divisions 1 and 2 of
the Football League should provide seated accomdation only by
August 1994 and those in Divisions 3 and 4 by August 1999.    In
order to help clubs meet the costs of carrying out this work the
Chancellor, in his 1990 budget, made available £100 million over
a five year period to the Football Trust.

Under the Football Spectators Act 1989 the Football Licensing
Authority (FLA) was established.   This will be responsible for
issuing licenses to grounds where matches designated under the
1989 Act are played, that is Football League grounds.             A
condition of such a licence is likely to be that the deadlines
for converting the ground into an all seated one are being m e t .

I hope this information is of use to you for your project.


                                              Yours sincerely


                                               Steve Bilbe
                                               (Fire and Emergency
                                             Planning Department)
                                            U ads      L saT s

Dear       m    r mojnihan,

©tuart-        rvsy.   o,-' .          ^                  oJocxxfc" t o
end      f v      ^             if0^       °f      ^     , <3rC'®e
footiooja                                    ^

         coQ® Kopioc*           upvj* CouOlct tzeLA rYU uol*/"
                                Prcoent- ©feo^oiarol o f sctffebu
         O * 0 ^ 30^                   t d n i r o u c ^ o u j t (c H e , & x 5   3
 c»2HHs • “X. oaaiUcA cUeo be. ArcxJfcaJPudl \ p lcu
C ^O ol b eu nne op encj p»<^s fo r <dm , { U u J
fe^e. Q C M ^ ^ o n ^ f c .   hc^s               footiooja , b o S L J
            S rounols ronoprg f r<w rnc^c^nsota/ c W
        ^Trapford end           HoA
                                  ifax's Shcxa aro^d -

5   ^      1 '^                            - - y




                                ^Quro Rny^idUM
  With C om plim en ts



COLIN B. MOYNIHAN, M.P.




  h o u se o f com m ons
     LONDON, SW1A OAA
                            COLIN B. MOYNIHAN, M.P.
■V




                          H O U S E OF C O M M O N S
                              LONDON    SW1A OAA            15   August   1 g 91




      Thank you for your letter of 11 August.

        I have to write and tell you that after three years as
Minister for Sport I moved to the Department of Energy in July
l a s t year .   I h a v e t h e r e f o r e p a s s e d your correspondence,
concerning the present standard of safety at football grounds, on
to my successor, Robert Atkins, for his attention.

                                 Yours sincerely
