DRAFT


                        DEALING WITH DISASTER
                         HOME OFFICE GUIDANCE


CHAPTER 1i    INTRODUCTION




1.1     The aim of this guidance is to raise the standard of
        peacetime disaster preparedness.   Advice on good practice,
        based on the previous experience of handling disasters, is
        offered to those who have responsibility for planning the
        response to, or may be involved in, the handling of
        disasters as an extension of their day-to-day
        responsibilities.    Thus the advice is offered to the
        emergency services - police, fire, HM Coastguard and the
        NHS (ambulance and emergency medical services) - and local
        authorities.   But perhaps more importantly, the advice is
        also offered to those less familiar with disaster
        management who nevertheless may become involved in the
        response;   for example, central government departments,
        units of the armed forces, voluntary organisations,
        utilities (water, gas, telephone and electricity

        companies) and industrial and transport operators.    The
        advice is therefore intended to show any who might be
        involved how they can fit into the overall disaster
        response.



1.2     Disasters can take a variety of forms, including:




                                                                    iWv
Natural           Storms, floods, snowfall, landslides,
                  forest fires etc.


Technological     Damage to structures and buildings;
                  industrial (eg chemical, nuclear);
                  transport (air, sea, rail and road).


Social            Health emergencies (epidemics),
                  poisoning of the food chain.


Environmental     Air, water and land pollution or
                  contamination.


A disaster is commonly understood by the general public as
a great misfortune or calamity.    In the context of
emergency planning, a useful working definition of a
disaster is any event (happening with or without advance
warning) causing death or injury, damage to property or
the environment or disruption to the community, which
because of the scale of its effects cannot be dealt with
by the emergency services and local authorities as part of
their day-to-day responsibilities.


This working definition above encompasses the definitions
used by the emergency services for a 'major incident'.
(These are included at Annex A to this chapter.)       In

defining a major incident, the emergency services
recognise that there will be a need for special
arrangements to be brought into play to respond to such an
incident.   That the emergency services should use the term
'major incident' is right because their contingency
arrangements and operational response must be geared to
any situation beyond their normal day-to-day activities.
However, not every major incident will become a disaster.
The most easily distinguished example is that of a serious
accident on the motorway involving a large number of
vehicles.   This may well be classed as a major incident if
it demands special arrangements on the part of the police,
fire and the NHS (both ambulance and hospital-based
services) but unless it has some wider ranging effects on
the community it will not be classed as a disaster.


Disasters have a variety of effects on society and the
environment.   Accordingly, they demand a combined
response, linking the expertise and resources of the
emergency services and local authorities, supplemented
where necessary by other services and organisations.     It
would be unrealistic to expect any single organisation to
be responsible for dealing with disasters in the UK.     In
1988 the Home Secretary initiated a review of the handling
of disasters and in 1989 he confirmed the decision of
successive governments that a national disaster squad
would not improve the immediate assistance already
provided by the local emergency services, supplemented

where necessary by local authority, health and other
services and organisations.
.6   The purpose of the next chapter is to set out the main

     features of the combined response to disaster.   Subsequent
     chapters will then address in greater detail specific
     subjects which those involved in managing the combined
     response will need to take into account.
                                                     ANNEX A




DEFINITIONS OF MAJOR INCIDENT




Police Service


The following definition is given in the Association of Chief

Police Officers Emergency Procedures Manual.


      "A major incident is any emergency that requires the
      implementation of special arrangements by one or all of
      the emergency services for:-


      a.    The rescue and transport of a large number of
            casualties;


      b.    The involvement either directly or indirectly of
            large numbers of people;


      c.    The handling of a large number of enquiries likely
            to be generated both from the public and the news

            media usually to the police;


      d.    Any incident that requires the large scale combined
            resources of the 3 emergency services;
      e.       The mobilisation and organisation of the emergency

               services and supporting organisations, eg local
               authority, to cater for the threat of death, serious
               injury or homelessness to a large number of people."


Fire Service


The following definition is set out in the Fire Service Major
Incident Emergency Procedures Manual.


      "A major incident is any emergency that requires the
      implementation of special arrangements by one or more of
      the emergency services for:-


      a.       The initial treatment, rescue and transport of a
               large number of casualties;


     b.        The involvement either directly or indirectly of
           large numbers of people;


     c.        The handling of a large number of enquiries likely
               to be generated both from the public and the news
           media usually to the police;


     d.        The need for the large scale combined resources of
           the 3 emergency services;


     e.        The mobilisation and organisation of the emergency
           services and supporting organisations, eg local
            authority, to cater for the threat of death, serious
            injury or homelessness to a large number of people."


National Health Service (including Ambulance Service)
The following is extracted from Health Circular (90)25
'Emergency Planning in the NHS: Health Services Arrangements for
Dealing with Major Incidents' - Department of Health 1990:


"There is no standard definition of a "major incident" which
would satisfy the health service and other agencies likely to be
involved, as each tends to determine such incidents in the light
of its own responsibilities.   For the purpose of this guidance
however, a major incident arises when any occurrence presents a
serious threat to the health of the community, disruption to the
service, or causes or is likely to cause such numbers of
casualties as to require special arrangements by the health
service."




Local Authority



The "Local Authorities Civil Emergencies Planning Manual",
published by the County Emergency Planning Officers' Society,
contains the following definition which augments that used by
the police service:


      "A serious disruption of life which causes or threatens



      a.    death or injury to numbers of people;
b.   extensive damage to property;   or,


c.   contamination of the environment;


on a scale beyond the capacity of the services for the
public operating under normal conditions and requiring the
special mobilisation and organisation of those services."
DRAFT




                        DEALING WITH DISASTER
                         HOME OFFICE GUIDANCE




CHAPTER 2:    THE COMBINED RESPONSE




2.1     Paragraph 1.2 of the previous chapter illustrates the many
        forms in which disaster may strike.     Accordingly, there
        can be no one "ideal” response to disaster;     the response
        will vary just as the nature and effects of the disaster
        will vary.   But any response will be a combined operation,
        and certain other features will also be common to the
        response to most disasters.   For example:


        a.    The initial response will normally be provided by
              the emergency services supported by the local

              authority and voluntary organisations,


        b.    The basic objectives of the combined response will
              be similar on each occasion,


        c.    The same basic management structure will generally

              be applicable, and




                                                                     I* / *
      d.    During the response, records should be kept for

            debriefings, formal inquiries and publicising
            lessons learnt.


      In this chapter points a. to d. are addressed in turn.
      Chapter 8 addresses the combined approach to planning,
      training and exercising the local response.


AGENCIES PROVIDING THE INITIAL RESPONSE


2.2   The immediate response to a disaster is usually provided
      by the emergency services - police, fire, ambulance and
      emergency medical services and HM Coastguard as
      appropriate - supported by the local authority.     Annex A
      lists those guidance documents which have already been
      issued (or will shortly be issued or re-issued) to the
      statutory services in England and Wales.    This chapter
      draws on the existing guidance documents to show how the
      procedures and operations described in those documents may
      be combined and coordinated to provide an efficient and
      effective response to disaster.


2.3   Each service or agency working at the scene of a disaster
      will have its own role and responsibilities, as set out in
      the relevant guidance documents.    To summarise:


      a.    The police coordinate the activities of all those

            responding at and around the scene of a disaster,
            which must - unless the disaster has been caused by
severe weather or other natural phenomena - be
treated as the scene of a crime and preserved
accordingly.    The police will oversee investigation
as necessary and will be responsible for gathering
and processing casualty information.    HM Coroner
will be responsible for investigating the cause of
deaths arising from the disaster, and on his behalf
the police will have responsibility for identifying

and removing the dead.


The first concerns of the fire service are to rescue
people trapped in wreckage or debris and to prevent
further escalation of the disaster by tackling fires
and dealing with released chemicals and other
hazards.    Where appropriate, the fire service
coordinates the safety of all those working at the
site.


Working with a Medical Incident Officer and medical
teams, the ambulance service seeks to save life

through effective emergency treatment at the scene
of a disaster and by transporting the injured in
order of priority to selected receiving hospitals.


The primary responsibility of HM Coastguard is to
initiate and coordinate civil maritime search and
rescue within the United Kingdom Search and Rescue
Region.    This includes mobilising, organising and
            despatching resources to assist people in distress

            at sea or in danger on the cliffs or shoreline.


      e.    In the immediate aftermath of a disaster, local
            authorities normally support the emergency services
            by making available the wide range of services and
            resources at their disposal.   Later, during the
            subsequent period of restoration and rehabilitation,
            the appropriate local authority may assume the lead.


      f.   Voluntary organisations and individual volunteers
            have frequently contributed to the response to
            disaster, and the valuable part which volunteers can
            play is discussed in Chapter 5.


OBJECTIVES FOR A COMBINED RESPONSE


2.4   The roles and responsibilities just described must be seen
      in the context of the objectives of the disaster response.

      All services and agencies responding to the disaster will

      be working - notwithstanding their particular
      responsibilities - to these common objectives.   They are:


      a.   to prevent escalation of the disaster;



      b.   to save life;


      c.   to relieve suffering;
      d     to protect property;


      e.   to restore normality as soon as possible;


      f.   to facilitate criminal investigation and judicial,
            public, technical, or other inquiries as
            appropriate.


BASIC MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE FOR THE DISASTER RESPONSE


2.5   In this section, the management principles underlying the
      combined response are described.    These can most clearly
      be portrayed using an example of a disaster confined to a
      single site, but further guidance on widespread disasters
      can be found in paragraphs 2.20 and 2.21.


2.6   If there is warning of an impending disaster, some
      preparations can be made.    More often, however, disasters
      strike with little or no warning and an effective response
      depends on the quick reaction of the statutory services.
      The emergency services maintain a state of readiness so
      that they can provide a rapid response;     local authorities
      and other organisations have arrangements for calling out
      key personnel to contribute to the response.     It is
      essential that all services and agencies likely to be
      called upon to deal with disaster stand ready to do so at

      very short notice.
2.7   The scene immediately after disaster has struck is likely
      to be chaotic.   To overcome this, the emergency services
      will build up command structures within which they will
      pursue their common objectives.


The initial Response


2.8   It is generally accepted that the first member of the
      emergency services to arrive on the scene should:


      a.   assess the nature and scale and confirm the location
            of the incident


      b.   decide whether or not to invoke major incident
            procedures and


      c.   relay this and any other relevant information to his
            control.


      On receipt of the initial message, the control room should

      immediately and in accordance with established plans alert
      the other services* control rooms and the appropriate
      local authorities.     It is also generally accepted that the
      first officer on the scene should:


      d.    identify routes into and out of the disaster site;



      e.   establish the risk of further hazards;
       f.   begin to direct information gathering, life saving
             and other operations as appropriate;     and


       g.   act as the communications link.


2.9    These initial tasks are of vital importance and the first
       member of the emergency services on the scene should
       complete them - or at least carry them out as far as
       circumstances permit - before beginning rescue operations.
       Experience shows that before the emergency services arrive
       to provide assistance, survivors will already have tried
       to help each other, and people nearby may also be

       assisting.


2.10   Once officers from each emergency service arrive at the
       scene they should establish a TEMPORARY JOINT COMMAND.
       The most senior officer of each service should act as
       temporary incident officer for that service.     The
       temporary joint command should agree arrangements for

       effective site management, including:


       a.   the positioning of control vehicles (which will act
             as each service’s incident control post);


       b.   the posting of safety lookouts;


       c.   precautions against the spread of fire and other

             potential hazards;
                                                                      I




       d.    the location of a marshalling point for survivors
             being transported to the survivor reception centre,
             a casualty receiving station where the injured will

             be mustered, and an ambulance loading point from
             which casualties will be taken to receiving
             hospitals.     (Chapter 3 considers in more detail the
             treatment of survivors and casualties);


       e.    the location of a MEDIA LIAISON POINT (Chapter 4
             offers further advice on facilities for the media);


       f.    the establishment of an outer cordon around the
             scene of an incident and an inner cordon around the
             site itself.


       Figure 1 illustrates an example of a management structure.


2.11   The decision on whether or not evacuation needs to take
       place may have to be addressed at this stage.     (Chapter 3

       deals in more detail with evacuation.)


2.12   The temporary joint command should arrange for fire
       appliances to be directed to a marshalling area or
       straight to the site, and for ambulances to wait nearby
       until called forward to loading points.    There should be a
       rendez-vous point for reinforcements, volunteers and other

       non-emergency service personnel, but until this has been

       set up they should report to the police incident control
                                                                           Figure 1



      EXAMPLE OF A MANAGEMENT STRUCTURE WHEN DEALING WITH DISASTER


RENDEZ-VOUS POINT                                                      MEDIA LIAISON POINT
       *                                                                           *




                        JOINT INCIDENT COMMAND                        ^ L o c a l authority
                                                                       ^       and other
                             LIAISON OFFICERS                           emergency centres

       Ambulance                     Police                                 Fire
      and Medical                  ("Silver")




                                   Survivors                  Fatalities




Casualty Receiving Station
     First Aid Post                                         Body Holding
 Ambulance Loading Point                                        Area
                                    Survivor
                                    Reception
                                     Centre




                                                                                              /
Receiving                                                                                /
Hospitals                    FORWARD CONTROL POINTS


            \                                                                      /
                                  Inner Cordon
                               *******************
                               *                                  *
                                                                               /
                               *        INCIDENT                  *             Outer
                               *                                  *             Cordon
                              * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * *
       post.    In Chapter 5, paragraphs 5.8 to 5.10, the

       arrangements for volunteers are discussed in more detail.


Joint incident rnmmana


2.13   Once senior officers and communications facilities arrive,
       a JOINT INCIDENT COMMAND should be established.      Each
       service should determine in advance the rank of the senior
       officer who will go to the scene.     The joint incident
       command should be at a suitable point adjacent to the
       disaster site and may use the mobile control vehicles of
       each service and/or a suitable building.     At this stage,
       the temporary joint command may become the FORWARD CONTROL
       POINT.   The police incident officer (who may be code-
       named "SILVER"), in liaison with the senior officer from
       each service, will take on the overall coordination of the
       site.


2.14   The JOINT INCIDENT COMMAND will obtain resources as
       necessary to deal with the disaster and is likely, at this
       stage, to be the central point of contact for the media
       and others seeking information.     Attached to the JOINT

       INCIDENT COMMAND should be a liaison officer from the
       local authority, and, depending on the nature of the
       disaster, from HM Coastguard, industrial and commercial
       concerns, public utilities such as gas, electricity or

       water companies and/or other organisations.     Liaison

       officers will need to maintain constant contact with their
       own organisation's emergency or control centre so that
       they can provide rapid support to the combined response.


2.15   If the disaster occurs within the perimeter of an
       industrial or other establishment, a liaison officer from
       the company should be nominated, who will then play a
       crucial part in an effective response.   Not only will the
       liaison officer be able to supply information derived from
       local knowledge, he will also provide access to facilities
       on the site and act as a link to the establishment's
       senior management and (most importantly) its emergency
       management structure.


2.16   If there are no special arrangements already in place, the
       response to a maritime disaster will be coordinated by the
       appropriate Maritime Rescue Coordination Centre.    However,
       reception of survivors ashore is the responsibility of the
       land-based authorities.   It is essential that land and
       maritime authorities liaise at the earliest opportunity to
       tackle the particular problems caused by maritime

       disasters, including wreckage and pollution.


Senior Command Group


2.17   Experience of recent disasters has proved the worth of

       establishing a SENIOR COMMAND GROUP to manage the response
       (illustrated in Figure 2).   Such a group is usually
       chaired by the police and comprises representatives of:
                                                         Figure 2



                       EXAMPLE OF A COMMAND STRUCTURE


                             SENIOR COMMAND GROUP
Local Authority              Chief Constable(Gold)
Emergency Centre(s)—           Chief Executive(s)
                          Chief Fire & Rescue Officer          Fire Control
Ambulance Control —         Chief Ambulance Officer
                                Medical Officer                Hospitals
                            Public Relations Manager           Media
                                                               Briefing
                                                               Centre




                            JOINT INCIDENT COMMAND
   Ambulance and                Police Incident           Fire Incident
   Medical Incident            Officer (Silver)           Officer
   Officers




                           FORWARD CONTROL POINT(S)



            Ambulance               Police              Fire
        + Medical Teams            (Bronze)
       a.    the local authority (county and district or
             metropolitan city/borough, as appropriate);


       b.   the other emergency services;      and


       c.   a representative of local    NHSmanagement.


       Representation should include the individual tasked with

       managing the information flow and public relations (from
       the police or local authority).     Other organisations may
       be represented, depending on the nature of the disaster.
       It might, for example, be appropriate to include:


       d.   HM Coastguard;


       e.   British Transport Police;


       f.   commercial organisations, such as British Rail,
             depending on circumstances;


       g.   senior military officer.


       In the most serious incidents, representation would
       normally be at chief officer level or equivalent.


2.18   The main function of the Senior Command Group is to
       coordinate action across the services for the hours or
       days ahead.   The chairmanship of the group may pass to the

       appropriate local authority chief executive once the
       priority becomes the longer term recovery of the

       community.


2.19   The group should ensure that the following are not
       overlooked:


       a.   arrangements for media liaison (see Chapter 4);


       b.   arrangements for the reception and escorting of VIPs
             (also addressed in Chapter 4); and


       c.   liaison with central government (see Chapter 6).


summary of Management Principles



2.20   Paragraphs 2.5-2.19 have outlined a typical management
       structure based on the experience of dealing with
       disasters.    There are 4 principles underpinning this
       structure:


       a.   The first officer from the emergency services to
             arrive on the scene should initiate the combined
             response;


       b.   A JOINT INCIDENT COMMAND, which will manage the

             combined response, should be established by the
             emergency services as soon as possible;
       c.   Attached to the JOINT INCIDENT COMMAND should be
             liaison officers from the local authority and other
             organisations as appropriate.   Liaison officers
             should be provided with communication facilities so

             that they may arrange support as necessary;


       d.   A SENIOR COMMAND GROUP should be established to
             oversee the combined response and provide a link to
             central government through the lead department.


Handling Widespread Disasters


2.21   Some disasters - for example, oil pollution and other
       forms of environmental contamination, rabies, severe
       weather, flooding, satellite accidents - will affect
       either a large area or a number of separate locations,    in
       the latter case, each response at each site may be managed
       along the lines already described, but particular
       attention will need to be paid to the coordination of the
       various responses.   A Command Group may be based at county
       or equivalent level, with similar arrangements in
       neighbouring areas depending on the circumstances.


2.22   When a disaster poses an immediate threat to life it is
       usual for the police to coordinate the local response.
       However, in some cases (for example, severe weather,
       flooding, rabies, or pollution) the responsibility for
       coordinating the response is likely to rest with the local

       authority whose statutory responsibilities bear most
       heavily on recovering from the disaster.   Examples of such

       responsibilities are highways, housing and environmental
       health.


DEBRIEFING, INQUIRIES AND LESSONS EMERGING


2.23   In order to facilitate debriefing and to provide evidence
       for inquiries (whether judicial, public, technical,
       criminal or of some other format), it is essential that
       all events, decisions and actions taken are recorded.
       Chief officers and chief executives should consider
       instituting a formal debriefing system, on both a single-
       and multi-agency basis.


2.24   Experience has shown that video recordings can be useful
       for historical records purposes, dissemination of lessons
       learned and possible briefing and debriefing.


2.25   Whether or not there is to be a formal public enquiry, it
       is important that the lessons emerging from the disaster
       are identified, that they are fully documented for
       promulgation, and then made widely available.   Thus in due
       course the lessons learnt can be shared amongst all those
       who might be called upon to respond to other disasters in
       the future.
                                                        ANNEX A


              GUIDANCE ADDRESSED TO PARTICULAR STATUTORY SERVICES


SERVICE/          TITLE                ISSUED BY                  DATE
DEPARTMENT

Police            Emergency            Association of             1990
                  Procedures           Chief Police
                  Manual               Officers

Fire              Major Incident       Chief and Assistant        1991
                  Emergency            Chief Fire Officers
                  Procedures           Association
                  Manual

NHS               Emergency            Department of Health       1990
                  Planning in the
                  NHS: Health Services
                  Arrangements for
                  Dealing with Major
                  Incidents.
                  Emergency Planning
                  in the NHS: Health
                  Services Arrange­
                  ments for Dealing
                  with Accidents
                  Involving
                  Radioactivity

Ambulance        Ambulance Service     Regional Ambulance         1990
                 Operational           Officers Group
                 Arrangements:
                 Civil Emergencies

HM Coastguard    Instructions and      Department of              1988
                 Operational           Transport
                 Notices to
                 Coastguards

Local           Emergency Planning     Home Office                Under
Authorities     Guidance to                                       revision
                Local Authorities
Local         Local Authorities   County Emergency     1991
Authorities   Civil Emergencies   Planning Officers’
Emergency     Planning Manual     Society
Planning
Officers
DRAFT




                        DEALING WITH DISASTER
                        HOME OFFICE GUIDANCE




CHAPTER 3:    THE IMMEDIATE CARE AND TREATMENT OF DISASTER VICTIMS




3.1     This chapter addresses some aspects of the immediate care
        and treatment of the victims of a disaster.   Chapter 7
        refers to their recovery, and that of the wider community,
        in the longer term.


3.2     in the following paragraphs, advice is offered on


              casualty clearance


             the removal of the dead from the scene


             the role of the casualty bureau


             arrangements for receiving relatives and friends


             shelter and evacuation.
CASUALTIES



3.3   Those who have survived the disaster uninjured (or with
      only minor injuries) may nevertheless be suffering from
      shock, intense anxiety and grief over the plight of
      friends, relatives and fellow victims.    They will,
      therefore, need to be treated with great sensitivity.
      Survivors will often be able to provide crucial
      information about what happened, and may be important
      witnesses at any trial or inquiry.    Some uninjured
      survivors may want to leave the scene as quickly as
      possible and may be unwilling to     wait to   givetheir
      personal details to the police.      This is   unhelpful because
      potentially useful information could be lost, and to try
      to prevent this the police seek to record the details of
      all survivors.   This will usually be done at the survivor
      reception centre, a secure area to which all uninjured
      survivors are taken.


3.4   Survivors' initial needs are likely to include comfort in
      their distress, food, drink, and first aid to treat minor
      injuries.   They may also need welfare   supportin the
      immediate aftermath of disaster,     such as   helpin finding

      temporary accommodation, transport back home or financial
      advice or assistance.   The local authority, assisted by
      voluntary organisations, should therefore plan to make
      these services and facilities available at the survivor

      reception centre.
3.5   Injured survivors should be taken to the casualty
      receiving station (CRS) where medical staff will assess,
      triage and treat casualties and ensure that those
      requiring immediate hospital treatment are given priority
      for removal.     The CRS is usually sited in a building, tent
      or temporary shelter close to the ambulance loading
      points.   The Ambulance Incident Officer will be
      responsible for the provision of ambulances and sitting
      case vehicles to convey casualties to designated hospitals

      and for arranging for helicopters to be available if
      appropriate for conveying casualties to distant specialist
      hospitals.


3.6   In a disaster, injured survivors may be thrown some
      distance away from the site or may even wander away in
      confusion.     It is therefore important to search the
      surrounding area for further casualties.


FATALITIES


3.7   Bodies of those killed in the disaster should not be
      moved, except to rescue trapped survivors, until a doctor
      has pronounced life extinct and labelled the body

      accordingly.    The position in law is that the authority of
      HM Coroner is required before removing those who have been
      pronounced dead.    Bodies will normally be taken to a
      temporary mortuary where autopsies can be carried out,
      although they might first be taken to a temporary body
      holding area.    The need to preserve evidence at the scene

      of a disaster must be clearly borne in mind.
CASUALTY BUREAUX



3.8   In the event of a disaster involving missing persons
      and/or a number of deaths, the police normally establish a
      casualty bureau.    The role of the bureau is to provide a
      central contact point for all those seeking or providing
      information about persons who might have been involved,
      and to collect data and collate all records.    The
      functions of the casualty bureau will include


      a.   handling enquiries from the general public about
            relatives and friends who might have been involved;


      b.   collating details of survivors, their condition and
            their whereabouts;


      c.   confirming areas of evacuation and the location of
            evacuees;


      d.   gathering data to assist in the identification of
            casualties;   and


      e.   compiling a list of persons believed to have been
            involved who are now missing.


3.9   Once the casualty bureau has been established, its
      telephone number(s) will be publicised through the media,

      with the general public being asked to provide information
      on persons thought to have been involved in the incident
       who have not been accounted for.   This information assists
       the police in their task of identifying casualties and the
       deceased.


3.10   In the event of an air crash, the Emergency Procedures
       Information Centre (EPIC) managed by British Airways at
       Heathrow may open.    If so, its telephone number will be
       broadcast.


RELATIVES AND FRIENDS


3.11   Recent experience of disasters has shown that, if they
       believe their relatives and friends may have been
       involved, many people may travel to the scene.    If
       necessary, a reception centre for relatives and friends
       will be established by the police, and staffed by them,
       local authority and voluntary organisations, including
       representatives of churches and other faith groups.
       Relatives and friends, who may be feeling intense anxiety,
       shock or grief, need to be treated with sympathy and
       understanding and staff should be prepared for the
       apparently unreasonable behaviour of some of those seeking
       assistance.   Access to the reception centre should be
       controlled to prevent those inside being disturbed by the
       media or onlookers.   The fullest possible information
       should be given to those seeking news of victims involved

       in the incident.
SHELTER OR EVACUATION


3.12   In some circumstances it may be necessary to advise the

       public on whether they should evacuate a given area or
       stay put and seek shelter.   Such circumstances include
       risks to life or health from:


       a.    the release or threatened release of radioactive or
             other hazardous materials;


       b.   the spread of fire;


       c.   explosion;


       d.   severe storms;


       e.   flooding;


       f.   earthquake;   or


       g.   environmental contamination.


       In the event of (a), information should immediately be
       sought, particularly from the manufacturer or operator, on

       the nature of the risk posed by the hazardous material and
       the possible consequences if it is released.   Additional
       information on the nature of the risk may be obtained from
       chemical data systems and other accredited sources.   One

       crucial factor in determining the area to be evacuated
       will be the forecast speed and direction of the wind
       which, together with other 'Chemet* advice, can be
       obtained from the appropriate Regional Weather Centre


3.13   Advance notice of severe storms or floods should have been
       issued by the Meteorological Office and/or Regional
       Weather Centres in the form of severe weather warnings.
       In addition, flood warnings may be issued by the National

       Rivers Authority.


3.14   on the basis of the advice obtained, it is normally the
       police who decide whether or not to evacuate and define
       the area to be evacuated.     The police, however, can only
       recommend evacuation and have no power to require people
       to leave their homes.     Past experience has shown that
       people with domestic pets may be unwilling to evacuate
       unless arrangements include their pets.     The physical
       difficulties of large scale evacuation should not be
       underestimated.     Care must always be taken not to put
       people at risk by bringing them outdoors during the course

       of evacuation when they might be more effectively

       protected under shelter.


3.15   If it is decided to evacuate a given area evacuation
       assembly points should be set up near the area and, if
       time permits, signposted.     (There may not be time for this

       to be done in the event of, for example, imminent
       explosion or flood.)     Those in the affected area should be

       given clear and audible advice to go to their nearest
       evacuation assembly point.   This can be done by house-to-
       house call or by using loud-hailers, mobile public address
       systems or radio announcements.     The police and officers
       of the local authority should make arrangements for
       ensuring the security of property left empty after the
       evacuation.


3.16   Local authority officers should coordinate the dispersal
       of evacuees to reception and rest centres and should
       maintain a comprehensive index of evacuees and their
       whereabouts.   This information will be needed by the
       police for casualty bureau purposes, and later if it is
       necessary to interview witnesses.     Police liaison officers
       at reception and rest centres will ensure that all
       necessary information is sent to the casualty bureau.     In
       order to account for all people evacuated from the
       affected area, it is important that those leaving the
       reception and rest centre and intending to stay with
       friends or relatives are encouraged to register their

       eventual destination at the centre.
DRAFT


                           DEALING WITH DISASTER
                           HOME OFFICE GUIDANCE




CHAPTER 4 g   RELATIONS WITH THE MEDIA




INTRODUCTION


4.1     The need for consideration to be given at the earliest
        possible stage of the disaster response to providing
        facilities for the media has already been mentioned in
        Chapter 2, paragraph 2.10(e).     It has also been noted (at
        paragraph 2.16) that the public relations manager should
        be a member of the senior command group.    This chapter now
        looks in more detail at the likely nature and scale of the
        demands which the media will make and how those demands

        can best be met.


4.2     Recent years have seen a rapid advance in
        telecommunication and information technology capabilities.
        Television channels devoted entirely to news and extended
        news programmes on other channels are with us to stay.
        The impact made at the scene of a disaster by those
        engaged in gathering material for the media can be massive
        and it is vital to prepare for the flood of media

        representatives, local, national and international.    In




                                                                       ^•/v
      little more than 12 hours after Pan Am flight 103 crashed

      there were at least 500 media people at Lockerbie,
      including 17 TV crews and a vast array of equipment -
      vehicles, cameras, communications and so on.


4.3   The purpose of this chapter is therefore to highlight some
      of the problems which can arise in handling the media's
      voracious appetite for information in the event of a
      disaster, and to suggest arrangements for overcoming those
      problems.


4.4   It is worth noting that certain incidents, such as the
      Hungerford shootings in 1987, may not necessarily be
      categorised as disasters, but they will nevertheless
      generate a high level of on-going media interest and pose
      similar difficulties.


COPING WITH THE MEDIA


4.5   In the first instance, the load in coping with media
      pressures usually falls to the police, in their role as
      coordinators of the response at and around the scene of
      disaster and with their responsibility for criminal

      investigation.    But there are other aspects of a
      disaster - temporary accommodation for victims, and
      perhaps their relatives and friends, safety of damaged
      buildings, road access and so on - which may call for a
      quick reaction by local authorities and so they too should

      be involved in the media response at an early stage.
      Depending on the nature of the disaster, attention may
      also focus on industrial operators or other organisations;
      for example, Occidental were in the front line of media
      attention from the outset of the Piper Alpha disaster,


4.6   The guidance in this chapter is offered primarily to the
      emergency services and in particular to chief police
      officers in their role as coordinators at the scene and
      local authority chief executives.     However, it is hoped
      that some of the material will also be of use to other
      organisations who may become involved in the disaster
      response.


INITIAL ACTIONS


4.7   Media personnel will arrive surprisingly quickly at the
      scene.     They will often have learnt of the disaster at the
      same time as the emergency services and when they arrive
      will expect to have access to all the facilities they will
      require.    They will also expect an instant response to
      their requests for information and briefing.     Demands from
      local and regional media will quickly be added to by
      demands from national and - depending on the nature of the

      disaster - international media.     If these demands are not
      anticipated and arrangements made accordingly, media
      representatives are likely to add to the initial confusion
      which is usually found when disaster has struck.
4.8   Experience has shown the value of immediately dealing with

      the following:


      a.   Control of access to the disaster site.    This is a
           police responsibility, put in place whenever

           practical, to allow rescue services to carry out
           their work unhindered, and to preserve evidence at
           what may be the scene of a crime.    It must be
           anticipated that the broadcast media, in particular,
           may bring large vehicles to the scene.    In addition,
           helicopters are often deployed and control of the
           airspace may be an early consideration (see para
           4.32).


      b.   Media liaison point.    Located (if possible) outside
           the outer cordon around the scene of the disaster,
           this will provide for the reception of media
           personnel, initial briefings, accreditation and
           arrangements for reporting, filming and photography.


      c.   Media spokesperson.    The swift attendance at the
           scene by a spokesperson - likely to be from the
           police - should ease the pressure from the media.

           Failure to arrange this will prompt the media to
           approach anybody available, which could give
           credibility to potentially inaccurate sources.    While
           the spokesperson takes the load off those coping with
           the disaster, brief interviews with the senior
«




               police, fire, ambulance or other officers at the site
               will add authority to the information being given.


          d.   Central Office of Information (COI).     Considering
               whether to seek reinforcement by one or more
               experienced COI press officers.     See also para 4.14.


    4.9   At the earliest possible stage there should be liaison

          between the spokesperson and others involved in the
          disaster response.   Lack of coordination and information-
          sharing is likely to result in different - even
          contradictory - messages emerging.     In addition, at this
          most difficult initial stage of the disaster response the
          following may be found helpful.


          a.   Reminders to the media that in the period immediately
               following a disaster, no-one, no      matter    how well
               prepared to respond, can know precisely what has
               happened.   Initial statements focusing on what is
               being done, what the limitations of knowledge are at
               present and what is happening to      arrive    at an overall

               appreciation of the situation will indicate a
               positive response.   If such statements are backed by
               a commitment to provide accurate information when
               this is available, the media are more likely to

               attend briefings, and thus accept a measure of
               control, particularly if the briefings are scheduled
               in advance at regular intervals.
       b.   Meanwhile, any factual statements, particularly from

            emergency services eye witnesses, will be avidly
            welcomed.     Clearly, however, such statements should
            not include speculation on the cause of the disaster,
            nor premature estimates of the numbers of casualties.


       c.   There will be great pressure on reporters to seek
            interviews with survivors and relatives.     The first
            consideration should always be the well-being of the
            individual:    but it does relieve pressure on all
            concerned if a willing and able survivor, relative or
            friend agrees to see reporters at a press conference
            to characterize the disaster for all.


       d.   Legal and evidential limitations on the release of
            information should be frankly explained, including
            the time it often takes to identify victims.


4.10   The aim should be to develop the best possible

       relationship with media representatives right from the
       start.   Pressure of competition between media teams and
       individuals will make them sensitive to any restrictions
       which appear to them to be unfair or biased.     If they feel
       they have been treated unreasonably, some representatives
       of the media will try to make their own arrangements which

       may well obstruct rescue work and compromise evidence for
       any necessary investigation.    Well managed media relations
       should alleviate these problems and should also allow
       positive advantage to be taken of the help which the media
       can provide.     The media can help by broadcasting
       messages - for example - asking people to avoid the
       disaster area, publicising details of any evacuation
       planned, putting out casualty bureau telephone numbers and
       asking people to minimise their use of the telephone.


4.11   When circumstances permit, police incident officers may
       wish to consider identification of media personnel and

       whether there should be on-site facilities for issuing
       passes or verifying bona fides.    Any system adopted should
       allow rapid identification of those allowed access to
       certain areas.


4.12   The management of large numbers of media representatives
       can be assisted through pooling arrangements.    For example
       a pool could comprise one television crew, one newspaper
       reporter, a stills photographer and a radio reporter.
       Although a limit can be set on the number of media
       personnel to be allowed access to the site, it is best to
       allow the media to decide who their representatives should
       be.   Additional pooling facilities may be required for
       overseas media representatives.    It is helpful to identify
       suitable sites outside any cordon for coverage of the

       disaster by photographers and camera crews who are not, at
       the time, involved in pooling arrangements.
MEDIA RESPONSE ORGANISATION



4.13   In the event of a disaster, particularly one which is
       going to be of continuing interest to the media, the
       initial actions just described may be no more than holding
       arrangements.   As events develop, the need for a
       comprehensive media response organisation headed by
       someone who equates to a public relations manager1 will
       become all too apparent.   A disaster is likely to have
       required the convening of a senior command group (as
       described in Chapter 2 paragraph 2.17-2.19).   It is
       essential for the public relations manager to attend
       command group meetings so that he is fully in the picture
       and can plan the media response accordingly.   It is
       recommended that he oversees all aspects of the media
       response, including:


       a.   activities at the media liaison point;


       b.   arrangements for the media to visit the site,

            possibly including transport where the disaster is in
            a remote area;


       c.   identification of media personnel;


       d.   management of the media centre where one is

            established;


        It is appreciated that not all organisations or agencies
currently have such a post, but experience has shown this to be
desirable.
       e.   appreciation of the possible media activities related
            to the disaster but at locations remote from the
            disaster scene (see para 4.19).


MEDIA CENTRE


4.14   A media centre may be set up by the police or by the local

       authority.     It is convenient for it to be close to the
       scene of the disaster but this must depend on
       circumstances.     The centre should provide working
       accommodation for media personnel, a news
       conference/briefing area, arrangements for monitoring
       television, radio and newspapers, and a press office with
       communications equipment.     It should be staffed by press
       officers from the major organisations with responsibility
       for handling the disaster.     In addition to the emergency
       services this should always include local authorities as

       appropriate;     and public utilities and commercial
       organisations (eg an airline) according to the
       circumstances.    Also likely to be included are government
       press officers (see para 4.22) and those assisting from
       the Regional Central Office of Information.     It should be
       noted that the COI has expertise in setting up media
       centres, and also have resources to help run them.


4.15   Chief police officers and local authority chief executives
       may have identified buildings in their emergency plans

       which could be used as a media centre although experience
       has shown that facilities can be set up rapidly in a

       suitable building not previously designated.   An initial,
       back-up option is to use a large and suitably equipped
       vehicle, for example a converted police command vehicle.
       This can provide a limited facility, but it will not
       accommodate the numbers of media personnel associated with
       disasters.


4.16   A media centre offers a number of advantages to all
       concerned;


       a.   it provides the media representatives with a known
            location for the most accurate and authentic
            information which the authorities can make available;


       b.   once links with the rescuers are in place and one

            spokesman from each of the individual services has
            been nominated, proper flows of information can be
            established, compared and coordinated as soon as
            possible;


       c.   there is then a better chance of identifying and
            dealing with any potential differences in approach
            long before these might be noticed elsewhere, and

            agreed approaches can be quickly relayed to the
            emergency services and other control centres;
       d.   oversight from the media centre should help to
            control media presence at the site whether this is
            for photo-opportunities or briefing;


       e.   monitoring arrangements may be set up at the centre
            to enable all concerned to be aware of what the media
            are broadcasting/publishing;


       f.   in the event of a widespread or multi-site disaster,
            a single media centre could serve as a focus for
            several media liaison points at differing locations;
            and


       g.   the same media centre may suffice for both life-
            saving and recovery phases of the disaster response.


TRANSFER OF THE MEDIA OPERATION TO LOCAL AUTHORITY CONTROL


4.17   As already noted, it is to be expected that the police

       will, at least initially, take the lead in the media
       response.   However, the local authority is likely to have
       a media team working from the outset, and there is obvious
       advantage in their being part of the operation coordinated
       by the police.   As the disaster response enters the
       recovery phase, control passes to the relevant local
       authority, who will then have to take the lead in

       providing any necessary public advice and information and

       in coping with continued media interest.    If the police

       and local authority media operations are run in
       conjunction, handover between them will be achieved more
       smoothly.


4.18   It is suggested that counties and their constituent
       districts should agree local arrangements for the media
       response in close consultation with the relevant police
       force(s).   Similarly, in the English metropolitan areas,
       cities, boroughs and metropolitan districts should liaise
       with the police.


REMOTE HANDLING


4.19   In some disasters, attention has focused on communities
       and individuals who may live many miles from the scene of

       the incident and yet become a centre of media activity.
       Examples are the home town of those killed whilst
       travelling or the home of a train driver involved in a
       rail incident.     In the latter example the individual may
       need to be protected from media harassment.


ROLES OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT


4.20   Although the emphasis in disaster planning is based on a
       locally-managed response, there is a need to recognise the
       scope of central government's interest and its role.

       Parliament will expect a report from the appropriate
       Minister as soon as possible and there may be calls for a
       public inquiry.    A number of government departments may

       have an interest in a disaster but the essence of central
       government arrangements for handling disasters is for one
       "lead" department to have overall responsibility.     (The
       concept of the lead government department is explained in
       Chapter 6.)


4.21   The lead department is responsible, inter alia, for
       ensuring that the government gives a consistent and
       properly considered response to public and Parliamentary

       demands for information and action.    Chief officers of
       police and local authority chief executives should
       therefore look to the lead department press officers as
       their main central government contact at the scene on
       media matters.


GOVERNMENT PRESS OFFICERS' ATTENDANCE ON SITE


4.22   Government press officers will often wish to quickly be on
       site in order to:


       a.   explain the involvement of government or of the
            relevant regulatory body in the disaster response;


       b.   be involved with any arrangements for VIP visits (see
            para 4.24 etc);    and


       c.   provide direct feedback to central government on
            media matters.    Where central government
            investigative agencies have a formal role, their

            representatives are enjoined not to speak to the
               media about their role except in carefully prepared

               circumstances after taking advice and in the presence
               of a government press officer,   similarly, government
               press officers will need to be aware of facilities
               providing access to a site which may become, or is
               the subject of, a statutory investigation.


4.23   Where specialist accident investigators are involved, the
       relevant government department press office support may
       continue far beyond the initial stages of the disaster.


VISITS BY VIPS


4.24   There is now a general expectation that a minister should
       quickly visit the scene of a disaster and the injured, not
       only to be seen to be marking public concern, but also to
       be able to report to Parliament on the disaster response.
       The scale of a disaster may also prompt visits by a member
       of the Royal Family or the Prime Minister.


4.25   Visits to the scene of a disaster need to take account of
       the local situation and the immediate effects of the

       disaster on the local community.     It is recommended that
       so far as is possible liaison takes place with the Lord
       Lieutenant, the local MP (see para 4.31), and other local
       VIPs.


4.26   Despite the inevitable disruption, which visitors would

       want minimised, there are dividends to be gained from VIP
       visits.   Not only can they be seen to boost the morale of
       all those involved, including the injured and the
       emergency services, but they also give an opportunity to

       place on record public gratitude for what has been done.


4.27   The police are of course experienced at handling VIP
       visitors in normal circumstances and many of the usual
       considerations will apply to visits to a disaster site.
       It may be necessary to restrict media coverage of such
       visits in which case pool arrangements should be made (see
       para 4.12).


4.28   Visiting ministers will probably require briefing on the
       situation before visiting the site, which they will
       doubtless want to see.   They will certainly require
       briefing before any meetings with the media.      They will
       want to meet those who have directed operations and be
       brought up to date by specialists on the spot.     This will
       help them to put into context the efforts of the emergency
       services and the difficulties they have been facing.


4.29   Ministers are likely also to want to visit those survivors
       who are well enough to see them and to meet emergency
       services personnel involved in the rescue.     There will be
       pressure for photo-opportunities and interviews.
       Arrangements will need to be flexible, taking into account
       ministers' views on how and where they wish to respond to
       what they have seen, and the limited time available.    They

       should be agreed with the government press officer, who
       will also liaise with the police liaison officer on the
       appropriate location for photographs.


4.30   It will be for the hospital authorities to decide whether
       media representatives can accompany a minister at any
       stage when visiting the injured.   If the media cannot have
       access to wards, for medical or other reasons, the
       minister can still be interviewed afterwards at the
       hospital entrance about how patients and medical staff are
       coping.


4.31   The local Member of Parliament may accompany the minister.
       This would be arranged by the minister's private office,
       which will also confirm who else will be accompanying the
       minister.


EMERGENCY FLYING RESTRICTIONS


4.32   Downwash from any helicopter can disrupt rescue
       operations, damage property and destroy evidence.     The
       presence of unauthorised aircraft poses a collision hazard
       to police and rescue helicopters operating in the area.
       It may therefore be necessary to regulate flights in the
       vicinity of the disaster.   A 'Temporary Danger Area'

       should be sought immediately in accordance with standard
       procedures2 and the media should be informed of this
       without delay and advised to avoid the area until
       overflight is authorised.


SUSTAINABILITY


4.33   Disasters place enormous demands on all involved in the
       response.   Media interest, particularly if it is

       international and involves different time zones, can
       create pressure throughout a 24 hour period.   It is
       recommended that chief officers of police and local
       authority chief executives take sustainability into
       account during the response to a major disaster and seek
       mutual aid accordingly.


SUMMARY


4.34   This chapter has concentrated on highlighting the
       pressures that are likely to be faced arising from media
       interest in a disaster, and the speed with which they
       build.   Experience has shown that large numbers of media
       representatives arrive surprisingly quickly.   They expect
       constant, accurate and authoritative information and to
       relay this to the public locally, nationally and possibly
       internationally.


     2       Standard procedures are set out in National Air Traffic
Services (NATS) Instructions for Establishing Emergency Flying
Restrictions within the United Kingdom Flight Information
Region. It should be noted that flight in a Temporary Danger
Area is not legally prohibited. If such prohibition is required
a Temporary Restriction of Flying Regulations should be imposed,
in accordance with the NATS instructions.
4.35   In the immediate aftermath of disaster, arrangements for
       dealing with the media are usually made by the police.
       Initial measures include controlling access to the site

       wherever this is practical, establishing a media liaison
       point and deploying a spokesperson to the scene.


4.36   Whenever disaster strikes, a comprehensive media response
       is likely to be required, involving oversight by a public
       relations manager who should attend meetings of the senior
       command group.   It is recommended that under the public
       relations manager, a media centre should be established,
       staffed in the first place by press officers from the
       major organisations with responsibility for handling the
       disaster.   COI have expertise in setting up and managing
       such centres.


4.37   When the emphasis of the disaster response turns from
       life-saving to longer-term recovery the local authority
       may take over control of the response, including the media
       response, from the police.


4.38   Central government departments have statutory and other
       responsibilities in relation to disasters, for example for
       investigation.   These duties are performed with a

       framework provided by a nominated lead department whose

       ministers keep parliament and the public informed about
       the disaster and the response to it.
4.39   VIPs including ministers will want to visit the scene of a
       disaster.   Suitable arrangements need to be made,
       including briefing ministers for media interviews on site
       or in the media centre.
DRAFT




                         DEALING WITH DISASTER
                         HOME OFFICE GUIDANCE


CHAPTER 5:    THE VOLUNTARY SECTOR




INTRODUCTION


5.1     Disasters can overstretch the resources of the emergency
        and local authority services, and the value of
        additional support from the voluntary sector has been
        demonstrated on many occasions.    These occasions have
        also shown that support from volunteers can only be used
        effectively if planned for in advance.    This chapter
        explains the advantage of planning for the use of the
        voluntary sector and offers principles to be followed.


5.2     The voluntary sector in the United Kingdom is large and
        often well organised.   Planning should take account of
        3 kinds of voluntary effort:


        a.    established organisations such as the British Red

              Cross Society, St John Ambulance Brigade,
              Salvation Army and the Women*s Royal Voluntary

              Service;




                                                                   HI?
      b.    specialist skills offered by groups of doctors,

            radio amateurs and search and rescue organisations
            etc;   and


      c.    individual contributions normally offered - or
            requested on the day.


ACTIVITIES SUPPORTED BY THE VOLUNTARY SECTOR


5.3   The voluntary sector can undertake or support a wide
      range of activities.   Some of the activities with which
      the voluntary sector is traditionally associated are set
      out in Annex A to this chapter, but this list is by no
      means exhaustive.


Planning the Voluntary Sector’s Contribution to the Disaster
Response


5.4   General issues of planning are discussed in more depth

      in Chapter 8.   However, in planning specifically how the
      voluntary sector might contribute to the disaster
      response, four principles should be borne in mind:


      a.    the local statutory services should identify the
            skills and expertise available from the voluntary

            sector in their area.   These will vary from place
            to place and it is essential to determine in
            advance what is and is not available locally;
b.    the voluntary sector must be able to demonstrate
      its capabilities to the statutory services.     It is
      of vital importance that, if disaster strikes, the
      voluntary sector should be able to make whatever
      contribution may have been written into local
      plans, and so voluntary agencies must be able to
      demonstrate that their support is reliable,
      consistent and sustainable to the required
      standard;


c.   the statutory and voluntary sectors should be
      clear about their respective roles in a disaster.
      Volunteers must appreciate that the statutory
      services bear the responsibility for the overall
      disaster response but equally, the statutory
      services must develop an understanding of the
      voluntary organisations* own structures and
      constraints;   and


d.   there should be agreement as to how, on the day,
      voluntary effort will be called out, what it will
      do and how it will be organised.


Planning will be more effective if it is carried out
with the voluntary sector within a well defined and
mutually agreed structure.   One possible model (in which
voluntary organisations are grouped on the basis of

functions and linked to the statutory authority

responsible for those functions) is described at
      Annex B to this chapter.    But there are many other

      possibilities;    the essential point is that there should
      be a structure which suits local circumstances and which
      is understood by all concerned.


5.6   Those responsible for organising liaison with the
      voluntary sector might find it useful to have a register
      showing what skills and resources are available from the
      voluntary agencies and how they can be contacted in
      advance.    This register might embrace both the
      established organisations and individuals or groups in
      the area known to have specialist skills.    (There should
      be a system for keeping these records up to date.)


TRAINING AND EXERCISING


5.7   General issues of training and exercising are also
      discussed in Chapter 8.    When considering the particular
      contribution which the voluntary sector can make to the
      response to disaster, it should be noted that

      established voluntary organisations and volunteer groups
      will usually have their own arrangements for training
      and exercising.   Wherever possible these should be
      demonstrated to the local statutory services.
      Additionally, the statutory services and voluntary
      agencies should aim for joint training and exercising
      wherever possible so that problems can be identified,

      plans and procedures updated and working relationships
      fostered.
ACTION FOLLOWING A DISASTER



5.8    Plans should include provision for voluntary
       organisations to be called out by or at the same time as
       the statutory authorities that they support;     voluntary
       organisations should not normally attend the scene
       unbidden.   Where there are a number of voluntary
       organisations providing support within the same or
       related functional areas, a "cascade" call-out system
       may prove useful.


5.9    A prolonged disaster may require voluntary organisations
       to operate a shift system.     This eventuality should be
       planned for.


5.10   Chapter 2 (paragraph 2.12) has described the setting-up
       of a rendezvous point for volunteers.     It is at this
       point that members of voluntary agencies called to the
       scene will assemble before being assigned to tasks or
       duties.   When disaster strikes, people who are not part
       of any voluntary organisation will also wish to help and
       will volunteer their services.    To deal with such
       approaches, a volunteer bureau should be set up to act
       as an initial contact point.     If the volunteer bureau
       wishes to accept the offer of help, the volunteer can
       then be asked to report to the volunteer rendezvous

       point or police incident control post.
SUMMARY



5,11   The voluntary sector offers a wide range of expertise
       and is anxious to help in a disaster.     To make the best
       possible use of the voluntary sector's contribution,
       planning is essential.   This should be carried out
       within a clearly identified structure best suited to
       local needs.   Within that structure:


       a.   there should be mutual agreement on the roles of
             the voluntary sector in a disaster;


       b.   voluntary agencies should demonstrate their
             ability to fulfil those roles;     and


       c.   joint training and exercises should be used to
            prove the effectiveness of disaster plans
             involving the use of volunteers.
                                                         ANNEX A




ACTIVITIES WHICH HAY BE UNDERTAKEN BY THE VOLUNTARY SECTOR IN
SUPPORT OF THE STATUTORY SERVICES


1.    WELFARE


     Working with: Local Authority Social Services Department
                    Local Authority Education Department
                    Local Authority Housing Department
                    and also police


     Activities:   Staffing reception and rest centres
                    Feeding
                   Provision of clothing
                   Advice on entitlements, grants, loans,
                     claims
                   Resettlement of victims, evacuees etc
                   Support and comforting


2.   SOCIAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL AFTERCARE


     Working with: Local Authority Social Services
                   Local Authority Educational Psychologists
                   National Health Service


     Activities:   Counselling

                   Providing longer term support
MEDICAL SUPPORT


Working with: NHS Ambulance Service

              NHS Accident and Emergency Departments
              NHS Health Emergency Planning Officers


Activities;   Back-up Ambulance Service
              First aid posts
              First aid support in rest centres,
                  emergency feeding centres etc
              Auxiliary roles in hospitals


SEARCH AND RESCUE


Working with: Emergency Services
              Armed Forces


Activities;   Mountain, cave, cliff, moor, coastal
                  rescue
              Supervision of other searchers (eg youth
                  organisations)
              Loan of equipment


TRANSPORT


Working with: Local Authority Social Services

              Emergency Services
Activities:      Transport and escort of homeless,
                   outpatients, next-of-kin, etc to and
                   from airports, railway stations,
                   hospitals, mortuaries, rest centres,
                   hostels, etc


COMMUNICATIONS



Working with: Emergency Services
                 Local Authorities
                 Utilities


Activities:     Providing radio communications,
                  eg shortwave, Citizens1 Band
                Vehicles
                Messengers


DOCUMENTATION



Working with: Emergency Services (especially police)
                Local Authority Social Services
                NHS


Activities:     Tracing

                Assistance at Casualty Bureau
                Logging/diary procedures
                Computer support (where available)
TRAINING AND EXERCISING


Working with: Emergency Services
              Local Authority departments
              National utilities
              NHS


Activities;   Analysis of training needs and
                capabilities
              Devising instructional programmes

              Joint planning and conduct of multi­
                agency exercises including call out
                arrangements and debrief
              Formulation and dissemination of good
               practice
                                                   ANNEX B



CO-ORDINATION OF EFFORT



In order that the requirements of the statutory services can
be met by a speedy and efficient voluntary response, it is
suggested that the voluntary organisations might be grouped on
the basis of functions and linked with the statutory authority
responsible for those functions,    in some cases this will be
one statutory authority and one voluntary organisation linked
to a specific function, for example HM Coastguard and the
RNLI; or the ambulance service and the immediate care schemes.
In other cases where the voluntary organisations are multi­
functional they would need to be associated with more than one
statutory authority and be represented on all of the relevant
functional groups.   Annex A has shown functions which have
been performed following major disasters, together with
examples of the activities involved and the statutory
authorities normally responsible.   It is hoped that this
functional grouping will clarify the contributions which
individual voluntary organisations are able to make.    This
would enable statutory authorities and voluntary organisations
to maximise - and rationalise - the voluntary contribution.


The integration of the voluntary organisations into the local
plan of the statutory services could be achieved by setting up
a Voluntary Emergency Steering Committee with functional sub­
groups as suggested by the sub-headings in Annex A.
DRAFT




                         DEALING WITH DISASTER
                          HOME OFFICE GUIDANCE


CHAPTER 6!    CENTRAL GOVERNMENT AND LEAD DEPARTMENTS




THE LEAD DEPARTMENT CONCEPT


6.1     It is fundamental to the arrangements for dealing with
        disasters in the UK that the first response is at the
        local level.     Where local services find that the scale of
        a disaster puts it beyond the capacity of their own
        resources, their recourse is usually to mutual aid
        arrangements with services in adjacent areas.     More often

        than not central government will have a role to play.
        This may be an active role - where, for example, local
        services seek specialist advice or assistance from a

        central government department or the main source of
        information about the disaster lies at central government
        level, eg overseas nuclear accidents and satellite
        accidents.     On other occasions the central government role
        may be limited to dealing with Parliamentary, media and

        public enquiries.


6.2     Where central government does become involved, it is

        essential that its response is properly co-ordinated and
      that information given to Parliament and the public is

      accurate.   This is achieved under the lead department
      arrangements, supervised by the Cabinet Office.


LINKS BETWEEN LOCAL AND CENTRAL GOVERNMENT


6.3   It is important to realise that the nomination of a lead
      department does not affect the underlying principle that
      wherever possible day to day procedures and links should
      be used for dealing with disasters.     Local organisations
      should therefore aim to continue to deal with the
      appropriate government department direct through the usual
      channels and not solely through the lead department.


6.4   Where, exceptionally, special arrangements need to be put
      into force to replace these normal day-to-day links, this
      would be made clear to all concerned.


THE ROLE OF THE LEAD DEPARTMENT


6.5   A central government lead department is expected to be
      prepared to undertake some or all of the following tasks:


      a.    Co-ordination of the activities of central
            government departments in the response to a
            disaster, providing a framework within which

            individual departments can discharge their specific
            responsibilities.
      b.   Co-ordination of the collection of information on
            the disaster and its effects for the purposes of


            i.     briefing Ministers,


            ii.    informing Parliament, and


            iii.   providing information to the public and the
                   media at the national level.


SELECTION OF THE LEAD DEPARTMENT


6.6   The nomination of a particular department as the lead
      department is primarily based on:


      a.   The nature of the disaster.     In many cases there is

            a clear link between the nature of a disaster and
            the normal business of the department.


      b.   Access to information.     Ready access to a flow of

            up-to-date and accurate information is essential for
            central government in general and a lead department
            in particular.     The chances of achieving this are

            greater if officials of the department, agencies and
            organisations concerned know each other and have
            worked together.    The public information division of
            the lead department has a special responsibility for

            ensuring that information originating from central
            government is consistent with that being given
            locally.


      c.    The availability of facilities. Where a disaster is
            large scale, or protracted, it may be necessary to
            use a dedicated emergency room and communications.
            Those departments most likely to be called upon to
            act as lead department have such facilities but it
            would be unreasonable to expect every central
            government department to set up such facilities for
            what may, in their case, be a remote possibility.


6.7   Wherever possible a lead department is nominated in
      advance;   a list of current nominations is set out in the
      annex to this chapter.   In other cases the Cabinet Office,
      in consultation with the Prime Minister's Office, will
      nominate a lead department.


CHANGE OF LEAD DEPARTMENT


6.8   Circumstances may change as a disaster develops or as the
      recovery phase is entered, and it may become appropriate
      for the department originally nominated to lead to hand
      over the task to another department.   This happened in the
      aftermath of the storms in October 1987 when the Home
      Office took the lead initially but handed over to the
      Department of the Environment at a later stage.
6.9    Any such change would be agreed inter-departmentally
       before being implemented and notified to everyone
       concerned.


PERFORMING THE LEAD DEPARTMENT ROLE


6.10   The way in which a government department performs its lead
       department role will depend on the circumstances.      In
       straightforward cases no special arrangements may be

       necessary, with lead department officials working from
       their normal offices or, out of normal working hours, from
       home.


6.11   Where circumstances demand, the lead department would
       activate special procedures, such as opening an emergency
       room, and may need to organise (either directly or through
       the Cabinet Office) regular meetings of the relevant
       departments.


6.12   However these activities are organised, it is incumbent
       upon the lead department to ensure that there is no
       unjustified duplication in requests for information from
       those busily engaged at the scene.   Departments are
       expected first to check whether information they require
       for their own purposes is already available within the
       lead department.   Equally, in a great many cases the lead

       department will be able to obtain information collected by
       other departments for their own use, avoiding the need to
       trouble people at the scene.
ROLE OF THE TERRITORIAL DEPARTMENTS


6.13   If a disaster affected only Scotland, Wales or Northern
       Ireland the respective territorial department would, where
       appropriate, take the lead.     Even if not nominated to
       lead, the territorial departments would have an important
       role in those parts of the United Kingdom for which they
       are responsible, acting in close co-operation with the
       nominated lead department.    (One example is the crash of
       Pan Am flight 103 in December 1988, after which the
       Department of Transport was in the lead.     The Scottish
       Office played a major role in co-ordinating central
       government action in Scotland in support of the combined
       response based at Lockerbie.)


REGIONAL EMERGENCY COMMITTEES (RECS)


6.14   Contingency arrangements are in place under which
       ministers may activate what are known as Regional
       Emergency Committees (RECs) should it be felt that the
       additional stresses caused by a disaster require support

       to be given to the normal administrative machinery at the
       local level.   RECs are not an additional level of

       government, they are an integral part of central
       government standing ready to operate when required.    They
       have no executive authority other than that delegated to
       departmental representatives by their parent departments.
6.15   In England, RECs (which are based for convenience on
       existing Home Defence regions) are chaired by the Regional
       Director of the Department of the Environment.    In
       Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland a senior official of
       the respective territorial department chairs an equivalent
       committee.   Other departments are represented by officials
       from the appropriate regional office or from headquarters.
       The emergency services are normally represented as are
       other relevant organisations such as British Telecom.


6.16   The principal functions of the REC are:


       a.    to provide an overview of the situation in their
             region and see that comprehensive and co-ordinated
             information passes between central government and
             local authorities and services;     and


       b.    to assist in determining priorities for scarce
             resources and, as far as possible, resolve local
             problems.


INSPECTORATES


6.17   There exists a range of inspectorates, each with its own
       specific duties and responsibilities during normal times -
       for example, Her Majesty's Inspectorates of Constabulary
       and of Fire Services, the Nuclear Installations

       Inspectorate (Nil), and the Railway Inspectorate - and
       many of these have roles in the aftermath of a disaster.
       Liaison with the inspectorates at central government level

       will be channelled through the parent department.
       Officials of that department, and often a representative
       of the appropriate inspectorate, are likely to be present
       in the lead department emergency room if one is set up.
SUMMARY


6.18   -     A lead department is nominated to ensure that
             central government activities are properly
             coordinated.


             The choice of a lead department is primarily based
             on the nature of the disaster, ease of access to
             information and the availability of facilities.


             Lead department arrangements do not necessarily
             replace existing day to day procedures and links
             between central government and local authorities and
             services.
                                                   A nnex

LEAD GOVERNMENT DEPARTMENTS


Departments currently (1991) nominated to lead in the event of
the natural or man-made disasters mentioned are as follows:


1. FLOODING (Coastal or          Miniatrv of Agriculture
   Riverine)                     Fisheries & Food or

                                 equivalent department of
                                 Scottish. Welsh or Northern
                                 Ireland Offices


2. MARINE AND COASTAL            Department of Transport

   POLLUTION (oil, chemical      (Marine Pollution Control
  or gas)                        Unit)


3. RADIATION HAZARDS (arising    Department of Energy

  within the United Kingdom)     for civil nuclear

                                 installations in England
                                and Wales.
                                         or
                                Scottish Office
                                for civil nuclear
                                installations in Scotland
                                         or
                                Ministry of Defence

                                for defence nuclear
                                installations or nuclear

                                material in transit.
                                            or

                                 Department of Transport

                                 for civil nuclear material in
                                 transit.


4. RADIATION HAZARDS (arising    Department of the Environment
   outside the United Kingdom)   (HM Inspectorate of
                                 Pollution)


5. BLOW OUT ON OFF-SHORE         Health and Safety Executive
   INSTALLATIONS                 (Offshore Safety Division)


6. SEARCH & RESCUE               Department of Transport
                                 (HM Coastguard)
                                        and/or
                                 Ministry of Defence
                                 depending on circumstances


7. SEVERE STORMS                 The Home Office initially or

                                 appropriate territorial

                                 department with Department of
                                 the Environment being
                                 prepared to assume role if
                                 appropriate.



8. OTHER GENERAL WEATHER         The Department of Transport
  EMERGENCIES                    initially, or the appropriate
                                 territorial department.
9. DISASTERS OVERSEAS - in      The Foreign & commonwealth

   which UK assistance is       Office (Overseas Development

   sought                       Administration)


10. TRANSPORT ACCIDENTS         Department of Transport

   (including those overseas
   involving UK registered
   ships & aircraft)


11. ACCIDENTS IN SPORTS         The Home Office or
    GROUNDS                     appropriate territorial
                                department (in close
                                consultation with the
                                Department of Education and
                                Science (Minister of Sport).


12. MAJOR EXPLOSIONS ARISING
    FROM LANDFILL GAS


13. DAM FAILURES


14. MAJOR STRUCTURAL FAILURES
    IN BUILDINGS (other than
   those caused by external
    impact, gas explosion,      Department Of the Environment

   fire or industrial process   or appropriate department of

    (Note.    If a government   the Scottish. Welsh or

   building is involved the     Northern Ireland Offices.

   relevant department would

   lead eg. D.Education &
    Science for schools in   )

    England                  )

                             )

15. EARTHQUAKES              )



16. SERIOUS INDUSTRIAL           Depending on circumstances
   ACCIDENTS
                             a. The Home Office if activities
                                 of emergency services are the
                                 main focus of attention.


                             b. Department of the Environment
                                 if rivers, inland waterways
                                 (outside Port Authority
                                 jurisdiction) or water
                                 services in England are the
                                 main cause of concern or gas
                                 clouds of toxic or unknown
                                 composition are threatening

                                 the environment or public
                                 safety.


                             c. Ministry of Agriculture.
                                 Fisheries and Food if the
                                 main focus of attention is

                                 safety of food supplies.


                             d. Department of Employment if

                                 the main focus of attention
                                 is centred on the Secretary
of State's responsibilities
for the operations of the
Health and Safety executive.


The Scottish. Welsh or
Northern Ireland Offices for
incidents in these parts of
the UK which come within the
responsibilities of the
respective Secretaries of
State.


Other possible, but less
likely, candidates for the
lead role could be:


Department of Trade and

Industry if main focus is
on information about the
industry involved and/or
the economic implications
of the disaster.


Department of Health if

the main focus is on advice
to the public on hazards and

their effects or on
activities of the NHS
(ambulance and hospital

services).
DRAFT




DEALING WITH D ISA STERS

HOME OFFICE GUIDANCE




CHAPTER 7:   RECOVERY




7.1   Recent disasters have shown the degree of damage and
      devastation which can result.    Repair to the fabric of the

      affected area may take a considerable time.    The effects of
      a disaster reach beyond damage to buildings and the
      environment, causing shock to victims, the bereaved and the
      wider community which may still be felt years afterwards.
      The relevant local authorities will take the lead not only
      in carrying out structural repairs and restoring the
      environment but also in providing social and psychological

      aftercare and in rehabilitating the community and
      facilitating recovery.    Even though recovery is a slow
      process and may take months or possibly years, local
      authorities may want to start the process as soon as
      practicable after disaster has struck.    The recovery

      process may therefore run in parallel with the later stages
      of the initial life-saving and rescue operation.


7.2   This guidance does not address the processes underlying
      longer-term recovery.    There are various publications which
explore the issues of recovery and rebuilding the

community, and some of these are listed in Annex A to this

chapter.     This is not an exhaustive list, but these
publications will be helpful sources of ideas and guidance
for local authorities and others as they set about
providing practical assistance and long-term support to the
community.
                                                   ANNEX A




Lockerbie:   A Local Authority Response to the Disaster,
published by Dumfries and Galloway Regional Council,

November 1989.


Disasters:   Planning for a Caring Response, published for
the Disasters Working Party by Her Majesty's Stationery

Office, April 1991.


Local Authorities civil Emergencies Planning Manual,
published by County Emergency Planning Officers' Society

1991.


The Bradford Disaster:   The Administration of a Disaster
Fund, by Roger Suddards, published by Sweet and Maxwell,
1986.


Disaster Appeal Scheme (United Kingdom), to be published by
the British Red Cross, September 1991.
DRAFT




                        DEALING WITH DISASTER
                        HOME OFFICE GUIDANCE


CHAPTER 8:    PLANNING. TRAINING AND EXERCISING




INTRODUCTION


8.1     Previous chapters have described the combined response to
        disasters in order that those responding can see their
        contributions in perspective.   Advice is now offered on a
        combined approach to 3 aspects of preparedness - planning,
        training and exercises.


8.2     The foundations of the combined response are the
        preparedness and expertise of each of the local emergency
        services and of the appropriate departments within the
        local authorities.   The effectiveness of the response
        depends to a large extent on these being brought together
        both in preparing the response and putting it into action.


SENIOR COORDINATING GROUP


8.3     Based on established good practice, an arrangement which
        can be recommended is for the chief officers of the
        emergency services and local authority chief executives to




                                                                 ^   /v
      meet at intervals to consider such matters as plans,
      procedures, joint training and exercises.     (This is, of

      course, similar to the senior command group referred to in
      Chapter 2, paras 2.17-2.19 and is likely to comprise many
      or all of the same people.)     It is recommended that the
      senior coordinating group should be assisted by a working
      level group or groups as necessary.


PLANNING


8.4   The senior coordinating group will be well placed to
      harmonise the plans of the services and organisations
      which make up the combined response, and any joint plans
      which may have been compiled.     One particular plan which
      is likely to require attention is that on relations with
      the media.   Chapter 4 indicates the scale of response
      which is likely to be required.     It is suggested that the
      media plan is prepared and updated in conjunction with the
      Regional COI Office and is integrated into all other plans
      for the combined response.


8.5   Chapter 5 describes the voluntary sector's contribution to
      the combined response.   Again, the senior coordinating
      group may want to check periodically on the progress of

      plans covering the voluntary sector.


8.6   It is suggested that the senior coordinating group also
      include cross-boundary planning in their oversight of the
      combined response.   Disasters may well affect more than
      one local authority area.    Prior arrangements for mutual
      aid, and some compatibility with the plans and procedures
      of neighbours, are certain to be valuable in the event of
      a widespread disaster which spans boundaries.


8.7   Planning should recognise the need to sustain the response
      at an unusually intensive level.   Reference has already
      been made in Chapter 4 (para 4.33) to the possible 24 hour
      nature of media demands.    A round the clock response is

      not necessarily limited to the emergency services'
      activities at the scene or to the media.   Arrangements
      should be devised to enable the response to be maintained,
      whilst at the same time recognising the need to relieve
      those engaged in it.   Where this involves personnel not
      normally associated with a 24 hour shift pattern, thought
      should be given beforehand to shift systems including,
      when necessary, mutual aid arrangements.


JOINT TRAINING AND EXERCISING


8.8   Planning should be underpinned by training and exercising
      and, collectively, the senior coordinating group should
      oversee the multidisciplinary aspects of these activities.
      Although they are inter-related they are, for ease of

      presentation, considered in turn in the following
      paragraphs.
SUBJECTS WHICH MAY BE INCLUDED IN JO IN T TRAINING



8.9   For the police and fire services and some of the NHS
      emergency services, responding to disaster can be
      considered as part of their day-to-day work.       For others -
      local authorities, the utilities and industry - the
      response may be an extension of normal roles.       For some
      groups such as volunteers and military personnel, the
      response may be unrelated to normal day-to-day activities.
      There are, however, key training topics listed which are
      likely to be relevant to all who may be involved in the
      combined response.    These are:


      a.    Awareness training.    This is a universal requirement
            for all who might be involved, however remotely, in
            the disaster response.       Attention should be drawn to
            the impact of disaster, to the numbers of victims
            which may result (including anxious or bereaved
            relatives and friends) and to the potential scale
            and complexity of the response.       For the emergency
            services, awareness training will cover in more
            detail aspects of joint operations at and around the
            disaster scene.    For local authorities, the emphasis
            will be on how departments can combine to support
            the emergency services in the initial stages of the

            response whilst maintaining essential services and
            preparing to recover from the disaster.       For others

            a general familiarity with the combined response

            will suffice.
Training in liaison and coordination.     This should

highlight the importance of liaison and coordination
in the planning and execution of the combined
response.   Good practice# conveyed through joint
training, is crucial in improving the combined
response and removing possible obstacles to an
efficient and effective joint response.


Communications.    These have sometimes proved to be
inadequate in previous disaster responses and so
deserve to receive attention during training.
Subjects for training might include:


      compatibility and inter-operability of the
      various communications systems within the
      combined response, and the need to avoid
      mutual interference when transmitters are in
      close proximity;


      familiarisation with other organisations*
      forms, terminology and call-out arrangements
      where these are different;   and


      information technology and information access.


Media relations.   In addition to the training

required for preparation of the media response,
             practical training in interview and news conference

             techniques is likely to be of considerable benefit.


       e.   Recognition of stress.     Social and psychological
             aftercare following a disaster has already been
             mentioned in Chapter 7 in relation to recovery.
             General training should be given in the recognition
             of stress both in the victims of disaster and in
             those responding and in appropriate referral of
             those suffering.


       f.   The international dimension.     Included in this are:


                    problems arising from disasters in which
                    casualties include a large number of foreign
                    nationals;   and


                    EC and other directives on issues such as the
                    transportation of hazardous material.


             The need for training in this area is likely to
             increase with the introduction of the Single
             European Market in 1992.


TYPES OF TRAINING


8.10   Some of the ways in which training for the

       interdisciplinary aspects of the combined response may be
       achieved are listed below:
On-the-iob training.     Those using this form of
training include local authorities and also hospital
staff.     Training may take the form of in-house
lectures, discussion periods, computer-based
simulation of disasters, and instruction on how to
operate emergency centres.


Home Office colleges.    The Emergency Planning

College at Easingwold provides a range of
interdisciplinary training in the form of seminars,
workshops and courses.    The Police Staff College,
Bramshill provides a disaster management course
primarily for police officers.    Details of training
available at the Home Office colleges may be
obtained from the addresses in Annex A to this
chapter.


NHS/Medical.    At least one county-based ambulance

service and the British Association of Immediate
Care Schemes run courses on the command and control
and the medical aspects of the disaster response.

Further information can be obtained as shown in
Annex A.


Academic institutions tend to run specialised
courses.    Some of the institutions offering courses

are listed at Annex B to this chapter.
       e.    Other seminars. A large number of seminars are run

             by many different organisations and address various
             topics related to the disaster response.    Details
             are usually advertised by the organisers.


JOINT EXERCISING


8.11   The need for joint exercising cannot be over-emphasised.
       Joint exercises test plans and procedures, provide
       practical training in the combined response and enable
       working relationships to be formed between those likely to-
       be involved in the disaster response.   The senior
       coordinating group may therefore wish to draw up an
       exercise schedule for the local combined response.
       Exercises may take a number of forms, for example:


       a.    Computer-based simulation. As various forms of

             information technology become established in
             operations rooms and emergency centres, this type of
             exercise may be particularly helpful in enabling
             commanders and operators to practise in their
             operational environment.


       b.   Table-top exercises.    These can be particularly
             cost-effective.   They can be designed to exercise
            the command and control of the overall combined
            response, or any part of it.    It is important in

            table-top exercises to be realistic and not to

             ignore the physical difficulties which, for example,
             deployments and communications present.   Similarly,

             the need for a media response must not be forgotten
             even if it is not being included in the exercise.


       c.    Live exercises.   These can be resource-intensive and
             should therefore be planned and prepared carefully.
             They are, however, the only reliable way (short of
             responding to a real disaster) in which to test
             procedures and liaison processes and to incorporate

             lessons learnt into revised plans.   It is
             recommended that the media response is included in
             live exercises.


FREQUENCY AND COST OF EXERCISING


8.12   It is recommended that each local response should be
       exercised live every other year with a table-top exercise
       every year.


8.13   It may be possible to reduce the cost of exercising by
       combining with a variety of mandatory exercises which a
       number of agencies carry out.   Examples include:


             exercise emergencies involving nuclear installations


             HM Coastguard emergency exercises


             airport emergency exercises
             port/harbour emergency exercises


             British Rail emergency exercises.


SUMMARY


8.14   Plans are more effective if they are prepared on the basis
       of knowledge of others1 plans and procedures.     Regular
       meetings between emergency service chief officers and
       local authority chief executives as well as meetings
       between those at working level will facilitate this.


8.15   Planning is underpinned by training and exercising.     A
       multidisciplinary approach, when appropriate, will enable
       those involved to get to know each other and foster a
       confidence in each other which will enhance the response
       on the day.


8.16   Exercises may take a number of forms.     They are the only
       validation of plans available, short of a real response,
       and their importance cannot be over-emphasised.
                                                        ANNEX A




COLLEGES FUNDED BY THE HOME OFFICE PROVIDING INTERDISCIPLINARY
TRAINING IN DISASTER MANAGEMENT




Emergency Planning College
The Hawkhills

Easingwold
York Y06 3EG
Tel:   Easingwold (0347) 21406




Police Staff College
Bramshill House
Nr Basingstoke
Hampshire RG27 OJW
Tel:   Hartley Wintney (025126) 2931




[NB:   Contact address required for BASICS/other health service
training]
                                                      ANNEX B




ACADEMIC INSTITUTIONS OFFERING COURSES IN DISASTER MANAGEMENT




Bradford University


Cranfield


Institute for International Research


Oxford Polytechnic


Southampton Institute of Higher Education




[NB:   Others to be added?]
