                       Ct   / *-'Y£~rV'   oC

                                               From: A R Baden (SARD C)
                                               Date: 11 December 1990

                                               cc   Mr Ellirigford
  1.    Mr Vaughan V
 .2.    PS/Mr Atkins

                 MEETING WITH MR KELLY: 12 DECEMBER 1990

 1. I understand that the Minister is to see Mr Kelly of the FA
 tomorrow.
 2.   Mr Kelly has provided us with a note outlining the main
 topics which a 'blueprint' for football would cover (Flag A). I
 understand that Mr Kelly wants the opportunity of tomorrow's
 meeting to present his ideas for such a 'blueprint'. It is ho
 doubt intended to be in part a response to •
                                            :the League's document
 'One Game; One Team, One Voice' which suggests that a Joint Board
 would have advantages for a number of the areas suggested in this
 'blueprint'.

  3. The Minister may wish to welcome/whait sounds a most positive
|package of proposals and clarify who        the parties to this
. 'blueprint' might be, its timing and how       the FA see it as
v relating to the League's proposals for a Joint        Board. In
  particular the Minister may wish to establish what is meant by a
  strong Executive Board; I attach a further copy of my note on the
  weaknesses of the present FA and League organisations and the
  case for the FA Council to be replaced by a much smaller board of
  directors (Flag B ).
 4. . On the particular 'components' of the blueprint raised by"
 MrKelly the Minister will' wish to know:

        - the absence of a strategy forthe implementation of
          all-seating and identification of priorities has been of
          concern to us in connection with the Football Trust's
          'first come, first serve' approach to grant aid for major
          projects. We are currently exploring with the Home Office
          whether there is scope for the FLA to assist in this and
  ■-      will report to the Minister;
        - the FA are reported to be considering whether they'might
          provide financial assistance to the Football Trust to help
          in the implementation of a strategy for 8 regional stadia
          of 40,000 for purposes of hosting the World Cu p or
          European Championships;

   f-     the FA will receive exactly the     same treatment as any
          other body bidding for the management of Lilleshall. The
          FA are also wrong in thinking that Sportspartner has a
          financial stake in Sportsmanager Ltd, the in-house company
          which won the competitive tender for Bisham Abbey (a copy
          of Miss Eustace's advice and Mr Millichip's letter of
          23 November at Flag C ).

   %
A R BADEN
SARD C
P3/165
Ext 0675
                                                                                          y . i ; i i ! i i ; ; l ! ! ^ i ! ; f |j ]




    CONFIDENTIAL:                                                    V■■■;




                                  M e g ^ ^ . obert A t k in s/Graham Kelly

                                     W ednesday ]2th Dec e m b e r •1990




               • Lack of strategic planning

               •Need for Blueprint for Football

                Main components of Blueprint-

’       .. .     .            ~ National Plan for Stadia

                               FLA and FSADC seeking guidance

                             - Need for collective investment

                             - Shortness of time

                               Ground sharing ;       ';;V

                               Partnerships with commc-rce and councils

                          - Commercial initiative - new company                                  '..V




                               Junior England Club

                         - Pursuit of Excellence

                         .-•■ Lilleshall

                         - Community.

    ;. :                      Discipline and the Laws of the Game                ^V   -

                     ■    ~    Rec!r.uit;hent of Referees                    ■

^   :           r        “                   tren«s - educational, sociological,
                              po.l.itica] , economic and sporting     :

                         - Sports Medicine

                         - Crowd control                                          V

               .. . — Role of nicinagers and players


               Confidence of prospective funders                 •

Creation of a strong Executive Board                         •
