                                                                                                 IT )
                       From-. T   he   P rivate S e c r e t a r y



                                                                    y jj J
                                                                              H o m e O ffic e
                                                                             QUEEN ANNE'S GATE
                                                                             LONDON SW1H 9AT




              RvV>            j\Kv
             T C F ’. ^ C -
                                                                                 RcC£IVfc*D HIM
    Q eu^ Pdc*^                                                                   3 f t!!!, 198$



    This is to confirm that the Home Secretary will be
chairing a meeting of Ministers and officials from interested
Departments at 5 pm on Wednesday 2 August to discuss handling
of the publication of Lord Justice Taylor's interim report on
the events at Hillsborough.

    I understand that your Secretary of State and Mr Moynihan
will be present.  Mr Forsythe and Lord Trafford have also
agreed to be present, but the latter only if the report's
recommendations touch on the responsibilities of the
Department of Health.  I should be grateful to know as soon as
possible the names of officials in your Department, Scottish
Office, Department of Health and Welsh Office who need to be
there.

    We expect the interim report to be presented to the Home
Secretary on Tuesday 1 August, with a view to enabling
publication on Friday 4 August if the Home Secretary wished.
I will send copies of the report to you and private
secretaries to other Ministers involved as soon as it is
received.  Mr David Mould on 273 3099 is the official contact
point in the Home Office.

    The recommendations will be interim, based on evidence so
far considered, and we understand they will not cover longer
term questions such as all-seated stadia, financial questions



                                                                       /about



Alan Ring, Esq
Private Secretary
Department of the Environment
                             2.




about restructuring of grounds, football membership scheme or
grounds other than football grounds.  The report will probably
state that the recommendations should be implemented
forthwith, but leave it to Ministers and other responsible
parties to decide precisely when they should be implemented.
The interim report is being produced to enable action to be
taken before the start of the new football season.

    The purpose of the Home Secretary's meeting will be to
decide whether publication should go ahead as planned on
4 August; what the Government's initial reaction should be;
what immediate action should be taken on the recommendations;
and whether there should be any prior disclosure to interested
parties to enable them to react Sensibly to the report.


A                        I k o d fU c A .IfS v J jL z       Ms




                                             MISS C M-BANNISTER
