                                                         ANNEX B




                                                            ©
          A F T E R       H I L L S B O R O U G H




    A Report and Recommendations for Co-ordinating and

             Delivering Helping Services of the

               Directors of Social Services

                      of the areas affected




 Prepared by Officers from Cheshire, Knowsley, Lancashire
 Liverpool, Sefton, St. Helens and Wirral in consultation
 with Merseyside Probation Service, the Voluntary Agencies,
 Mersey Regional Health Authority and Merseyside Emergency
 Planning Unit, under the Chairmanship of Professor Howard
 Parker.


                            APRIL 1989




HLAAAB
AIM

       To consider the feasibility including costings of
establishing a regional unit in order to marshall and
organise the allocation of a variety of resources so that
h el p can be made available in the right place at the right
time to people affected by the "Hillsborough" disaster.    In
this context "Region" is the seven local authorities.

M E TH OD A ND FORMAT

     A working party of senior staff, drawn from statutory
and voluntary agencies in the region was established to
report on the potential for an Assistance Unit built upon
the service structure created after "Hillsborough".   The
group was chaiired by Howard Parker, Professor in Social Work
at the University of Manchester.

     The report uses the experience gained from the disaster
at "Hillsborough" and other recent tragedies, and sets out
recommendations for dealing with the organisational,
information and co-ordination issues which have arisen.
Specifically, this consists off a synopsis of the key
elements required to operate a service which is responsive
to need and has an outreach capability, including the
provision of a helpline, counselling, specialised work,
database, staff training/support and public relations.  All
of these elements are included within the broad aim as
stated above, and the role of the unit as perceived by the
group.

INTRODUCTION

     The events at "Hillsborough", Sheffield, on 15th April
1989, are a graphic illustration of the extensive damage to
personal well-being which can be precipitated by the trauma
of a major disaster.  This applies to those directly
involved, through injury or bereavement, their helpers,
onlookers, and people suffering shock due to publicity or
association with similar events.  The effects are often
long-term and can have a profound impact upon family life
and on individual ability to cope with everyday living.

     "Hillsborough" is the latest in a tragic line of
disasters.  Manchester Airport, Bradford, Piper Alpha,
Zeebrugge, Kegworth, Clapham and Lockerbie have all
illustrated how a major unexpected disaster affects the
lives of ordinary people and the agencies which must provide
them with assistance.  We have learnt a great deal from
these earlier tragedies, particularly ho w large scale
disasters produce trauma and grief much further and deeper
than common sense would expect.




HLAAAB
0




    6.        Fol lowing the disaster;, there was a rapid mobilisation
         of resources from a variety of authorities, and
         non-statutory agencies.    It became apparent from the outset,
         that a mechanism was necessary to ensure that these
         resources were properly co-ordinated to reach people and
         families in need in the most effective and speedy manner.
         Drawing from the experience of those involved in the
         response to earlier disasters, and from the current
         situation, it is considered essential that an infrastructure
         is established which can consolidate the effort currently
         under way, and develop and adapt it to meet the changing
         needs of the region for a minimum period of two years.

         BACKGROUND

    7.          The services and resources available for assistance
         are, in the main, already in place though not always on the
         scale required.     These services are provided by a
         multiplicity of organisations.     They must respond to those
         w h o have asked for help, but also reach out to those who
         h av e not come forward spontaneously.   It is important that
         services are available quickly, are easily accessible,
         approachable and able to deal with a whole range of
         emotional and practical needs.     Some of these needs will be
         immediate, some short-term, some of a more permanent nature
         and in many cases needs will remain hidden for months, or
         even years.

    8.        Localised services, well publicised, are of course,
         most important but these should be seen in the context of a
         regional network of centrally co-ordinated resources.   In
         addition, regional co-ordination can mobilise resources in
         particular areas which would perhaps be overwhelmed by
         demand, if left to cope alone.

         KEY CO-ORDINATION FUNCTIONS REQUIRED ARE;-

    9.   (i)      Receipt and analysis of all requests for help both
                  locally and nationally to ensure a co-ordinated
                  response is made;

         (ii)     provision of an outreach service to track those who
                  need help, but who have not yet come forward?

         (iii)    promote quality assurance of services,   through
                  monitoring and review;

         (iv)     establishment of criteria for staff training and
                   support patterns which are common across the region;

         (v)      advise on the public relations function;




         HLAAAB
I




          (vi)     guidance and assistance I- the establishment of
                   appropriate local databases which are compatible with
                   the central system, to ensure speedy, reliable and
                   accurate information?

          (vii)    promotion of liaison and co-operation between all
                   relevant agencies in the region;

          (viii) review action already taken in other regions   (e.g.
                 Sheffield, Nottinghamshire).

          COUNSELLING SERVICES - CONTINUING REQUIREMENTS

    10.        It is clear from the information from previous
          disasters that continued access to practical and counselling
          services is required by some victims for a considerable time
          after the event.   It cannot be assumed that individuals
          needing help will be requesting or needing it now and
          arrangements must be made to ensure that help is accessible
          and readily available in the medium and long-term.

    11.        The extent of future service requirements is difficult
          to predict though some indications of the range of problems
          presented, the location of people needing help and the form
          of hel p they require should be available when data collected
          so far, has been analysed.   Some patterns of service
          requirements will be discernible and inform the detailed
          planning of provision.

    12.        Meanwhile it is possible to identify in broad terms the
          kinds of services that will be needed and the ways in which
          they may be provided.   A co-ordinated mix of centralised and
          local services from the statutory and voluntary sector is
          likely to provide the greatest flexibility in the use of
          resources;   such flexibility will be necessary given the
          difficulty of identifying the extent and type of need, and
          ensuring that deployment of resources is appropriate and
          adequately monitored.

          Philosophy

    13.       It is important to ensure that the service response
          meets with an overall philosophy agreed by the participating
          agencies.

                  For the consumer this will mean that:

          (i)       There are clear avenues for seeking help (locally and
                    regionally).

          (ii)      The response to their requests will be quick and
                    appro pr i at e.




          HLAAAB
            (iii)       Help is easily accessible (i,e.     help is not
                        dependent upon where people 1 i v e ) .

            (iv)        Help should be non-labelling and non-stigmatising.

                 For the participating agencies this will mean that
            services:

            (i)         Should be well co-ordinated and consistent.

            (ii)        Should be quality assured.

            (iii)       Cost effective.

            (iv)        Keep the consumer as the primary consideration.

 14.             In addition, the agencies will need to contribute to
            the wider body of knowledge that can be drawn upon in the
            event of further disasters.  Funds to mount an evaluation of
            the response to this disaster are being sought
            independently.  The feedback from such research could be
            invaluable regionally and nationally in emergency planning.


            Specific Service Requirements

  15.            The provision of services as a response to disaster can
            be considered along a continuum with practical help at one
            end and long-term counselling at the other.  Figure 1
            attempts to show this continuum in more detail.

            Figure      1 - A Service Continuum

Practical                                 Advice/                              Counselling                               Long-term

HelD                                      Guidance                                                                        Support

            1       1       1     1       1     1    1    i      1         I I              II              1     1      1
        Transport   I   Legal     I Information |    A    | Physical     Sharing   |        1 Mourning   Bereave- |     PTSO

                    1             I             iListen- |               feelings |          1           ment      1

                    1             1             1ing ear |                         1        1                      1
                    1             1             1        1                         1        1                       1
                  Finance       Medical       Referral Support       Medical    Relation-            Stress     Staff Support
                                                on       Group                  ships
                                                                                        Grief


  16.            It can be seen that the services along the continuum
            reflect particular post disaster time phases, the possible
            different modes or models of service provision and the
            possible locations where services are received.  Many of the
            services are best left at the local level where resources
            are familiar and can easily be adjusted in response to
            changes in need.




            HLAAAB
17.        HoweVr'i. . cm.1t'>': c-,r- ne p:io'          effectively at a
      Regional l e v e l , e.g,       Helpline # central information.  In
      addition, some services can best foe monitored, evaluated and
      co-ordinated at a regional level,             A 'network' of specialist
      skills can be developed by a regional unit.

18.        The Inter-Agency Planning Group recommends that a
      co-ordinating body, known as the "Hillsborough Support Unit"
      be established for a minimum period of two years.   The Unit
      should have an executive officer, and support staff;
      operate the central Helpline;   set up an efficient database?
      oversee the pattern of services to enable resources to be
      used effectively;^ see that districts provide systematic
      support and training for all staff;   develop clear channels
      of communication and form partnerships with all relevant
      authorities and non-statutory agencies in the region;   set
      up monitoring, evaluation and performance review systems.

19.        The lead authorities responsible for the Unit could be
      represented through a Committee comprising local authority
      members and officers' representatives of Mersey Regional
      H ealth Authority, Merseyside Probation Service, Voluntary
      Organisations, and the Disaster Trust Fund.

      S uggested   'Regional Services'

           The services outlined below will need to be linked to
      each other through the proposed Regional Unit.

      HELPLINE

20.        This service currently operates on a 24 hour day, 7 day
      w eek basis and is staffed by officers of the Social Services
      Departments and a variety of other organisations.   Given the
      nationwide 'catchment' of potential users of the service it
      will be cost-efficient to retain this centralised service at
      its current level for a period of weeks to come and will
      ensure a ready access point for assistance while medium to
      longer term arrangements are effected.   It is envisaged that
      the Helpline will become a national 'one number' service run
      b y the regional unit with calls then referred to local
      services as appropriate.

      Co-ordination of Counselling Services

21.        Whilst counselling will usually be offered very
       'locally' it will be necessary to ensure that individuals
       are referred to the most appropriate agency; that their
       needs are met, and the services are monitored.  In addition




       HLAAAB
      there will cs poopj e needing lieIp f roir> outside the 'region'"
      whose needs must be assessed and referrals made.       This will
      require a team of 4 headed by a team leader.

22.        It is important that referrals to and from statutory
      agencies across the country are properly co-ordinated.
      There are a number of voluntary agencies on Merseyside and
      in the region for whom counselling is already the major, or
      a significant part of their work; these should be used
      wherever possible.   These include COMPASS, Personal Social
      Services, C. of E. Board of Social Responsibility (through
      the clergy and national organisations with local bases, such
      as Cruse).   The regional unit would aim to co-ordinate
      referrals to and from these agencies where appropriate.

      Drop-in Centre

23.        The Anfield Advice Centre has already allowed a large
      number of ’s u r v i v o r s ’ to describe and share their experience
      of being at Hillsborough.           It has offered other services as
      well.   It is likely that this Centre will continue via
      funding from other sources.           However, because of the
      symbolic importance of Anfield we recommend that it is used
      as a referral point for Helpline on Match Days.           We believe
      that many new referrals will be obtained on Match Days.

      OUTREACH AND CO-ORDINATION

24.            Whilst the majority of people affected by Hillsborough
      reside within or just outside the Merseyside region it is
      known that a significant number reside elsewhere.        This
      p r o b l e m was found by Kent following the Zeebrugge disaster
      where survivors and others lived long distances from the
      centre of help.        An "away" Team was established to initiate
      and provide assistance outside the Dover area.        Zeebrugge
      also demonstrated that many people required specialist help
      from Counsellors, Psychologists and Psychiatrists etc., and
      that a mechanism was needed to co-ordinate their services.
      Thus problems were both identified and met by the Kent
      "away" Team.

25.          Unlike Zeebrugge, however, the identity and location of
      people affected by "Hillsborough" are largely unknown.
      Whilst this is a handicap, there is sufficient justification
      to reach out to those in potential need.     There is a need,
      therefore, to establish the equivalent of the Kent "away"
      T e a m but with the limited role of referring those from
      outside the region to appropriate services across the
      country.     Basic tasks will be to:-




      HLAAAB
      1.   P ro v ic f'   a   c fi’it.;   “ «■ i e r - h o ^ e   i m e ,   e „ q ..   an   0800
           (freephone)           nusber;

      2.   Provide an assessment and referral service, whereby
            people are re-referred to Local Advice Services;

      3.   Co-ordinate referrals both from within and without the
            region;

      4.   Provide oversight of the different elements of
           specialist services, e.g. psychologists etc.

      5.   Identify key events and anniversaries which may effect
            individuals and consequently service provision (e.g.
            Inquests, future football games).

           Thus the differing needs of people will be identified
      and the appropriate resources matched up to meet those
      needs:  this will avoid duplication of effort and create a
      more efficient use of resources.

      DATABASE REQUIREMENTS

26.         The unit will require a database capable of recording
      information fed through to the 'helpline', 'drop.in' centres
      and other source points.   The majority of contacts will be
      w ithin two broad categories, i.e. either requesting
      assistance or offering help.     Currently the 'Hillsborough
      Helpline' has separate systems dealing with these two
      elements.   At present, nearly 3,600 offers of help have been
      received from a variety of sources, including over 600
      through the 'Hillsborough H e l p l i n e 1. About 1,650 requests
      for help have been received nationally, the majority of
      these being through the 'Hillsborough Helpline'.         With this
      level of activity occuring, it is clear that an effective
      database is essential to matching needs for assistance with
      the wide range of resources available.

27.        In respect of referrals for help, a manual database was
      established as a record of callers, pending the setting up
      of the computerised system.  It is suggested that this be
      retained and maintained as a back up in case of problems
      with the system.

28.         Information which is useful for the database, includes
      basic details such as names, addresses, local authority of
      origin, referral to district and agency, general
      practitioners, significant dates, (birthdays, anniversaries
      etc).   Each person has an individual reference number, and
      there is a facility for a group reference for people linked
      together.




      HLAAAB
29.        Staffing levels, which are currently based upon staff
      seconded from other duties should be formalised as soon as
      possible.  Minimum staffing is expected to require a systems
      manager, two operators, and full-time clerical support.
      Once the system is up to date close links should be
      maintained with the 'Helpline', and other agencies involved
      in collating or investigating data.

      Staff Training and Support

30.          The need for on-going and carefully targetted training
      h a s been demonstrated via earlier disasters.   Clearly such
      training can and has already been 'bought in' from external
      sources.     So far this specialist training has been
      provided for local authority workers.     The regional unit
      would hope to adopt a policy of 'training the trainers' and
      thus by using expertise within the region attempt to reduce
      training costs.

31.        It is absolutely clear that those managing and working
      in post-disaster situations found the work very stressful.
      T hey need access to regular de-briefing and 'talking out'
      sessions.   Whilst for some workers this will in part be
      provided in their own agencies there is a need for an
      independent service which all helpers, whether paid or
      voluntary staff, can use.   The regional unit would aim to
      ensure these support systems were in place and make
      arrangements to co-ordinate offers of this 'care for the
      carers' (e.g. by BASW and the Psychology Service).   The unit
      could also respond, in confidence, to direct requests from
      staff anywhere in the region.

      PUBLIC RELATIONS

32.         "Public relations" is an important and basic element in
      the success or failure of any venture.   This is complex and
      requires skilled and sensitive handling if its potential is
      to be realised.   It needs to be regarded as an explicit
      task, and as part of the management and objectives of the
      unit.   It can best be organised within the framework of a
      public relations strategy.

            Such a strategy will acknowledge that:-

      (i)      Interest in the disaster will be subject to
               fluctuation.  For example:   funerals, inquests,
               litigation, football matches, anniversary of the
               disaster etc.  Forward planning for the impact of
               these events is required.




      HLAAAB
      ( i j-)   uo.;. 3.r:   3 t :..r o i r::\i-■>' ',sy ■; :v. ■.:11;t-:rsl of: hard, factual
                and ac curate i rir.ci. inst i o n aDout the work of the unit,
                There w i l l , there tore, need to be direct links between
                the management and the public relations functions of
                the unit.

      (iii)     Media interest can sometimes be aggressive and
                time-consuming.  This can be wasteful at best and
                damaging at worst.  Thus contact with the media needs
                to be carefully channelled and regulated separating
                local and regional issues.

33.       It is suggested that Public relations can best be
      undertaken by the Head of the Unit along with substantial
      support from the Management Committee.

      COSTINGS

34.        Since "Hillsborough" is a national disaster, it is
      recommended that strenuous efforts are made to obtain the
      funding of the Unit from central government, the EEC and
      other sources.   Costs are estimated at around £350,000 per
      year for two years.   This may be generous or alternatively
      additional resources may need to be added on.

      CONCLUSION

35.       The advantages of co-ordinating all helping responses
      seem clear.  It is believed that a Regional Unit would, in
      the long run, be cost effective and more importantly would
      introduce a whole series of supports and checks which would
      mean a better service for those who need it, including the
      carers.




      29th April,        1989




      HLAAAB
            ESTIMATED COSTS "HILLSBOROUGH" SUPPORT UNIT


                                1989/90   1990/91   1991/92

                                From      Full      To

                                1.7.89    Year      30.6

RUNNING COSTS                   £000      £000      £000

Salaries                         140       185           46

Volunteer Expenses                33        44           11

Office Accommodation,   etc.      26        34            9

Supplies and Services             12        14            4

Transport                            6       8            2

Telephone                         11        15            4

Printing,   Stationery etc.          8      10            2

Central Support                      8      10            3

Contingency                       30        30           15

                                 274       350           96



EQUIPMENT ETC

Typewriter, Wordprocessor)
Computer Hardware         )
Software                  )     40
Phone System              )
Office Furniture          )



                                314       350            96




HLAAA B
