                                                           <2   rx.   •



                               /U H W ^



Mr M c D o n a l d

M E E T I N G W I T H MR PHI
                               IPS ^ w U ^ L * ^
1.Y o u , Mr Kinghan and Mr Lee were present when Mr Moynihan    1
had a short discussion with Trevor Phillips of the Football
League.

2. The Minister thanked Mr Phillips for his efforts over
recent months. He said that in the light of Lord Justice
Taylor's Report, the membership scheme was now on the "back
burner" and the implementation of Part II of the Football
Spectators Act and the establishment of the FLA was now the
responsibility of the Home Office. The Minister said that he
wished to undertake some further work in order to identify
the most appropriate scheme. It would then be shelved for use
in the future if it proved necessary. In this context he was
anxious to obtain copies of the responses to the ITT. This
was discussed and it was concluded that you would try and
obtain copies of the bids from the companies direct. If this '
proved impossible, the Department would need to approach the
League again.

3.Mr Phillips told the Minister that he was pursuing the idea
of a national voluntary membership scheme. He had presented
his ideas to the Management Committee last week.He thought
that there was a reasonable chance that such a scheme would
work and it would in particular result in better marketing
opportunities for clubs and possibly provide a vehicle for
football spectators to represent their views and participate
more fully in football. Mr Phillips handed over an advance
copy of a Football League report on supporters' attitudes
which was to be released on Thursday. He and the Minister
discussed briefly the importance of improving facilities at
grounds.

4.The issue of sponsorship by the drinks industry was touched
upon and the Minister said that he hoped to have talks with
the Portman Group and the Brewers Society shortly. Mr
Phillips brought the Minister up to date with the progress
being made in finding new sponsors.




Teresa Vokes
PS/Mr Moynihan


14 February 1990

cc: Mr Kinghan
    Mr Lee
