                                    V sW U v\   0
                                                v   A'                   *


 K H . 3 . 6 / F E B M E E T . OM        dC




            HOME OFFICE
            Queen Anne’s Gate London SW 1H 9AT
                                                          Direct line 01-273 3 C
                                                         Switchboard 01-273 3°oc



Mr A R Baden                                                                   Your reference
Department of Environment
Sport and Recreation Division                                                  Our reference
2 Marsham Street                                                                    FEP/90 35/48/89
LONDON                                                                         Date FEP/89 35/48/127
                                                                                    6 March 1990
                                                                                                       f/i


Dear Tony


MEETING 14 FEBRUARY 1990 RE ISSUES ARISING FROM THE
HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY FINAL REPORT

I mentioned to Tom Ellingford that I felt one or two points
contained in your note dated 26 February of the meeting of 14
February did not reflect accurately our position. I thought I
should therefore set out that position as we see it. I have
done so below cross-referencing the comments to the relevant
paragraphs of your note.

Paragraph 3(1)

2.   We recognise that it is for us to take the lead on
implementing the recommendations'of the Final Report of the
Inquiry.  In so doing we are content to answer enquiries about
financing some of the recommendations (particularly all seated
accommodation) along the common line which our two departments
have agreed. We look to DOE (SARD) to take the lead in
determining the policy for funding of sport, including
football and including the safety issues which affect football
and/or other sports. This simply follows the existing
practice.

Paragraph 3(2)

3.   Our position here remains more open than is suggested in
your note. At present we intend first to consult the
representative sporting bodies before considering introduction
of primary legislation. Their willingness to move voluntarily
to all/more seated accommodation is something which might
influence our approach. The schedule to the Home Secretary's
statement on 29 January has not changed.

Paragraph 3(3)

4.   Similarly, extending the role of the FLA is also more
Open than is suggested in your note and remains as set out in
the schedule to the Home Secretary's statement.
Paragraph 4

5.   The lead department on hooliganism is a matter between
you and F8 Division.  I would have thought it would be more
accurate to say that DOE continues to be the lead department
on any work associated with the need for and introduction of
any football membership scheme in order to help combat soccer
hooliganism.

6.   I hope this clarifies the situation as we see it and I am
sorry if there has been any misunderstanding.

                                       Yours sincerely




                                       D J MOULD

                                       (Fire and Emergency
                                       Planning Department)
                        APPOINTMENTS-IN-CONFIDENCE


NOTE OF A MEETING HELD ON 14 FEBRUARY IN ROOM N17/14 BETWEEN THE
DEPARTMENT OF THE ENVIRONMENT AND THE HOME OFFICE TO DISCUSS THE
FOOTBALL LICENSING AUTHORITY


Licensing Authority

Those present were •

Mr   N   Kinghan    -   DOE
Mr   P   A Lee      -   DOE
Mr   A   Baden      -   DOE
Mr   T   Ellingford -   DOE

Mr P Bolton         _   Home
Mr D Mould          -   Home
Mr F Archer         —   Home


Responsibility for FLA

1.   The purpose of the meeting was to discuss the implications
of the probable transfer of responsibility post Taylor for the
setting up of the Football Licensing Authority from the DOE to
the Home Office and to inform the Home Office of where the DOE
had got to in establishing the Authority.

2.   The DOE confirmed that the Minister for Sport was content
with the proposed transfer but the Secretary of State had yet to
be consulted.    Sir Terry Heiser had now received Sir Clive
Whitmore's letter proposing the transfer of responsibility and
the DOE, as the lead Department, would be preparing a submission
to No 10 copied to other interested Departments and the Treasury
to effect the transfer.

3.   The DOE still had a continuing interest in the FLA.        This
included:

         (i )  the financial implications for football clubs of Lord
         Justice Taylor's recommendations, including the funding of
         all-seater stadia.  The Home Office would take the lead but
         the Minister for Sport would naturally be prepared to meet
         the football authorities to discuss funding related issues;

         (i i ) any proposals for requiring all-seater accommodation
         at other sports grounds, e.g. rugby league, rugby union and
         cricket grounds.   The Home Office confirmed that there was
         no intention at present to require all-seating at these
         other designated sports grounds.   They might write to the
         relevant rugby league and rugby union clubs to make this
         clear. There might also be scope to come to a voluntary
         agreement with the few cricket clubs whose designated
         grounds were not all-seater;
                         APPOINTMENTS-IN-CONFIDENCE
 I
          (iii) any proposals for extending the safety remit of the
          FLA to other grounds.   The Home Office explained that there
          was no intention at present either to introduce primary
          legislation to give this effect or to extend the Authority's
          responsibilities on a voluntary basis.

     4.   The DOE    would remain the lead Department on football
     hooliganism.     This might need to be reviewed at some stage
     because   the   Home  Office  had responsibility for all  the
     anti-hooligan   measures in Lord Justice Taylor's alternative
     strategy.


     FLA Chairman

 5.     Mr Moynihan had written to Norman Jacobs explaining that it
 would be for the Home Office to determine the appointment of
/^hairman and members.   A copy of the letter was handed over to
  the Home Office.   Mr Jacobs was known to the Minister and he
 seemed to have the right legal background for the FLA before the
 changes brought about by Taylor. Other possible Chairmen the DOE
 had considered were:-

          Alan Goodson - retired Chief Constable of Leicestershire, an
          assessor at the Popplewell Inquiry;

          Maurice Stonefrost - Director General and Clerk to GLC
          1984-85 and Chief Executive of the British Rail Pension Fund
          since 1986;

          Sir John Wood - Professor of Law at Sheffield University,
          Chairman of the Football League Appeals Committee and
          several PFA committees.

     FLA Members

1 6.   The DOE had been considering the following Board structure
  which was probably still relevant post Taylor:

          Ex-policeman - F8 Division had found a candidate;

          Ex-fireman - Mr Brannan, a former   Chief Fire   Officer   of
                       Cheshire, had   been   nominated    through   Mr
                       Bolton;

          A structural engineer - Douglas   Craig   had   a   suitable
                                  engineering background, arbitration
                                  experience and    an   interest   in
                                  football as Vice Chairman of York
                                  City. He had been nominated by John
                                  Greenway MP;

                                  More recently Andrew Shaw had been
                                  nominated by the ISE.      Further
                                  details would be sent to the Home
                                  Office;
