                         lO DOW NING STREET
                                 LONDON SW1A 2AA

From the P riv a te Secretary                      29 November 1991

                                             S k p s 1^115<e 11 ^     5 -5




        8r
       I enclose a copy of a letter from
  Mr Steve Greenall of Cambridge United
  Football Club.

       I should be               grateful for your advice on
  their invitation               to the Prime Minister to
  attend a game at               the Abbey Stadium.  Please
  could this reach               me by Friday 13 December.




                                SANDRA PHILLIPS



  Miss Mela Watts
  Department of Education and Science
                    THE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND SCIENCE
                                                                           RAPS/4156/1833
                       ELIZABETH HOUSE YORK ROAD L O N D O N SEI 7PH
                                  TELEPHONE 071-934 9000

                                     ROBERT ATKINS m p
                                      Minister for Sport

Miss Sandra Phillips
Private Secretary
10 Downing Street
London                                                             ; 11 DEC 1991
SW1A 2AA




Thank you for your letter of 29 November enclosing a copy of one from
Mr Steve Greenall of Cambridge    United Football Club.

Cambridge United   are a small club which has achieved promotion from
Division 4 to Division 2 of the Football League in successive seasons.
They are currently having a successful season and on present form are
likely to gain promotion to the proposed new Premier League at the end
of the season. This recent success has been achieved on a limited
budget and comparatively low attendances.

Some small clubs such as Cambridge are likely to face problems in
meeting   Lord  Justice   Taylor's   recommendations  particularly  in
converting their grounds to all seater within the timetable. Even if
promoted to the   Premier League any financial benefits are not likely
to accrue soon     enough to assist the club in meeting the Taylor
deadline of all    seating by August 1994. Therefore if     the Prime
Minister were to accept the invitation he may be lobbied about the
need for greater financial assistance to such clubs.

On the other hand a visit from the Prime Minister would        be a
tremendous boost to a local club which has made remarkable progress
under difficult    circumstances. He may therefore wish to consider
accepting the invitation.




MELA WATTS
Private Secretary


                                                                                            1
                                                  Cambridge U nited F.C.
                                         Registered Office and Ground: Abbey Stadium, Newmarket Road, Cambridge CB5 8LL
                                    Telephone: Cambridge (0223) 241237 Fax: (0223) 247874 Registration No. 482197 England
 C*M Bfilpr.c nwiTED f C                                                                                                                     O W W D C E UNITED   H




              The Rt. Hon. John Major, M.P.,
              10, Downing St,
              LONDON,
              SW1A OAA.


               22nd November 1991.                                     f.




               Dear Prime Minister,

               You may be aware of the success that we have enjoyed can the field in the
               last couple of seasons. Increasingly, the pressures of having to comply
               with the findings of the Taylor Report, as well as working with the
               Football Licencing Authority, puts added strain onto a club like curs, new
               possibly can the threshold of reaching the Premier League. Just over three
               years ago, we stood at the bottcxn of Division Four.

               The Board of Directors have asked me to invite you to attend a game at the
               Abbey Stadium, so that you can see for yourself the success we have
               achieved on a very tight budget, and to highlight the problems to a club
               like ours in the present day.

               It is well appreciated that you will have several hectic months ahead
               in the run up to the General Election. As many of your constituents attend
               games here, we feel you would be made more than welcome at what we feel
               is a friendly, family club, with ambitions to become the first club in
               Football League history to go from Division 4 straight up to the First
               Division in consecutive seasons.

               I look forward to your reply, and would be glad to supply a list of
               fixtures for the remainder of the season.


               Yours sincerely,


               STEVE GREENALL;
               Company Secretary - -Cambridge United Football Club.




               • n President d a Ruston f.c .c .a .                                                                        Official Club Sponsors:
  Chairman: R.H. Smart Vice C hairm an:D.A. Ruston f.c .c . a .                                           ^

 Directors: G. Harwood. J. Howard. R. Hunt, G. Lowe, R Smith
Company Secretary. Steve Greenall Team Manager. John Beck
               Com m ercial Manager: John Holmes
                                                                                                                             FUJITSU
                 S u p p o rte d by C a m b rid g e City C o u n cil                          The 9!2ba' computer & communications company
