   1 0 , D ow ning S t r e e t ,
     Wh it e h a l l S.W . 1




With the Private Secretary’s

       <    )pliments
                                                             5 APR 1989 iC O l0)




                              — 10 DOWNING STREET
                  2 6 APR                  LONDON SW1A 2AA

                                                             20 April 1989
             From the Private S ecretary
                                            VvT-



                                      2 i,
                                  PEKr.i'’ «•*--
c                    The Prime Minister has asked me to
                thank you for your letter of 17 April about
                the Hillsborough disaster.   As you say,
                thankfully Rugby League has remained fully
                a family sport. The problems of Association
                Football are very different.   I have passed
                on your letter to the Home Office who are
                responsible within government for safety
                of grounds.




                                                   (D.C.B. MORRIS)



                 D.A. Tomlinson, Esq.




    [i   0
                Halifax Rugby League Football Club Ltd
                                                Registered Office

                           THE PAVILION, THRUM HALL, HALIFAX, HX1 4TL
                                           Telephone: (04 2 2 )61 0 2 6
      Address all                                                            President: D. Brook, M A . M BE
                                              Fax: (04 2 2 )349019
  communications to:                                                            Chairman: S.Ackroyd
    Club Secretary:                                                                    Directors:
      R. M urphy                                                                 A. Beevers, P. Cooper
 The Prime Minister.

 The Rt. Hon. Mrs Margaret Thatcher MP.

 10, Downing Street.

London. W.1.                                                              17. April 1989.


. _ar Mrs. Thatcher,

I write as a long time Party member and supporter in the hope that I may offer

some sound and considered advice in the face of this terrible disaster last

Weekend. Firstly,         I served for twenty years in the West Yorkshire Police,and

during that time was heavily involved in Sport Crowd Control,and, since retiring
have been Commercial Manager and             P.R.0. to this famous and successful club.

I do appreciate that you and your Ministers will be inundated with well meaning

advice and that the opposition will use the disaster as ammunition with which

to embarrass the Government.            I do feel however that the whole problem is being
handled fro, the wrong angle.

Disasters of this nature are in my opinion a natural animal reaction to mass

hysteria in part caused by the psychological reaction to containment. Members of

our   'modern society'       are less disciplined than any others in our Nation's History

and do react to regimentation. They object to rules and regulations and particularly
react to those enforced by a 'Police presence'.

So as not to waste your valuable time, though I have many thoughts on the matter,
succinctly:

Remove all fences and barriers from all sports grounds and allow the spectators
to move at will.

Do not use Po.Tice officers for 'ushering' spectators back and forth-

Place a heavy police presence            on the field perimeter, not in the Crowd.

Employ police          snatch squads'    from strategic points within the ground toquickly
eradicate trouble, but do not            have the Police Officers mingling.

Introduce substantial Minimum            penalties for all public order offences and         with
people other than Juveniles make these custodial sentences.

Build a 'National Stadium'         somewhere in the middle of the country with a capacity
of at least 150,000.

In my recent experience Wembley is a disaster situation waiting to happen,                     luckily

my team have been there for the last two years, both times before capacity crowds,
this year the crowd limit is reduced to 77,000 and I can see the stadium being
besieged, what will be the situation if Liverpool and Everton meet in the....
F. A. Cup final this year when the normal      'home gate' of both clubs totals

substantially more than the crowd limit - a potential riot.



Again, sorry for adding my 'twopennorth' to a situation which must be causing you

much worry, it may be time for your Government to lead the way by letting the

officers of all spectator sport   organisations find the answer to their own problems



I am proud to say that this club does not have barriers, heavy Police presence
or Crowd Trouble, but then again we are lucky, Rugby League truly is a Family Sport

  vould gladly expound upon and   add to this letter but only upon invitation,

£ have no wish to preach to the   converted.




Yours sincerely,

                        /


       '■'0   "    (L


David A. Tomlinson.
