                                             a t* .     c+AJLx~bfoy\ Q ^, ce> ^ ^ M .J n ^ W >

(fe s^ rtl^ u i^ -A                       M IvnJ      IW JlCvv     SnA_lo—S & e J lx l& v\   <^rv%


                                               ---                        (d r a f t : 24 May 1989)

CROWD CONTROL
                                                        s\y O

INTRODUCTION                 IV >   <^y                  WC>         •



The Government's objectives in relation to crowd control at
football matches and other sporting events are to ensure that
necessary legislation and practical arrangements exist so that:


          - spectators can watch the event safely and enjoyably


          - violence, disorder and other unacceptable behaviour is as
          far as possible prevented and is dealt with if it arises.


Practical arrangements rest principally with the organisers of
the events (in relation to football, clubs and the football
authorities) and the police.                 JtJfytimately, no arrangements can be
entirely satisfactory without a large measure of responsibility
and self-discipline amongst spectators.


The incidence of football hooliganism F8


It is regrettably the case that we have come to associate
professional football with a persistent incidence of hooliganism
amongst some spectators.                The annual criminal statistics
published by the Home Office do not identify offences inside
 football matches or otherwise related to football, as a separate
 category.            However, as a guide to the level of trouble at
matches, ACPO collate for each football season the total number
 of people arrested at or ejected from Football League matches
 (arrests 'at1 meaning arrests inside grounds, or those made
 outside but directly connected with the policing of matches).                                       In
 recent seasons these have totalled:


           Season              Arrests                   Ejections


           1985/6               4,143                           4,356
           1986/7               5,531                           6,466
           1987/8               6,106                           6,542
Although as a proportion of attendances these figures are
relatively small (0.03% in 1987/8) they are a continuing source
of real trouble and certainly include many serious instances of
violence and disorder.   Of particular note is that this level of
hooliganism exists despite a massive commitment of resources by
the police and others, for example:


     - typically 5,000 officers in England and Wales are assigned
     to football duties on a 'football Saturday';


     - rigorous segregation is routinely enforced, by police
     tactics, proscribed routes, fencing inside grounds, and
     controls on ticket sales;


     - closed circuit television and video systems are
     extensively used to record evidence of crowd disorder and to
     deter disorder from arising;


     - special efforts are made to promote good liaison and
     intelligence, to anticipate and prevent trouble; and


     - other important measures, described below, have been
     taken.


The Government's opinion is that football hooliganism is at
unacceptable levels and is barely contained by the present
measures.   Without the existing strenuous efforts, the Government
believes the problem would be considerably worse.     Special
reference is made to some major incidents of hooliganism since
the tragedy at Hillsborough.     At the Everton v Norwich City semi­
final on 15 April, 100 supporters were arrested.     On 22 April, 94
were arrested in connection with the West Ham United v Millwall
match.   Most seriously, in several incidents across the country
on 13 May, the last full day of the 1988/89 Season, over 3 00
people were arrested following incidents at football matches (180
arrests) and on journeys to or from matches (126 arrests).      Two
people received serious head injuries.     And 81 people were
arrested at the FA Cup final between Liverpool and Everton at
Wembley on 20 May.


THE LAW


Disorder


The offences which football hooligans may commit during bouts of
disorderly activity vary greatly in type and seriousness.       At one
end of the scale, section 5 of the Public Order Act 1986 makes it
an offence for a person to use threatening, abusive or insulting
words or behaviour, or disorderly behaviour, or to display any
writing, sign or other visible representation which is
threatening, abusive or insulting, within the hearing or sight of
a person likely to be caused harassment, alarm or distress.       The
offence may be committed in public places and, with a few
exceptions, private places.    A constable may arrest without
warrant a person who does not stop such behaviour when warned to
do so.     On conviction the maximum penalty for the offence is a
fine not exceeding level 3 (currently £400).


At the other end of the scale is the offence of riot in section 1
of the Act.     This makes it an offence where 12 or more persons
who are present together use or threaten unlawful violence for a
common purpose and their conduct (taken together) is such as
would cause a person of reasonable firmness present at the scene
to fear for his personal safety.     The offence attracts a maximum
of 10 years' imprisonment.


In between these two ends of the scale there are the offences of
violent disorder (section 2), affray (section 3) and fear or
provocation of violence (section 4) which attract maximum
penalties ranging from 5 years' imprisonment and a fine not
exceeding the statutory maximum (currently £2000) to 6 months'
imprisonment and a fine also not exceeding £2000.     There is a
specific offence in the Act to deal with threatening, abusive or
insulting behaviour which is intended to stir up racial hatred or
is likely to stir it up.     A person suspected of committing the
offence can be arrested without a warrant and on conviction can
be imprisoned for up to 2 years.
There are many other offences, outside the scope of the Public
Order Act 1986, which hooligans may commit during disorderly
activity.   For example, the offences of common assault and
malicious wounding.   These attract maximum penalties of 1 year
and life imprisonment respectively.     The gravest incidents of
hooliganism may involve murder or attempted murder for which the
maximum penalty is also life imprisonment.     Criminal damage and
possession of an offensive weapon in a public place are other
offences which hooligans sometimes commit which can attract terms
of imprisonment.


Statute law is not the only means at the police's disposal for
coping with hooligans.     Breaches of the peace may be dealt with
using common law powers.     If the police reasonably apprehend an
imminent breach of the peace they may take any reasonable steps
which are necessary to control or prevent it, including arresting
those responsible.    They may bring the offenders before the
courts where they may be bound over to be of good behaviour for a
period.


Alcohol


The Government is very concerned about the part which alcohol can
play in spectator violence and has already taken firm action.
Various specific powers in relation to alcohol at football
matches are contained in the Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol
etc) Act 1985, as amended.     In addition there are a wide variety
of general powers in relation to alcohol licensing which have a
bearing on alcohol in the context of football.


The Sporting Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985 restricts
the sale and consumption of alcohol on the way to matches on
football special coaches and trains.     It also makes it an offence
to try to enter a ground when drunk or in possession of alcohol
and to possess a consume alcohol within view of the pitch during
the period of the match (from 2 hours before until 1 hours
afterward).   Although there is provision for magistrates to grant
exemption orders for premises with no view of the pitch, the
police are empowered to close any bar in the ground should
trouble occur.   The Act also prohibits the possession of any
bottle, can or other container capable of causing injury.        All
Football League grounds, Wembley Stadium and non-League grounds
when used for matches involving League clubs are designated under
this Act.   The Act also gives the police the power to search
someone reasonably suspected of committing an offence under the
Act, and to arrest such a person.


Schedule I of the Public Order Act 1986 extends the Sporting
Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985 to prohibit alcohol on
minibuses on journeys to or from a designated sporting event, and
prohibits the possession of a firework or similar item at, or
while entering, a designated sporting event.


Circular 68/1988 (Alcohol and disorder) issued on 5 August 1988
gave wide ranging advice reminding courts and the police of
relevant criminal offences and powers to regulate licensing,
including the power to close all licensed premises in an area
when riot or serious disorder is expected.     (Section 188,
Licensing Act 1964).


In addition to the powers already available to the police, th.e
Home Secretary agreed last year to try out, on an experimental
basis, a byelaw which prohibits the public consumption of alcohol
in specified areas.    The seven local authorities involved have
designated areas, in consultation with the police, in which the
practice of drinking in public by groups of mainly young people
had reached the state where other citizens found it both
threatening and intimidating.     One of the Councils involved,
Scarborough, has included in its designated areas the roads
leading to and surrounding both the (separate) local cricket and
football grounds.     The byelaw will be tested for two years,
during which time it will be closely monitored to see whether it
can provide an effective remedy, without becoming oppressive,
which can be made available as a model to other Councils.
Although it is early days, preliminary results in Coventry where
the byelaw has been in force for seven months are encouraging.
The byelaw has been shown to be popular and public drinking on
the streets has effectively stopped.


Exclusion of troublemakers


Part IV of the Act gave new powers to the courts to impose
exclusion orders, prohibiting attendance for a minimum period of
3 months at all prescribed matches of any person convicted of a
football-related offence.    This includes offences committed not
only inside or outside grounds, but also on journeys to or from
matches.


[From 1 August 1987, when this power was introduced, to
7 February 1,417 exclusion orders were recorded by the Football
Association.   Update? 1


This power to impose exclusion orders is without prejudice to a
club's own entitlement to choose who to admit, or refuse to
admit, to their property.    Conditions under which this will take
place are set out in each club's Ground Rules, which normally
follow a model drafted by the [DOE? Football League/Association].
Ground   rules typically assert the club's right to exclude
someone who refuses to be searched on entry.


The national football membership scheme proposed in Part I of the
Football Spectators Bill is intended to replace exclusion orders
- see [DOE evidence submitted separately?]


PRACTICAL ARRANGEMENTS


Responsibility for crowd control at football matches


Chapters 2, 13 and 14 of the 'Green Guide' set out the respective
roles of the management and the police in controlling crowds in
football grounds and other sporting stadia.


The grounds' management has primary responsibility for the safety
and control of crowds inside their stadium.    The management offer
the sale of tickets for the event to the public, and is therefore
obliged to ensure adequate arrangements are made.    The direction
of crowds entering or leaving the ground in a safe manner is
normally carried out for the management by stewards, engaged by
them.


For management to discharge its responsibilities properly
paragraph 204 of the Guide points out that a special police
presence inside the ground may be necessary to deal with any
problem of disorder which may arise, as well as to provide
support and leadership in an emergency.     The number and
disposition of the police must be determined by the chief officer
of police who has sole responsibility for the direction of police
operations.   As a 'special service' within the meaning of section
15 of the Police Act 1964 the cost of such police presence, if
the chief officer agrees to provide it, is normally charged to
the club.


Outside the ground, on public property, direction of crowds is
fully under the control of the chief officer and is considered to
be normal police responsibility.     However paragraph 205 of the
Green Guide emphasises the need for effective liaison, in
connection with advance planning and debriefing.     Co-ordination
is necessary not only for policing inside the ground but also
policing outside directly connected with the match - for example
escorting fans or directing traffic.


In addition to specific operational decisions by the chief
officer, the Association of Chief Police Officers (ACPO) issues
general guidance to its members on the policing of football
matches.


Police intelligence and liaison F8


Police operations at football matches are usefully reinforced by
suitable advance planning and, especially, by information eg
known travel routes and numbers attending and by intelligence on
possible trouble at matches and on individuals thought likely to
cause that.


Good liaison generally exists between police forces whose
supporters are meeting in a fixture, territorial ('Home Office')
police forces and British Transport Police.      Many individual
forces have made efforts to collate intelligence on football
hooliganism.


The Home Office intends shortly to establish a National Football
Intelligence Unit as a central police team (under Common Police
Service arrangements) to promote the further development and co­
ordination of local efforts and to take a central view on
emerging national trends and issues of concern.


Some forces have also undertaken covert investigations over
protracted periods to identify small numbers of hard-core
football hooligans who engage in systematic, organised violence.
Some subsequent trials were unsuccessful when evidence was
brought into doubt and all defendants were acquitted.
Appropriate lessons have been learned.     But other operations have
been highly successful.    Most recently in operation 'Omega'      (...
sentencing expected 5/6 June.    25 out of 26 defendants have
pleaded guilty to all substantive charges, including conspiracy.
Heavy press interest likely.)


Perimeter Fences F8/G1


One (of many) possible counter-measures to hooliganism is the use
of perimeter fences to assist with segregation of opposing
supporters.    See also paragraphs      above.


Responding to maior outbreaks of hooliganism - 'Swifter Justice'
(C 2 )


Home Office circular 62/1988 issued on 4 August 1988 invited the
courts, the police and others to formulate contingency plans to
bring very rapidly to court those involved in large scale
disorder.     Swift action was intended to deter further outbreaks
and to demonstrate the determination of the agencies involved to
act firmly.    The initiative envisaged disorder in general, but
included that arising in the context of football.
CONTROL ON ADMISSION


A vital ingredient in the safe conduct of football matches is
adequate control on the numbers of spectators admitted within the
authorised limit and, frequently, the segregation of opposing
supporters in different parts of the ground to prevent conflict.
Rigorous control by the organisers is therefore important
whenever there is a potential for trouble, often strengthened by
an 'all ticket1 requirement (ie an announcement that spectators
will be admitted only with tickets bought in advance, none being
on sale on the say of the match).


The most serious potential threats to the integrity of ticketing
arrangements and therefore safety are those which would result in
overcrowding inside grounds: especially unauthorised entry
without tickets or with forged tickets.   Next are threats to
public order for example from touts selling tickets to persons
the organisers wish to exclude or selling tickets without regard
to segregation arrangements so that rival fans are admitted to
the same enclosures.   Other crime can be associated with ticket
arrangements such as theft by snatching valid tickets near the
turnstiles.


Ticket allocation and distribution


The overall limit on ground capacity, and limits on individual
parts of the ground, are set by the licensing authority and
guidance on this is given in Chapter 16 of the Guide.   (Section
14 of the Public Order Act 1986 also gives the police the power
to limit numbers at any public assembly, but only if the senior
police officer reasonably believes serious public disorder (etc)
may result.   We are not aware of this power having been used in
the context of football matches.)


Before tickets are offered for sale organisers normally allocate
a certain proportion between home and away supporters, and
possibly others.   This would, reasonably, have regard to expected
demand but also to arrangements for their arrival and separate
entry to the ground (paragraph 205 of the Guide).
It is desirable for clubs to control the distribution of tickets
so that as far as is practical they do not fall into the hands of
known troublemakers or those known to have abused arrangements
for the distribution of tickets in the past.    For some games
tickets are only released for sale at the latest practical
moment, to minimise the opportunities for circulation to ticket
touts and forgers.


While an allocation of tickets that is perceived as fair by all
groups is desirable, that may not be achievable, for example if
total demand for tickets significantly exceeds the overall
capacity of the ground.     In those circumstances it is therefore
important that supporters unable to obtain tickets accept they
will be unable to enter the ground; and suitable precautions may
be necessary to deal with those who nevertheless try to enter.




Extensive unregulated selling of tickets by private individuals
for substantial profit immediately outside football grounds
('ticket touts') can undermine segregation of spectators and
arrangements to restrict sales to authorised final recipients.
Such arrangements can be important in preventing violent clashes
between opposing fans.    The expectation that ticket touts will
operate can encourage those without tickets to travel to matches
declared to be 'all ticket'.


Various powers already exist to take action against ticket touts,
in certain circumstances.    A club may eject a tout from their
premises if they wish.    It is of course open to a police officer
to ask someone to move on - or if appropriate to arrest someone
without a warrant for obstruction (Police And Criminal Evidence
Act 1984, section 25(3)(d)(v), or to prevent a breach of the
peace (in addition to common law powers mentioned earlier).


Sections 1 and 24 of the Act also allow the police to stop and
search people, and arrest them without warrant, on reasonable
suspicion of their having stolen property, forged tickets or of
committing any offence for which an adult may be sentenced to 5
years or more imprisonment.    (Miss Wooldridge - correct, please?)


However, it is difficult to foresee a practical and enforceable
criminal offence directed specifically at the activity of touting
tickets.   For example, it would be difficult to draw the right
distinction between undesirable activity, and the understandable
wish of a genuine spectator to sell a ticket he bought in good
faith but can no longer use.   It may well be that a better
solution rests with tighter controls by the organisers of
sporting events over the distribution of tickets, and the
imposition of sanctions against those found abusing the system.
[DOE: perhaps in conjunction with the proposed national football
membership scheme?]    (Also membership card - mandatory cards).


Forged Tickets F8/C4


Forged tickets are a serious matter not only because of the
dishonesty, deception and fraud involved but also because they
could lead to serious overcrowding.   However practical
difficulties arise both with detecting forgeries, particularly
given advances in printing technology, and in identifying the
persons responsible.


The criminal offences and penalties available are [C4?]


Newspapers reported that on 5 May Judge John Prosser QC at
Cardiff Crown Court sentenced 3 defendants to terms of 4, 3 and 2
years' imprisonment and a fourth to 1 year's detention following
the distribution of 2,000 forged tickets for Welsh rugby
internationals.    It was also reported that fairly serious
problems of overcrowding arose at the matches.


MATCHES OVERSEAS


The Government also considers it very important to do all it
reasonably can to deter and deal with football hooliganism by
those from our country who travel to matches abroad.
In 1985 very serious disorder by Liverpool fans at the Heysel
stadium in Belgium during a match with Juventus led to the death
of 39 people when a wall collapsed.   A substantial police
investigation identified 26 suspects who were extradited to
Belgium; [?] were recently convicted (although some defendants
are appealing).   Following the Heysel tragedy English clubs were
banned from UEFA competitions in Europe.    Then in the Summer of
1988 over 300 English fans were detained in West Germany during
disturbances at the European Nations Cup.


The Government has sought action in two main respects: through
powers to prevent certain hooligans from travelling to key
matches abroad ('restriction orders'), and through encouraging
effective international liaison between police forces and between
football authorities.


Restriction Orders


Part II of the Football Spectators Bill now before Parliament
proposes for the courts with a new power, on convicting someone
in England or Wales for a football related offence, to impose a
restriction order on him if the court is satisfied that would
help to prevent violence at or in connection with a designated
football match in other countries.    Provision is also made, after
designation of the appropriate arrangements, for a restriction
order to be made in respect of a conviction outside England or
Wales for an offence corresponding to a football related offence.
Under the terms of the Bill a restriction order if imposed would
be for two years or, if the accused was sentenced to immediate
imprisonment, five years.


The effect of a restriction order would be that the person must
report to an agency (the reporting agency) on the occasion of a
designated match (outside England and Wales), thus preventing him
from attending.   Failure to report as directed would be a
criminal offence punishable by up to one month's imprisonment or
a level 3 fine (currently £400) or both.


The reporting agency is unspecified in the Bill and might for
example be the police, probation service or a private security
firm - or some combination of these.    The Bill provides for a
degree of selectivity so that, for example, full internationals
would probably lead to all persons subject to a restriction order
being required to report whereas when individual clubs were
playing abroad only some individuals might be 'called up'.     The
Bill also provides for someone to apply for exemption from a
requirement to report, where special circumstances exist, and for
termination of the restriction order.


The Government believes restriction orders will be effective in
significantly reducing hooliganism at football matches outside
England and Wales by persons from those two countries, and will
demonstrate to other countries (especially in Europe) our resolve
to tackle this problem.   The proposed powers have received
general support.   The conceptual alternative of withdrawing
someone's passport was considered both ineffective (since it is
relatively easy to obtain a temporary British Visitors Passport)
and too sweeping a restriction (since it would prohibit all
foreign travel, whether a foreign match was taking place or not).


Police liaison


Football hooliganism is discussed by European Community partners
under the 'TREVI' committee of law enforcement Ministers and
officials.   Under the UK's Presidency of the EC in 1986 a network
of 'Permanent Correspondents' on football was established: each
country has nominated such a person who then acts as the primary
communication channel between police forces in his own country,
and other EC countries, in connection with football.    (Police
forces remain free to communicate directly, if appropriate.)      The
arrangements have been put to frequent use and are considered to
be helpful by EC partners.


During the European championships last Summer police liaison
officers from this country went to West Germany to provide on the
spot advice to the German police who were responsible for public
order at matches involving the English team.    Advice was provided
on the handling of English supporters, and on the identity and
suspected intentions of troublemakers.    Various other EC
countries provided similar support.    This too was a considerable
success and the Government intends that it should be repeated for
the World Cup in Italy next year.     The lessons from the
experience in Germany have been incorporated in draft guidelines
for international co-operation on the policing of international
football matches; these are being discussed within TREVI.


Football authorities


(DOE - international co-operation on security arrangements,
ticket sales, etc; and on the Council of Europe Convention on
Spectator Violence?).
