                                                              ]lJL


                                                              1*1^


H



Dr Derek Tordoff                    9 May 1989
Director
The British Constructional
 Steelwork Association Limited
35 Old Queen Street
Westminster
London SW1H 9HZ




I am sorry not to have replied until now to your letter of
18 April about the Hillsborough football disaster.    I am
grateful to you for taking the time to write to me and have
arranged for your letter to be made available to Lord Jus­
tice Taylor who is conducting the Inquiry.

                                                   jOSVg-
                                        S 9 0 W V=> " S o




David McDonald
Sport and Recreation Division
                                                                                / 5 - ^              ^

                       The British Constructional Steelwork Association Limited
                                          35, Old Queen Street, Westminster, London         s w ih   9Hz

                                       Telephone: 01-222 2254       Telex: 27523     Fax: 01-222 3026
                                                                                                         Anneg de la Construction Mgtallique


From the Director
                                                                                                            o)mo
Dr. Derek Tordoff




        DT/gmm


        18 April 1989


        D A McDonald Esq
        Construction Industry Directorate
        Department of the Environment
        Room A110
        Romney House
        43 Marsham Street
        LONDON
        SW1P 3PY


        Dear David

        HILLSBOROUGH FOOTBALL DISASTER

        Apologies for writing to you on this topic, but having been at the match
        with my 13 year old son I wanted to pass on one or two comments to someone
        and I thought of you!

        First of all, I confirm the press reports about the overcrowding and the
        inadequacies of the police and emergency facilities; the police on the
        pitch from 3.06 pm onwards appeared not to know what they were supposed to
        be doing and the lack of stretchers, etc, and the time it took the two
        ambulances (only two came onto the pitch!) to reach the injured was
        unbelievable.  I also confirm the press reports about the total
        inadequacies of a 'modern' sports stadium - to me the only solution is an
        immediate total ban on standing in existing stadia and an urgent plan to
        build a series of new 'American' style multi-sports stadia on the fringes
        of towns and cities with controlled access, identity cards, ticket checks,
        e t c.

        However, the main point that I can add relates to something which has not
        been mentioned in the press. This is the fact that between 3.06 pm and
        approximately 4.10 pm when we left there was no announcement to the
        spectators about what was happening.  During this period there was a
        continual risk of major violence and confrontation which made me decide to
        leave, not the fact that the match was abandoned, because we were not given
        this information.

        The majority of spectators believed, until at least the time we left (and
        we were amongst the first to leave) that the problem was Liverpool
        suporters trying to climb onto the pitch and disrupt the match; this caused
        continual frustration amongst the Nottingham Forest supporters and a major




  BCSA              Registered in England No. 895252   Registered Office: 35, Old Queen Street, Westminster, London       sw ih   9H z
riot nearly broke out at approximately 3.30 pm when the Liverpool
supporters charged across the pitch to try to fight the Nottingham Forest
supporters.  The suspicion of Liverpool hooligan problems appeared to be
confirmed to the spectators when the police brought approximately 10 police
dogs onto the pitch to control and contain the Nottingham Forest
supporters, when all that was required was a simple announcement over the
public address system about what was happening.  Total chaos was avoided due
the self-control of the Nottingham Forest supporters, not the actions of
the police or ground authorities.

If the above observations are of any assistance, I would be grateful if you
could pass this letter on to the appropriate person.

Kind regards.

Yours sincerely




Dr D TORDOFF


cc Tony Baldry, MP
