                                   .                                                                           C U M PA NY UVi
            Reg. Office: THE FAVILIOn WILLOWS ROAD SALFORD M5 2ST TEL: 061-737                                                    6363
                                                       Commercial D ept 061-736                                                   6564
                                                                   FAX: 061-745                                                   8072
                                                              Club Call: 0898 12                                                  16 44
MAIM SPONSORS: QREEMALL WHITLEY PLC                                                                            (In fo rm a tio n S erv ice)
               CAMBRIAN SOFT DRINKS LTD.

               Our Ref: GMcC/CSJ




               21st June, 1990




               The Chief Constable,
               Computers and Communications Branch,
               Communications Technical Department,
               P.O. Box 22 (S West PDO),
               Chester House,
               Boyer Street,
               Manchester,
               Ml6 ORE.


               Dear Sir,

               Re: The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster

               Thank you for your letter of 7th June, 1990 regarding the Lord
               Justice Taylor recommendations. Following a meeting held at the
               Club with several of your representatives on Tuesday, 19th June,
               and a Board of Directors Meeting on the same date, at which the
               requirements were discussed in detail, my Directors have asked
               me to state that whilst the Club appreciate the position of the
               Police Force in this matter, they feel further advice should be
               taken from the Rugby League, and the City of Salford.

               The Salford Club are currently waiting a reply from Mr. Moynihan
               M.P., to a letter forwarded by the City of Salford regarding
               financial assistance from Local Government.

               As you are aware, soccer clubs obtain 75% grants for ground
               safety works as apposed to the Rugby League clubs for whom no
               grants are available.

              However, you can be assured that the Salford Club will do all
              in its power to assist you in this matter, though the financial
              situation places restrictions beyond our control.



                                                                                                        cont’d .../




                                         CHAIRMAN: J A Wilkinson VICE CHAIRMAN: M. Bloor
                             CHIEF EXECUTIVE D.M. Tarry                  COMPANY SECRETARY: Q. McCarty
                        J. Oakes, LJ. Bettinson, A White, Sw Bibby, J. Robinson, C Wynne, R. Kaneen, ECritchley.

                                                  VAT. Reg. Mo. 147 107 090
                                          -   2   -




We have indicated to your Officers the work we feel may be within
our capabilities this year, and are in the process of arranging
quotations for the work to be carried out as soon as possible.




UUrXr AN I    S£,O K £.X A K I




c.c.         Mr.   R.   Rees, Chief Executive, City of Salford
             Mr.   P.   Mulvenna, Assistant Chief Executive, City of Salford
             Mr.   W.   Hinds, Leader of Council, City of Salford
             Mr.   S.   Murphy, Chairman, Police Committee
                   C.   Movnihan. M.P.
                                             All correspondence must be
                                             addressed to the Chief Constable

                                             Computers and Communications Branch

                                             Communications Technical Department
                                             P 0 Box 22 (S West PDO)
                                             Chester House
                                             Boyer Street
                                             Manchester M 1 6 ORE
                                             Telephone 061 8 7 2 5 0 5 0
                                                       061 8 5 5
                                             Fax       061 8 7 2 4 7 7 8
r
                                             Our reference
    Salford Football Club 1914 Ltd
                                             Extension/contact
    Willows Road,
    SALFORD.   M5 2ST                        Your reference

                                              Date               7th June 1990
L                                        J




    Dear Sir

                      THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

         As a result of the recommendations made by Lord Justice Taylor
    into the Hillsborough Stadium Disaster, the Greater Manchester
    Police have a duty to control communications at all venues covered
    by the Safety at Sports Grounds Act 1975.

         In order to carry out this responsibility, it will be necessary
    for your club to provide suitable accommodation and communications
    equipment, as outlined in the report.     The attached document has
    been prepared to give you some idea as to our spatial requirements,
    and includes details of staff who may eventually need accommodating.

         In addition to the accommodation requirements, it is the Forces
    intention to provide two radio channels and all necessary equipment
    for controlling police staff on police allocated frequencies.     In
    order to recover the cost of this equipment it will be necessary to
    charge the club £600 per annum.   This will be a fixed fee   for the
    life of the equipment, which is not expected tobe less       than 10
    years.

         The Force is anxious that suitable accommodation is provided as
    soon as possible, so that necessary installation work can proceed.
    Advice on communications matters can also be given to a limited
    extent.  Requests for such support should in the first instance be
    directed to the Divisional Commander for your area.

         Your assistance in this matter is very much appreciated.

                              Yours faithfully




                         Assistant Chief Constable.
      GMP SPECIFICATION FOR POLICE CONTROL ROOMS AT SPORTS GROUNDS



STAFFING AND EQUIPMENT

a)   CCTV Operators - 2     Each operator will require 1.5m width of
     worktop, which should be against a wall capable of having upto 4
     CCTV monitors per operator mounted upon it. The operators do not
     need a direct view of the ground.

b)   Radio Operators - 3 Each operator requires 1.6m of worktop width
     to accommodate a radio control unit, a CCTV monitor, and A4 size
     radio log sheets.   At least two of the operators must have a view
     of the ground and terracing.

c)   VHF/Public Address Operator - 1   The operator will require 1.2m
     width of workspace to accommodate a radio, a microphone connected
     to the Ground Public Address System, and radio log sheets.    The
     operator must have a good view of the ground and the terraced
     areas.

d)   Telephone Operators - 2 Each operator must have "1.5m of worktop
     width.  The club must provide 3 exchange line telephones, and 1
     telephone linked to key points around the ground. A view of the
     around is not essential.

e)   Ground Commander and Deputy - 2 These positions should be such as
     to provide a good view of the ground and terraced areas, together
     with the ability to over view CCTV pictures being received in the
     room. An unobtructed window length of 1.8m should be available.

f)   Additional Staff - 3 Provision for additional staff e.g. visiting
     Police Officers, Club Staff (Stewards/Marshalls), Fire officers,
     Safety Officers should be available.   Whilst a view of the ground
     would be desirable it is not essential, and no special provision is
     required for these people.


BUILDING REQUIREMENTS

1.   The Control area floor space must be not less than 20 sq.m.
      overall. All parts capable of giving a view of the stadium must be
     glazed from cill height to provide maximum viewing areas.

2.   The glazing must be constructed from double glazed units to reduce
      noise, and must be made from vandal proof glass. Where the Control
     Room is inaccessible externally, for ease of cleaning, the windows
      should be centre pivoted, either vertical or horizontal.

3.   External wall and roof constructions must be such as to provide
      sound insulation to the accommodation. All work surfaces specified
      should be 600 mm wide, and should be fixed at cill level with
     sufficient area below the surface to work from a seated position.
4.   Internal decorations must be such as to avoid glare and reflection
     on the TV monitors and the glazed areas.

5.   External doors must be vandal proof and be fitted with a 5 lever
     mortice lock.

6.   The roof must be of a robust vandal proof construction, and should
     have sufficient fall to avoid the retention of articles thrown upon
     it.

7.   Floor covering must be carpeted to reduce and absorb noise.

8.   Built-in lockable cupboards should be provided to allow for      the
     securing of loose equipment, telephone directories, etc.


ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS

1. Standby mains power must be available to cover all electrical and
    electronic equipment, including lighting (240 volts at 13 amps).

2.   Cable ducts must be provided into the Police box, physically large
      enough to carry all mains, CCTV, radio and telephone cables
      (approximately 15 x 10cm). Ducting should be continued on the
      internal perimeter of the room, or alternative arrangements such as
     hollow sections of floor and dado height trunking could be
      considered.

3.   Sufficient power points must be provided to facilitate the items of
      equipment already mentioned, with a good supply of additional
      outlets for future expansion.

4.   Lighting in the area should be controllable, and should be sited so
     as not to cause glare on the CCTV monitors, or reflections on the
     glazed areas.

5.   Sufficient controllable heating must be installed to maintain
      comfortable working conditions, and also to retain a minimum
      temperature when the room is unmanned, to prevent condensation
      forming on equipment.

6.   Controllable extraction fans must be provided to facilitate an
     adequate exchange of air in line with health and safety guidelines.


GENERAL

1.   The location and exact shape of the Control  Room will need to be
      agreed in conjunction with the Chief Constable’s representative.
     However, access must be such that it isprotected from crowd
      invasion or attack.

2.   The provision of a w.c. and kitchen area     with sink units and
     cupboards attached to the Control Room is desirable, however, if
this is not achievable then such facilities must be available close
by.

Security must be of a high order, and a suitable alarm system is
essential.   Such an alarm must terminate at a permanently manned
location, and must not rely soley . upon an audible bell type
installation.

The Club must make provision to ensure that the building is kept in
a good state of repair, and defects must be remedied promptly.

Seating must be provided for upto 10 operators, and should be such
that chairs   are capable of sliding/rolling, and turning to
facilitate movement of staff with the minimum of disruption.

Care should be taken to site the room in such a position that
operators will not be blinded by a setting sun, but equally a good
direct view of the ground is required, giving maximum site of
terracing and access points.

All plans and proposals must be submitted to the Chief Constable
for approval prior to commencement of work.
