                 C                   H                                                                                                             G                 E
                                                                                                                                         R      O       U       P

                                                                                                                                35 Spring Gardens
                                                                                                                                London SW1A 2BA
                                                                                                                                Tel: 01-839 5933
                                                                                                                                Fax: 01-930 8145

25 January 1990

The Rt Hon Margaret Thatcher MP
Prime Minister
10 Downing Street
LONDON
SW1

Dear Prime Minister
You may recall our meeting at Number 10 on two occasions over the past four years in my
capacity as Founder and Chairman of a fund raising project called Sport Aid.
The project raised over $45m in the end and the funds went via Band Aid, Unicef and other
development agencies to help the victims of the Ethiopian famine as well as under priveleged
children in other developing countries.
Since concluding this event, I formed a global marketing and communication company -
Challenge Group - along with two fellow directors, John Mitchell and Bobby Moore OBE.
Both Bobby and John played professional football at the highest level and, of course, Bobby
is well known as England's Captain in the World Cup winning side of 1966.
Whilst I cannot boast such ability as a player, the sport is held in the highest regard by all of
us, and the problems currently confronting the industry here are problems we feel passion­
ately about.
Following the appalling tragedy at Hillsborough last year, we felt a sense of urgency to assist
the industry which had given both John and Bobby a livelihood and, indeed, all of us so much
pleasure.
We developed a concept which we felt could resolve some, if not all, of the contentious
issues of the soccer ID card scheme. In fact, as the scheme unfolded, it took on new dimen­
sions which were not only beneficial to soccer, but the overall financial fabric of our country.
A copy of the concept is enclosed with this letter.
The scheme itself is very simple and we proceeded to discuss this with the Football League,
the PFA, a number of First Division Football Clubs and Ernst Young. In every instance, we
were told the concept was quite brilliant, yet because the current legislation required cards to
be electronically read at the turnstiles, our proposal did not meet all the necessary criteria. As
a result, we are seemingly top of an "alternative list".




    s - n i r, f ir n h fi r f ■ R & v s fe r f- d iii f t n o l d n d N o : 2388322 R e g is te r e d O f f i c e   So J i b a m p c o n H o u se , 3 1 7 H ig h H o l b o r n , L o n d o n   WC1V 7NL
                         C     H




Our joint feelings were that the other schemes under review would eventually find them­
selves deadlocked against this inevitable "crowding at turnstile" problem, and therefore we
decided that we could wait for our time to come.
Given the current position following the all-important Taylor Report, I wonder whether that
time is now.
The scheme as set out in the enclosed document has been prepared specifically for Barclays -
given their current sponsorship of the League. The scheme could and should, however, be
syndicated to all banks. In fact, Mastercard are currently investigating this scheme with a
view to introducing it as a global ticket access facility for the 1994 World Cup. I am sure
you will agree that there could not be a better billboard for a UK business initiative.
This document was sent to the Minister of Sport's Office last year. Todate we have received
an aknowledgement of receipt - nothing more.
May we respectfully suggest that this scheme be reviewed given the current climate, and
further suggest that our collective experience in this area be at your disposal. We want to
find a solution to an issue which is currently threatening our national game.
Yours sincerely




Chris Long
Director


Enc
