                                               2 MARSHAM STREET
                                               LONDON         SW1P 3EB

                                               01-276 3 0 0 0


                                               My ref:

                                               Your r e f :

The Rt Hon Peter Walker MBE MP
Welsh Office
Gwydyr House
Whitehall
LONDON
SWl                                                    1989




FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL \           \
Thank you for your letf€er of 22 February.
The question of the application of this Bill to Wales was the
subject of an amendment debated in Committee in the House of Lords
on Monday. Alexander Hesketh made the points that Wales could not
be exempted from the Bill in the way proposed, that you had
established a working party to consider the designation of matches
in Wales and that it was very unlikely that designation would not
include Football League and FA Cup matches played in Wales when
the home team was one of the Welsh League clubs. At the end of
the debate he said that he would take the matter away for further
consultation, but without any commitment.
It is essential that we should clear this issue up as soon as
possible. As you have acknowledged, it has always been the
Government's intention that the national membership scheme should
apply to all 92 League clubs.  The Prime Minister has made this
clear more than once.  Exempting the three Welsh clubs would
seriously undermine the effectiveness of the scheme.  It would
leave English and Welsh hooligans free to attend matches at the
Welsh League clubs; at the same time, supporters of the Welsh
clubs would have to join the scheme if they wished to attend a
match in England.  This would clearly be totally unacceptable.

For these reasons, I do not think that we can leave open any
longer the possibility that you might decide not to designate
relevant matches involving the Welsh League clubs.  The longer we
do so, the longer we allow our opponents to throw into question
the Government's commitment to the application of the scheme to
all 92 clubs.  I would be grateful therefore for your agreement to
our taking the earliest possible opportunity to spell out that
relevant matches involving the Welsh League clubs will be
designated and that your working party will look only at the
question of designating other matches - in the Welsh Cup for
example.
I am copying this le t t e r to the .Prime M i n i s t e r , the Home
Secretary, the Lord President, the Lord P r i v y Seal, the Chief
W hips in bot h Houses, Sir Robin B u t l e r and Fiirst p a r l i a m e n t a r y
Council.                       /                   \




                                 \\    NICHOLAS RIDLEY
                            \j        (Ap p r o v e d b y the   S e c r e t a r y of S tate   and
                                      signed in his absence)
