PRIME MINISTER



FOOTBALL SPECTATORS' BILL


As expected, this was the main item at Questions.                                            The Lord
President repeated the Home Secretary's statement that the
Government believes the future of football in this country .
lies in a National Membership Scheme and in providing all­
seated accommodation at major football clubs.                                            He also added
that Third Reading in the Lords had been postponed and that no
                                                          4" " 1      "             ^

new date had yet been arranged.           This too went no further than
theTIome Secretary yesterday.


When challenged by Mr Hattersley to give an undertaking that
the Bill would be delayed to take account of the findings of
the Taylor report, the Lord President said.


     'The Bill is an enabling framework.                              The Government has
     already given a full commitment not to implement the
     Membership Scheme within that framework until
     arrangements have satisfactorily been worked out.                                            That
                                                  "   ~   ~ " """"           "

     commitment still stands and obviously now embraces the
     lessons to be learned from this event.'


Some Government backbenchers have chosen to read more into
this than was intended and are interpreting it as a concession
that the Bill will be postponed pending the inquiry.                                            This
                                          ■                        — ------------ "” 7

line has been picked up by the media.


We need to emphasise the distinction between the Bill and the
Scheme under it.   The Bill will be postponed a little to
enable it to be strengthened by measures relating to seating
but it will still go through this Session.                                       Any changes
recommended by Taylor will be incorporated into the Scheme
which the Football Membership Authority has to produce.
           —        -             —   "       .

Mr Ridley has taken steps in the Lobby to emphasise that the
Government is still pressing on with the Bill, but further
work will be needed tomorrow.
The Chief Whip has given me a pessimistic assessment.      At
present, he believes the Government could not get the Bill
through as the overwhelming feeling is that it, or at least
Part 1, should be delayed pending the Taylor report.    He
believes, however, that in two or threeweeks^tlme when
emotion has subsided and the facts about the behaviour of the
crowd have been appreciated, the incident will be seen to stem
mor^e^from rowdyism than from the police's response.    In those
circumstances, sentiment for pressing on will return.      Hence
the need not to concede the principle of postponement now.


The Lord President is holding a meeting tomorrow with the Lord
Privy Seal and departmental Ministers to work out a revised
programme for the Bill.   This can then be discussed at Cabinet
under Parliamentary Affairs on Thursday.   Their current
thinking is that the Third Reading in the Lords should be put
back from 24 April to 8 May.




ANDREW TURNBULL
18 April 1989




EAMATA
