                            CONFIDENTIAL




PRIME MINISTER


FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL


The Department of Environment letter attached follows up the
outstanding point from last week's meeting and seeks your
agreement on a number of issues.


(i)      Parliamentary debates on the scheme; DoE propose
         including a proviso that the FMA should draw up a
         scheme only if directed to do so by the Secretary of
         State.   They further propose that the appointment of
         the FMA and this direction should be subject to a
         commencement order which would be activated together
         after a parliamentary debate.      Together with the
         already announced Hesketh amendment this provides an
         opportunity for debate both before and after the
         design of the scheme.


(ii)     The framework of the scheme; rather than remove any
         of the detailed provisions in Clause 5, DoE suggest a
         power for the Secretary of State to direct additional
         provisions for the scheme.


(iii)    Licensing football grounds: DoE confirm that many of
         the safety recommendations Lord Justice Taylor might
         make could be incorporated into the Bill provided the
         House approved an instruction to the Standing
         Committee to consider such amendments as cognate to
         the Bill.    DoE also propose that the licensing
         functions should be carried out by a NDPB rather than
         by the Department or by the FMA.


(iv)     Timetable; DoE propose to make the announcement on
         resumption of work on the Bill next week rather than
         this.    A timetable is set out which seeks a Second
         Reading in the Commons in the week beginning 19 June.



                             CONFIDENTIAL
                             CONFIDENTIAL
                                -   2   -




Content with these points?                  (JT
You may like to look at the speech which Colin Moynihan
proposes to make to the Football Writers Association on
Thursday evening.    Paragraphs 6-10 argue the case for the
membership scheme.




ANDREW TURNBULL
17 May 1989



DS2AQN
