Paul Freeman
Controller and Chief Executive
                                                                   HMSO
MANAGEMENT IN CONFIDENCE
                                                                    St Crispins
                                                                    Duke Street
                                   CABINET *F?!CE                   Norwich
 M r P h ilip / M a w e r
                                                                    NR3 1PD
 Cabinet Office
 70 Whitehall
                                  K ...h .§±I.                      Telephone
                                                                    0 6 0 3 694210
 LONDON                              - 6 FE5 1990
                                                                    GTN 3014 4210
 SW1A 2AS
                                   FILING INSTRUCTIONS
                                                                    Fax 0 6 0 3 6 9 5 04 5
                                  FILE No
                                                                   6 February 1990


 Dear Mr Mawer

 "FAST-TRACK" PUBLISHING

 1.    Thank you for your letter of 26 January         following our telephone
 conversations.   We do already give special treatment to the printing of
 important reports where requested, and I am quite prepared to formalise these
 arrangements, into a guaranteed performance standard.

 2.    I am not aware of any "problems", as such, affecting the Taylor report,
 but there are a couple of points I should like to register about it, in view
 of the ill-informed press criticism of HMSO:-

            2.1  It appears, from the press and from the Prime Minister's remarks in
            the House, that copies of the final text of the Taylor report were
            available to Ministers on Friday 19 January.  This final text was not at
            that time available to HMSO.  The complete copy was released to HMSO at
            around 1530 hours on Monday 22 January,       and even then there was
            uncertainty about the photographs to be used.

            2.2 The publication date of Monday 29 January was nominated by the Home
            Office, and HMSO made its operational arrangements accordingly.   At no
            time were we asked whether earlier production was p os sible.


  3.    If we had received final copy on 19 January, when it was available to
  Ministers, we could have published on Tuesday 23 January. Even starting from
  the actual receipt of final copy on Monday 22 January, publication on Friday
  26 January would have been achievable, had we known of the requirement,
  although    simultaneous  availability   outside  London  would   have  been
  problematical.

  4.   The key to fast publication       is forward planning,    and subsequent
  adherance to the timetable by all concerned, which enables suitable production
  facilities to be earmarked for precisely the right time.        HMSO routinely
  produces overnight, every night when Parliament is sitting, around 600 pages
  of Hansard, Votes and Proceedings, etc - a combined volume of text equivalent
  to three national newspapers.     This is achieved by having purpose-designed
  typesetting  and   printing  equipment   following a  standard    format in   a
  pre-determined timescale - exactly like the national newspapers themselves.
  We also have a small classified press which regularly meets requirements for
  special items like the FSBR.    But the capacity of our presses is carefully
  planned in relation to their prime output, since it would make no economic
  sense to maintain permanently idle printing capacity in case of an urgent
  requirement which might arise only occasionally.
5.    For these purposes HMSO maintains a professional print-buying unit in
central London, which has established arrangements with a number of private
sector printers,   some of whom have been carefully vetted to undertake
classified work, and can be pressed      into  service as  the need arises.
Obviously, these companies have other customers, and so we sometimes find
ourselves in a queueing situation, but this can be avoided by giving advance
notice.   Unfortunately, our experience is that the authors of these reports
can rarely predict with any accuracy just when final copy will be available,
and production can therefore take a little longer than would strictly be
necessary if we could plan ahead.

6.    Another problem is the turn-round of proofs.    It was not, in fact, an
issue with the Taylor report, since proofs were checked in real time on the
contractor's premises;    but often the proof stage is used not just for
checking typographical errors but as an opportunity to revise the text, which
can extend the overall production schedule.   This problem is much reduced if
the report is prepared on word processing equipment which can output tape or
disc in a format suitable for direct input to the printer's typesetting
equipment.  HMSO is keen to extend this approach and always ready to advise on
the technical requirements.

7.    As   an  Executive  Agency  dedicated   to  satisfying   its  customers'
expectations, HMSO would be quite prepared to commit itself to performance
standards for important reports of this kind.     I propose, therefore, that
where "fast-track" treatment is requested by the responsible Minister, HMSO
would guarantee the following production times subject to three working days'
notice of firm dates for delivery of final copy and/or'clearance of proofs:

                      Typesetting          Printing

      Up to 48pp          12 hrs            2 days

      48pp-144pp          24 hrs            3 days

      Over 144pp          36 hrs           4 days


These times are for publication in London only.   If simultaneous publication
at other locations is required - and we increasingly get complaints from the
regions if an important publication is not available locally when it       is
published - then an extra day should be added.

8.    As you suspect, the costs associated with such "fast-track" arrangements
could substantially exceed our normal economical print-buying methods.  It has
long been the accepted practice that purchasers should not have to pay higher
cover prices to reflect the urgency or security required in a particular case,
and so sponsor departments could on occasion be asked to contribute towards
any exceptional costs involved in "fast-track" publishing.

9.    You are also correct in identifying illustrations,     maps and colour
printing as complicating factors.     Where the volume    of illustrations is
relatively modest, as with Taylor, we can handle them in parallel with the
text,  but  larger volumes would    extend the   timescales,  as would maps,
throwouts, and colour printing either within the text or on the cover.  On the
other hand, final artwork for illustration sections, maps and cover material
could conceivably be passed to HMSO at an earlier stage, whilst the text    is
 still being finalised.
10.   Please be assured that HMSO is committed to doing everything in its
power to meet Ministers' wishes for speedy publication of important reports.
We shall be better able to achieve this in individual cases if we are
consulted by officials at the planning stage.     I hope you will find our
proposed performance standards helpful.



Yours sincerely




PAUL FREEMAN
