                                                          2 ----




                                                           /
                       HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY

                 STATEMENT BY THE HOME SECRETARY


Commenting today on the publication of Lord Justice Taylor's
report, the Home Secretary, the Rt Hon Douglas Hurd CBE MP said:-

"i am grateful to Lord Justice Taylor and his team for completing
the first part of his inquiry in time to produce an interim report
before the start ofthe football season.

Mlt is an excellentreport which pulls no punches about the causes
of the disaster.

"The Government welcomes the thoroughness of the report and its
recommendations. They include a number of matters which should be
dealt with without delay pending the longer-term findings of the
inquiry which will be published in the final report.

"A Home Office circular* is to be sent out immediately to local
authorities, the police, football clubs and others concerned with
the organisation of football matches, urging them to take action
on the report's recommendations so as to putas many of them into
effect as possible before the beginning of     the season. Similar
steps are being taken by the Secretary of State for Scotland.

"i am satisfied that the interim report has not identified any
major shortcomings in the law on safety in sports grounds, though
clearly the Government will look at the Safety of Sports Grounds
Act and the Home Office and Scottish Office guide to safety at
sports grounds ( The Green Guide) in the light of the inquiry,

"Most of the problems which contributed to the disaster at
Hillsborough had been recognised in the past. The report reveals
serious shortcomings in applying those lessons on the part of the
police, of the club and of the local authority responsible for
the safety certificate.

"The report reveals clearly that there are major deficiencies in
the layout and organisation of the Hillsborough ground which
should have been recognised and corrected."




* A copy of the circular is attached.
I




    The South Yogkahlre Polto
    "It will be for the Chief Constable in the first instance to
    consider the conduct of individual officers and the South
    Yorkshire Police collectively in the light of the inquiry and the
    investigation carried out by the West Midlands Police. I shall
    look to the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire initially for a
    report on the action he proposes to take."


    supervision of Safety Certificates

    "Powers recently proposed by the Government in the Football
    Spectators Bill will permit the setting up of a new authority
    with powers to supervise the way in which local authorities carry
    out their responsibilities for the safety of sports grounds if in
    due course this is considered necessary in the light of Lord
    Justice Taylor's final report*

    "The tragedy would not have occurred if lessons learnt in the
    past had been properly applied. It is for everyone concerned to
    ensure they are applied in the future."
