PRIME MINISTER                                    12 July 1989


     FOOTBALL SPECTATORS' BILL AND SAFETY AT SPORTS GROUNDS


1.     Nicholas Ridley has written to members of H Committee
proposing:


     (i)     to maintain the present role of local authorities
              as 'safety authorities', but to give the national
              licensing authority power to ensure that local
              authorities are carrying out their 'safety' functions
              in a consistent way;


     (ii)     to make the national licensing authority a quango;


     (iii) to take a power to direct that certain club grounds
              should be made all-seater.


2.     You have already agreed to (i).


(ii)        A new quango


3.     On (ii), you expressed some doubt, and said that you
would want any bureaucracy to be kept to a minimum.


4.     The national licensing authority is essential to ensure
that clubs comply with the national membership scheme.
The options are:


     (a)     for it to be part of the Department of the Environment


     (b)     for it to be a quango.


5.     Nicholas Ridley's proposal is for the equivalent of
9 f ulltimeinspectors (some of whom would be part-time)
supported by 5 administrative staff.       The inspectors would
include people from the police (eg retired Chief Constables),
the fire service, engineering and building professions.
                      CONFIDENTIAL
6.      A staff equivalent to 14 people does not look excessively
bureaucratic.      The suggested composition of the licensing
authority is sensible.       It will be important to have the
confidence of the police and the fire service now that the
                         t            r - 1 1 1 —-■■■>

licensing authority's role is to extend to safety matters
as well as to ensuring that clubs are complying with the
national membership scheme.


7.      Nicholas Ridley and Douglas Hurd both see attractions
in a quango because it would distance the Government from
detailed arguments with local authorities^and perhaps the
police and fire services.


8.      Against this there is a risk that a quango would seek
to duck difficult issues in a way that would not be possible
if the inspectors were part of the Department of the Environment.
 And it would be important to prevent the quango either
growing in an unchecked way;      or arguing for more money
and people whenever safety at football grounds or the national
membership scheme seem to be going wrong.


9.      Nicholas Ridley does not really argue out the pros
and cons of making the national licensing authority a quango.
 He should be asked to do so.


(iii)     All-seater stadia


10.      On (iii), Nicholas Ridley proposes that any direction
                                                            ~   ^   ...... — y


to a club to make its stadium all-seater would be subject
to the n e g a tiv eresolution procedure.                Parliament would
thus be able to debate and vote on each case.


11.      In practice these are likely to come in batches based
on recommendations by the national licence authority.                            Forcing
a club to go all-seater will cost the club a lot of money.
Nicholas Ridley feels that it could be so contentious that
specific Parliamentary backing in each case is needed.


                                  2
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS

Nicholas Ridley would like to table amendments providing
for (i) and (iii) tomorrow.
                     x    —



On (ii:: ), it would be worth asking Nicholas Ridley:


       whether he is convinced that a quango would face
       up to difficult issues and not seek to pass the buck
       to the Government;


       whether he is confident that a quango can be stopped
       from turning into a pressure group for more money
       for itself;


       how he would propose to prevent a quango from burgeoning.




                         CAROLYN SINCLAIR
