                                     Q U E E N A N N E ’S G A T E L O N D O N SVV1H 9 a T




                                                  A,/ June 1989




                   V
  FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL AND SAFETY. AT FOOTBALL GROUNDS
                                    cJ h
  Thank you for your letter of 25 May in which you considered
options available to achieve any amendments to legislation on
safety in the light of the outcome of the Taylor Inquiry.

    I can see the attraction of your option B (a national safety
authority for football grounds, taking over the local authority
role of issuing safety certificates). It is not at all clear of
course that the Taylor Inquiry will recommend such a course. The
Popplewell Inquiry took the view that the local authority system
was working satisfactorily. The charge of inconsistency might
arise from the different nature of every ground, and could in
future be levelled against a national body. I am sure you are
right that if we were to amend the Bill to this effect we would
be widely criticised for anticipating Taylor; just as important
is that Sir Peter Taylor himself might well take this view on
such a structural question. I therefore agree with your
conclusion that we should not pursue this option. If the Taylor
Inquiry were to recommend that the issue of safety certificates
should be a national rather than local responsibility, and ,we
thought his case for this was right, I agree that we should seek
an early place for the necessary legislation.

     This leaves your options.-A and C. These are only partial
alternatives, of course, as both would leave the basic structure
as "it is. Under option C- the national licensing authority under
the Bill (either yourself or an NDPB) would be given powers to
monitor the way local authorities exercise their duty to issue
safety certificates.   (They are required to issue certificates in
respect of designated grounds; they cannot withhold one.)

    I would not necessarily rule out option A as a way forward.
I recognise the potential for confl'ifct between the licence and
the safety certificate,^and the difficulty and opportunity for


                                              /playing the



The Rt Hon Nicholas Ridley, MP
Department of the Environment
playing the national authority against the local authority._ It -
should be possible however to produce an amendment to the Bill
which would build bridges between the two, as well as some form
of appeal, as you suggest. I would use my powers in the safety
legislation to direct local authorities to implement any
acceptable Taylor recommendations about the content of the safety
certificate. The requirement for all-seated accommodation^could
be tackled on a national basis through the safety legislation by
means of inclusion in the Bill of a suitable amendment — I could
then designate a football ground as requiring not only a safety
certificate but also all-seated accommodation. Nevertheless, I
am ready to agree that it should be dealt with through the
licence, your option C, but it will of course be necessary here
also to build bridges between the licence and the certificate to
avoid conflict and allow for appeals where there is a conflict.
But option C does throw in sharp relief the need to avoid
conflict between the licence and the certificate. I think we
should take an enabling power in the Bill to give the licensing
authority the powers you suggest, but this should be presented as
getting ourselves into the position of being able to implement
Taylor if he made such a recommendation and we thought the case
for it was right. Sir Peter Taylor himself might well feel that
his report was being unduly anticipated if we were to say that a
final decision had been taken to use the powers we were obtaining
whatever he reported.

    You may be right to say that imposition of a national
inspectorial role would be resisted by the local authorities
although the attraction of off loading responsibility to another
body may be hard for them to resist. I think there would be
strong misgivings by the Association of Chief Police Officers and
the Chief and Assistant Chief Fire Officers' Association at the
idea that the professional competence of the police and fire
services in making their input into the content of individual
safety certificates should be supervised by the licensing
authority and its inspectorate. But there is a way of overcoming
this. Both the authority and the inspectorate could be required
to include suitable people from the police and fire services. I
think too that the engineering and building professions would
have to form part of any inspectorate. Both make an essential
contribution to the content of safety certificates.

    I therefore agree that our officials should work up detailed
proposals, and I agree with you about the advantages of an
authority to which we both make appointments.

    I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister and the
Ministers present at her meeting of 9 May and to the Chief
Secretary and Sir Robin Butler.
