                                            QUEEN ANNE'S GATE LONDON' SW1H 9AT


                               ..CABINET- -OFFICE.’


                               a                                          August 1989
                                 2 1 AUG 1989
                                                                5^         ft. 6
                              PILING IN S T R U C T© !*:




          tv                                               A -® * -* ''




        Thank you for your letter of 8 August to Sir Robin Butler
about the arrangements for delivering to you a copy of Lord
J u s t i c e Taylor's report on the disaster at Hillsborough
Stadium.                                       v

    We made every effort to publish Lord Justice Taylor's
interim report as quickly as possible; Accordingly, within a
few days after the report was presented to me it was published
at the same time as it was laid before Parliament, at 11 am on
Friday 4 August.   No copies of the report were available from
the printers until the morning of 4 August arid confidential
final revises of the report were not issued to the press, in
advance of Lord Justice Taylor's press conference at 11 am,
until 9.30 am.   These copies were issued under a strict
embargo to the effect that their contents would not be
disclosed or discussed with third parties before 11 am.     I can
understand your annoyance at having the news media apparently
quote from a report which you had not yet s e e n . Any use of
the report in that way would have been in breach of the
embargo placed on the copies issued at 9.30 am.     The press
had these copies so as to make possible informed discussion at
Lord Justice Taylor's press conference at 11 am.     Apart from
the individuals and organisations directly involved in Lord
Justice Taylor's inquiry, who received confidential final
revises at 9.30 am in order to ensure that they would not
first hear of any reference to them in the report through the
media, no other advance copies were i s s u e d .




                                                           /My office




The Rt Hon Denis Howell, MP
House of Commons
LONDON
SW1A OAA
    My office arranged for you and Roy each to receive a copy
of the final version, at 11 am, when it was being laid before
Parliament and published.    Courtesy copies were also delivered
at the same time to Members with either a cdristituehcy
interest or who had considered the Football Spectators Bill in
Standing Committee A and to others with a close interest such
as the tiyerpodl S’oqtball Club.   By the time you telephoned on
4 August to make clear your concern at not receiving an
advance copy, my staff were already on their way over to the
Palace of Westminster to ensure that copies of the report were
laid before both Houses at precisely 11 am and also to ensure
that you arid Roy Hatters.ley received copies at the same time.

    I am sorry that you should have felt in any way slighted
by not receiving a confidential final revise in advance of
publication.  No slight was intended at all - indeed a deal
of effprt was made by my staff to ensure the prompt delivery
of final copies at the earliest moment once the report had
been laid before Parliament itself.

    I am sending copies of this reply to Mr Speaker and to
Sir Robin Butler.




                                                  <QM
                                   C J WALTERS

                          Approved by the Home Secretary
                            and signed in his absence.
