                                                            iiv\U. ()]•!!. !.
                                  RESTRICTED
                                                          Q I K K N . V N S K S (i.VI'i-;

                                                           I,O N   D i/ S   S W !! i - ■/.

                    CAgf <£T          tr
                    K           fe s s s .

                        - 7 F£B 1990
                    PiLINQ INSTRUCTIO NS          7 February 1990
                   FILE N o ,




PUBLICATION OF LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR'S FINAL REPORT ON THE
HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

Thank you for sending me a copy of your letter to Dr Freeman
of HMSO, dated 26 January, in which you asked about the time
taken to publish the Taylor inquiry report and about the
possibility of "Fast track" publication. I think it might
assist you to have the attached timetable (see Annex) of
events which took place during the report's publication
process.
With hindsight one can say that had the report been made
available to the printers on Friday 19 January then
publication might well have been achieved in the week ending
27 January. In the event, however, the starting date was
Monday 22 January and our advice to Ministers that the
earliest practicable publication date was early in the
following week took into account the need to have
Lord Justice Taylor's report published in good order, with
copies in the Vote Office, and the desirability of having a
nationwide distribution of the report.
I should also add that at all times throughout the process,
HMSO, the typesetters and the printers acted in accordance
with requests made to them by the Inquiry Unit and ourselves.
Both the typesetters and the printers performed an excellent
job in the time available and succeeded in meeting the
shortened timetable (ie when publication was advanced from
30 January to 29 January) albeit at the cost of our doing
without proper CFRs and of some doubt cast on whether all HMSO
outlets would have the report on publication.
Given that we live in the age of word processing, I await with
interest Dr Freeman's advice on the general feasibility of
very rapid production of material such as the Taylor report.




P J C Mawer Esq                      RESTRICTED
                          RESTRICTED




However Parliamentary considerations, when publication is is
to be linked with a Statement are, as already indicated,
liable to make one extra concerned that the publication
arrangements proposed to Ministers are fully achievable.
I am copying this letter to the recipients of yours.




                            J A GILBERT
                            Parliamentary Clerk




                           RESTRICTED
                                                          ANNEX


TAYLOR REPORT:   PUBLICATION TIMETABLE




Friday                       Photographic Appendices handed to
12 January                   HMSO representative.

Monday                am     Parliamentary Section
22 January                   notified of report's receipt and
                             asked to advise on earliest
                             possible publication date.
                             Ministers agree expected
                             publication date of Tuesday
                             30 October       .

                      pm    Member of HMSO's Security Printing
                            Branch collects report from
                            Hillsborough Inquiry Unit and
                             takes it to secure typesetter in
                            London. Typesetting begins.

Tuesday          early am   Typeset version complete
                             (including typed appendices) and
                             available for proof reading.

                             Ministers at No 10 agree to
                             publication on Monday 29 January.


11.00 am                     The Inquiry Unit start checking
                             the proof.


Wednesday         3.00 am    Inquiry Unit complete their
24 January                   proofcheck and finalise the format
                             of their Appendices. These
                             include complete set of laid-out
                             colour photographs. The proofs
                             are driven to Derby by a Security-
                              cleared representative of the
                             printer (arranged by HMSO) to
                              enable work to start on the
                              printing at 6.00 am.

                  3.30 pm    It is announced in reply to a
                              written PQ from Tom Pendry that
                              the report is to be published on
                              Monday 29 January.
Friday                  am    Inquiry Unit first see final
26 January                    version of the photograph
                              Appendices. Fortunately they are
                               satisfactory, (apart from the
                              placement of one caption).

                        pm    Printing is complete.

Saturday-Sunday               Printers package the reports; this
27-28 January                 is completed on Sunday afternoon.

Monday            early am    Printers distribute reports to
29 January                     Queen Anne's Gate, to all mainland
                               HMSO bookshops and to selected
                               HMSO agents.

                   9. 30 am   Parliamentary Section receive
                               Home Office order of reports and
                               distribute to the Unit and other
                               officials; we also prepare
                               manually a number of CFRs (normal
                               CFRs were not available because of
                               the speed of the publication and
                               the fact that it took place on a
                               Monday).
                   3.30 pm    Home Secretary makes Statement and
                              publication takes place around the
                              country.
