    Paul Freeman
    Controller and Chief Executive




                                                                           St Crispins
                                                                           Duke Street
                                                                           Norwich             I
               /
     P J ^,/Mawer |Esq
                                                                           NR31PD

                                                                           Telephone
                                                                                               '


     Cabinet Office                                                        0603 694210
     70 Whitehall                                                          GTN 3014 4210
     LONDON SW1A 2AS
                                                                           Fax 0603 695045

                                                                          13 February 1990


     Dear Mr Mawer

     FAST-TRACK PUBLISHING

     1.    Thank you for your letter of 9 February and the accompanying drafts. As
     you would expect, since most of the material is taken from my letter of 6
     February, I have no difficulties of substance with the drafts.    I have a few
     minor amendments to suggest, as listed on the attached sheet.

     2.    So far as your specific questions are concerned, I can confirm that the
     "typesetting" and "printing" times would need to be added together in
     appropriate cases.   I have shown them separately since they do not always
     follow on without a break, depending on what arrangements authors request for
     proof-reading.   Of course, if compatible tapes or discs are provided, the
     typesetting operation is eliminated entirely, though we would still recommend
     proof-reading for layout, etc.

     3.   I think you will find that the feasible dates for publishing the Taylor
     Report which were quoted in Paragraph 3 of my letter of 6 February are broadly
     consistent with the performance standards proposed.    If the new arrangements
     had been in place, it is possible that we could have done even better, given a
     degree of advance planning.   This is because the Taylor team did produce the
     text on discs, which could not be used because they did not conform to the
     required technical standards.

      4.   So far as pricing is concerned, it is a long-standing principle, on
      grounds of equity, that titles in Parliamentary series are priced on standard
      scales relating to page content.   Otherwise members of the public could have
      to pay more for a small but obscure report than for a much larger but popular
      one.   Similarly, where extra costs are incurred for reasons of security or
      urgency,   this  is  normally  occasioned   by  political   or  administrative
      considerations within the sponsoring department, or by the exigencies of the
      Parliamentary timetable.  There would undoubtedly be complaints if it resulted
      in an exceptionally high cover price in a particular case.

      5.       Please let me know if I can assist further.

      6.   I am copying this letter to the      Economic     Secretary,   Treasury       and   to
      John Gilbert in the Home Office.

      Yours sincerely




*J o r
J     PAUL FREEMAN
PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO DRAFTS


1.   Draft minute from Mr Mawer to Mr Sutton


Paragraph 2, line 1:   delete "new" and insert "formal"


Paragraph 4, line 10: delete "in advance" and insert "at an early stage"


Paragraph 5, line 3:   after "print-buying methods",   add   "depending on market
                       conditions."

Paragraph 6, line 5:   after "other aspects of the report's publication,"     add
                       "including any security requirements."

Paragraph 7, line 6:   amend to read ".... they could, given reasonable notice,
                       have published on Tuesday 23 January.       Even starting
                       from   the  actual  receipt   of  copy:, on    22 January,
                       publication on Friday    26 January would have        been
                       achievable, ...."

Paragraph 8, line 7:   after "well in advance",   insert "including the possible
                       use of word processing,"




2.   Draft minute from the Lord President to the Prime Minister


Paragraph 2, line 7:   after "other aspects of the report's publication,"     add
                       "including any security requirements."


Paragraph 3, line 11: delete "requirements" and insert "standards"


Paragraph 4, line 4:   amend to read ".... private sector printers, a handful
                       of whom have been specially cleared for the production
                       of classified material.     Productive capacity can be
                       earmarked  for  precisely   the   right time,  provided
                       sufficient advance notice is given."

Paragraph 5, line 8:   amend to read "The extent of such costs would depend on
                       market conditions, and could only be determined case by
                       case."


HMSO
13 February 1990
