                                                                                "70p;
                                                                                         Press
                                                                                         PC>

                                               QUEEN ANNE'S GATE LONDON SW1H 9AT

                                                                      ~5 iUH        mi


The Rt Hon John Morris QC MP
The Attorney General
70 Whitehall
London                    I ,
SW 1A2AS                  k/i




                                |p rtu A m *. f    fUwA*

                                                                             i Sl   .




\         rfrx



THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

As you know, I have been considering the representations which have been
made about the Hillsborough Stadium disaster on 1 5 April 1989. The disaster
was of course fully investigated by the late Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor, but
concern has been raised about a number of features of the case and material
considered by some to represent new evidence has been brought to our
attention. These and related matters were raised in the Granada Television
documentary drama "Hillsborough" last December.

My officials have thoroughly examined the alleged new evidence and the
allegations made in the Granada television programme and have concluded that
there are no grounds for establishing a new public enquiry. The material has
also been co n sid e re d by the Attorney General's Office and the DPP's Office.
None of those who have examined the material consider that there is evidence
to justify a new public enquiry, a re-opening of the inquest, or the prosecution of
individuals. But I am certain that continuing public concern will not be allayed
with a reassurance from the Home Office that there is no new evidence. I
therefore propose that there should be an independent examination of the
alleged new evidence by a senior legal figure - a respected judge (serving or
recently retired), or perhaps a senior Counsel. It will be important to ensure that
whoever undertakes the task is sufficiently senior and respected to command
public confidence. My personal preference would be for a judge. The proposed
terms of reference are:
 "To carry out an independent examination and advise whether there is new
 evidence relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough Stadium on 1 5 April 1989
 which provides sufficient grounds for:

          i.       the Secretary of State for the Home Department to establish a
                   further public inquiry;

          ii.      the Attorney-General to consider applying to the High Court under
                   Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 for another inquest;

          iii.     The Director of Public Prosecutions to consider bringing criminal
                   charges against any person;

          iv.      The relevant Chief Police Officer to consider taking disciplinary
                   action against any police officer.

Or whether there is any other action which should be taken in the public
interest."

There will need to be a public announcement of the establishment of the
independent examination. This will require careful handling. I am sure that the
announcement will have to be made in the House. But I shail want to make sure
that the ground is properly prepared before the announcement is made with
those outside Government with a close interest in the Hillsborough disaster
including the Hillsborough Family Support Group.

I should be grateful for the Lord Chancellor's advice on a suitable figure to lead
t h e in d e p e n d e n t e x a m in a tio n , and fo r y o u r c o m m e n ts and th o s e o f c o p y
recipients on the proposed terms of reference by 12 June.

Copies of this letter go to the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, the
Lord Chancellor, the President of the Council, the Minister Without Portfolio, the
Secretary of State for National Heritage, the Director of Public Prosecutions and
Sir Robin Butler.

                                       /  < v\a,




                                               JACK STRAW
