                           Office of the United Kingdom Permanent Representative
                           to the European Community                                                  ia y
                           Rond-Point Robert Schuman 6 1040 Brussels
                           Telephone 2 3 0 .6 2 .0 5
                                                                                              c*(7
                                                              Your reference
       R Kornicki esq
       Home Office                                            Our reference    To   C £ > /S < R   i/io i/e
       Queen A n n e 1s Gate                                                   & <to QJd
                                                                                                             .Qoy,
       London SW1                                             Date 14   June 1989                              ~




t.    ■[ '1i1/ ’   ^   1

     !iEp,yContribution iito the Hi 11 sborbugh Disaster Fund

     ''n'l-.V, Following our recent discussion I spoke to Paolini about
       •She EC contribution.     He confirmed that it was paid to the
        Disaster Fund Account on 31 May.

       2.    Paolini has now sent me the enclosed two letters setting
       out the need for a report after 4 months on how the Community
       aid was used and detailing the various elements’*bf the Report.

       3.          I imagine that in the Hillsborough 1 case the need to
       provide accurate details of recipients etc of the EC aid will
       p r e s e n t h e a d a c h e s , giv en that the ECU will ,by now have
       disappeared            into the        general fund.     I re co g n i s e the
       difficulties involved.              However, if we want to avoid protracted
       problems with the Commission and Paolini in particular in the
       com ing mon t h s I wou l d suggest that some adm in i s t r a t i v e
       mechanism be established to set the EC money on one side so
       that (notionally, at least) we can readily identify recipients.

      4.    I would be grateful therefore if you can pass on the
      contents of these letters to the Administrators of the Fund,
      with whatever advice    you deem fit.

      5.    I have managed to persuade Paolini (insofar  asanyone  can
      be sure!) to route all Commission letters to the Hillsborough
      people through me.   I will in turn deal with you so that we can
      ensure consistency in our response to the Commission

      6.    Now that the aid has actually gone to Hillsborough we
      should perhaps consider a more fuisome, formal reply of thanks
      to the Commission.  UKREP responded immediately by telex to the
      Commission at the time of the disaster and I subsequently
      acknowledged the Commission action in a letter to Paolini a few
      days later.    You might want to consider what further thanks
      need to be proferred     and by whom.
