1.    As the Home Secretary has indicated the Government has
       decided to have a pause in the passage of the Football
       Spectators Bill to allow a period of reflection.

2.    That period of reflection should take account of the facts
       of the situation.

3.    These are:

      i. the Football Spectators Bill was brought forward to
         tackle hooliganism.

      ii. that problem has not gone away.

     iii. the package of measures taken by football and the
          Government have contained the problem but not cured it.

      iv. the Football Spectators Bill is there to cure it by -

          (a)   separating the true football supporter from the
                hooligan by excluding the hooligan from matches
                at home

          (b)   banning convicted hooligans from travelling abroad
                on the day of key international matches

          (c)   removing the focus of violence from football
                because hooligans who have no reason to travel
                will not do so as the Luton scheme has shown

4.    If the Football Spectators Bill were not to reach the
       Statute Book this session

         we would have taken no steps to deter hooligans from
         causingjmayhom. at the World Cup in Italy next summer;
         and thisfc^hild have a direct bearing on the return of
         English clubs to European competition.

         we would not be                       standing aside from
         - the problem of domestic hooliganism at football matches

         consequently we would be ensuring no legislative means of
         for tackling the problem for at least another 12 months

          after 250 deaths in soccer since the War we would be
          abandoning the legislative vehicle by which we could
          statutorily require all seater grounds at our major
          football clubs
    after two decades of hooliganism we would be continuing
    to accept the need for 5,000 police to be on duty at
    football matches every Saturday

-   we would in fact be throwing away for 12 months the
    opportunity to incorporate in any scheme for the greater
    safety of football crowds any recommendations for the
    Taylor inquiry: or any other improvement that might be
    accepted by the Government and the Football Membership
    Authority.

The question all members of this House must ask themselves
after, to repeat 2 decades of hooliganism, hundreds of
deaths and tens of thousands of arrests and ejections is
whether they wish to take the responsibility of doing
NOTHING for another 12 months.
