                                                                                  %p:HRlPS
                                                                                          Press
                                                                                          PO
                                                  QUEEN ANNE'S GATE LONDON SW1H 9AT

                                                                         -5IUMH3T


The Rt Hon John Morris QC MP
The A tto rn e y General
70 W hitehall
London                    1
S W 1A 2AS                K/


                                  !kip iv^ AVa.<,                    «•> a <£\1Wj
                                                 ? ${j>tAhi ^V: vUAVwittfc,


W         XL-.                                   ^
THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

As you know , I have been considering the representations w hich have been
made about the Hillsborough Stadium disaster on 15 April 1989. The disaster
w as of course fu lly investigated by the late Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor, but
concern has been raised about a number of features of the case and material
considered by some to represent new evidence has been brought to our
attention. These and related matters were raised in the Granada Television
docum entary drama "H illsborough" last December.

M y officials have thoroughly examined the alleged new evidence and the
allegations made in the Granada television programme and have concluded th a t
there are no grounds for establishing a new public enquiry. The material has
also been considered by the A ttorney General's O ffice and the DPP's O ffice.
None o f those w ho have examined the material consider th a t there is evidence
to ju s tify a new public enquiry, a re-opening o f the inquest, or the prosecution of
individuals. But I am certain th a t continuing public concern w ill not be allayed
w ith a reassurance from the Home O ffice th a t there is no new evidence. I
therefore propose th a t there should be an independent examination o f the
alleged new evidence by a senior legal figure - a respected judge (serving or
recently retired), or perhaps a senior Counsel. It w ill be im portant to ensure th a t
w hoe ver undertakes the task is sufficie ntly senior and respected to com m and
public confidence. M y personal preference w ould be for a judge. The proposed
term s of reference are:
"To carry out an independent examination and advise whether there is new
evidence relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough Stadium on 1 5 April 1 989
w hich provides sufficie nt grounds for:

       i.     the Secretary o f State fo r the Home Department to establish a
              furthe r public inquiry;

       ii.    the Attorney-General to consider applying to the High Court under
              Section 13 o f the Coroners A c t 1988 for another inquest;

       iii.   The Director of Public Prosecutions to consider bringing criminal
              charges against "any person;

       iv.    The relevant Chief Police O fficer to consider taking disciplinary
              action against any police officer.

Or w hether there is any other action w hich should be taken in the public
in te re st."

There w ill need to be a public announcement of the establishment of the
independent examination. This w ill require careful handling. I am sure th a t the
announcem ent w ill have to be made in the House. But I shall w a n t to make sure
th a t the ground is properly prepared before the announcement is made w ith
those outside Governm ent w ith a close interest in the Hillsborough disaster
including the Hillsborough Family Support Group.

! should be grateful fo r the Lord Chancellor's advice on a suitable figure to lead
the independent examination, and fo r your com m ents and those o f copy
recipients on the proposed term s of reference by 12 June.

Copies of this letter go to the Prime M inister, the Deputy Prime M inister, the
Lord Chancellor, the President of the Council, the M inister W ith o u t Portfolio, the
Secretary of State fo r National Heritage, the Director of Public Prosecutions and
Sir Robin Butler.

                             Y * v\a»




                                    JACK STRAW
