                                             CONFIDENTIAL




                                                                                 S Ctw t$z.

                                       lO DOWNING STREET
                                          LONDON SW1A 2AA
From the Principal Private Secretary                                    18 May 1989



                                   FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL

        The Prime Minister has seen your letter to me of
   17 May.  She was content that the announcement of the
   Government's intention to resume Parliamentary consideration
   of the Bill should be made next week.  (This was confirmed
   at Cabinet this morning.)  She was also content with the
   suggested timetable.

       On the proposed changes to the Bill, she has agreed
  that the Bill should be amended so that the FMA should draw
  up a scheme only if directed to do so by the Secretary of
  State;  that the appointment of the FMA and this direction
  should both be subject to a commencement order;   and that
  this should be subject to a Parliamentary debate.   She was
  also content with the proposal to introduce a power for the
  Secretary of State to direct additional provisions for the
  scheme in Clause 5.

        She has noted that the House authorities consider that
  amendments to the Bill providing powers to deal with many,
  if not all, of the recommendations which Lord Justice Taylor
  may make on physical matters would be permissible, provided
  the House had approved an instruction to the Standing
  Committee to consider such amendments as cognate to the
  Bill.

       The Prime Minister did, however, query the proposal to
  set up a NDPB to carry out the licensing functions.  She
  would welcome an opportunity to consider the proposals which
  are being developed and she will want to be sure that the
  bureaucracy involved is kept to a minimum.

       The Prime Minister welcomed the speech which the
  Minister of Sport is proposing to make to the Football
  Writers Association Dinner this evening.  I have already
  communicated some drafting suggestions to Philip Stamp.

       I am copying this letter to Colin Walters (Home
  Office), Carys Evans (Chief Secretary's Office), Nick
  Gibbons (Lord Privy Seal), Steven Catling (Lord President's
  Office), Murdo Maclean (Chief Whip's Office), Philip Stamp
  (Mr. Moynihan's office) and Trevor Woolley and Shaun Munday
  (Cabinet Office).

                                                                                -|
                                                            G 1-*— —>
                                                                            1
                                                     (ANDREW TURNBULL)
  Alan Ring, E s q .,
  Department of the Environment.
                             CONFIDENTIAL
