PRIME MINISTER


                     FOOTBALL SPECTATORS' BILL


The origins of this meeting lie in one held two weeks ago
between the business managers and Mr. Ridley and Mr. Hurd.      On
hearing that 'Lord” Justice^Taylor was unlikely to be able to
cover membership schemes in his interim report, Mr. Ridley
drew the conclusion that the Bill, or at least Part 1, could
not be proceeded with.     The business managers, though
recognising the difficulties, still felt it could succeed.        In
the light of this confusing reversal of roles, the Lord
President adjourned the meeting.


The problem seems to be that Mr. Ridley believes he has given
an undertaking to backbenchers that the Bill would not be
proceeded with until Lord Justice Taylor had produced an
interim report.    And since an interim report on the issue in
question will come too late, the Bill is doomed.


Mr. Ridley has gone, or believes himself to have gone, further
than you did in your response to Mr. Kinnock.     You said:


        "A Bill completed in this session would still be able to
        take account of any interim recommendations by Lord
        Justice Taylor".


        "The Bill will not pre-empt any decisions that may be
        made by Lord Justice Taylor".


Your argument is that the enabling/framework nature of the
Bill allows changes to be made to the scheme even after the
Bill has received Royal Assent; and that the House, in
endorsing the Secretary of State's approval of the scheme, has
jan opportunity to consider whether adequate changes have been
made.     You also argue that keeping the Bill going provides a
vehicle for acting on other recommendations, e.g., seating,
that are in the interim report.
                                 -   2   -




The objectives for the meeting are:



     (i)     to convince Mr. Ridley that, given the
             framework/enabling nature of the Bill, later arrival
             of Lord Justice Taylor's views is not an impediment;


    (ii)     to settle the next steps, i.e., when to go for Third
             Reading in the Lords, when to have Second Reading in
             the Commons, and how much progress needs to be made
             by the recess (the Chief Whip is worried about
             leaving too much work to be done in the overspill).




ANDREW TURNBULL


8 May 1989
