                      CONFIDENTIM
PRIME MINISTER                                5 May 1989



           FOOTBALL MEMBERSHIP SCHEME - MEETING ON 9 MAY


You are meeting colleagues to discuss the way forward on
the football Bill in the light of Lord Justice Taylor's
enquiry into the Hiliborough disaster.     Attached for background
is a note on what Mr Justice Popplewell said about football
membership schemes..


Background


It was agreed at your meeting on 20 April that Royal Assent
in July was no longer attainable.     That meeting agreed that
the Bill would need to be completed during the Autumn in
the overspill, with Royal assent in, say, October.     The
assumption was that Lord Justice Taylor's interim report
would have appeared by then, and would have addressed the
proposed membership scheme.


Since then Lord Justice Taylor has made it clear that while
he expects to produce an interim report in July, it is unlikely
this will cover the question of a national membership scheme.
That will be addressed in his final report due in December.


Timetable


There are three strands to the timetable issue:


(i)         the timetable for the passage of the Bill to Royal
            Assent;


(ii)        the timetable for Lord Justice Taylor's interim

      •)
            and final reports;


(iii)       the timetable for getting the membership scheme
            up and running.
Prior to Hillsborough, the timetable for getting a national
membership scheme up and running was:


(1)    Royal Assent                     July 1989


(2)    Agreement on details of          July 19 89
       scheme (between football
       and DOE officials)


(3)    Selection of suppliers           August 198 9
        (by football authorities)


(4)    Scheme up and running            Apri1-May 1990


It is the third and fourth elements of this timetable which
depend cirucially on the Taylor recommendations.       These are,
for example, likely to include a proposal for many more
turnstiles.   This in turn will affect the design and cost
of a membership scheme.


It would not be sensible for the football authorities to
select their suppliers before we know what Lord Justice
Taylor is going to recommend.     Nor would it be consistent
with what John Wakeham has told the House:


      'The Bill is an enabling framework.    The Government
      has already given a full commitment not to implement
      the Membership Scheme within that framework until arrangements
      have satisfactorily been worked out.     That commitment
      still stands and obviously now embraces the lessons
      to be learned from this event.'


If Lord Justice Taylor's interim report does not cover the
national membership scheme, the selection of suppliers will
be put back to January/February 1990 at the earliest.        It
could be summer/autumn 1990 before the scheme is in place.
Options


There are:

(1)       To have another go at persuading Lord              Justice
          Taylor to cover the national membership scheme in
          his interim report.         Douglas Hurd can advise on
          the chances of this succeeding.         ... It would be
          the best solution from the Government's point of
          view


(2)       t:o press ahead anyway to Royal Assent in October,
          while making it clear that the timetable for practical
          implementation will be held up pending Taylor.
          This would r e q u i r e   continued emphasis on the framework
          nature of the Bill.          It would be a high risk course
          given the present climate in the House.          By the
          autumn, when the Bill would be in Committee, the
          interim report would have appeared and any silence
          on the national membership scheme would be known.


(3)       To drop further consideration of all, or Part I f
          of the Bill, pending Lord Justice Taylor's final
          report in December.          The Bill would be lost, and
          would have to be reintroduced in January.          The delay
          in implementing any measures to combat football
          hooliganism could then be considerable.


Conclusion and recommendation


Unless Douglas Hurd is sanguine about persuading Lord Justice
Taylor, Option (2) seems the best course in the circumstances.
It will not be easy.
                     CONFIDENTS!
One pitfall to avoid is giving the impression that the Bill,
once law, will be a framework for implementing anything
relating to the membership scheme which Lord Justice Taylor
recommends.    This is because elements of the scheme will
be set out in primary legislation (partly as a reesult of
pressure in the Lords during the passage of the Bill).
If Lord Justice Taylor recommends something quite at odds
with what is set out in the Bill, it may not be possible
to take account of this in the Scheme which is subsequently
submitted for the Secretary of State's approval.


If course (2) is chosen, the public line for presentation
would be:

     The Government has already said that the Bill will
     not pre-empt any decisions reached by Lord Justice
     Taylor.


     This means that the Government would not expect the
     football authorities to take key practical decisions
     to implement the scheme until Lord Justice Taylor's
     recommendations are known.


     Meanwhile the Government thinks it is right to proceed
     with the Bill which will be a framework for implementing
     arrangements at home and abroad to combat violence
     associated with football matches.         Hillsborough does
     nothing to reduce the urgent need for this.


     The House will have an opportunity to debate the details
     of the scheme when it confirms the Secretary of State's
     approval.    This will not happen until after Lord Justice
     Taylor has reported.




                         CAROL       INCLAIR




                                 4
                                                   ANNEX A



POPPLEWELL REPORT


Mr Justice Popplewell's interim report recommended that:


     "Urgent consideration should be given to introducing
     a membership scheme in England and Wales so as to exclude
     visiting fans."


His final report recommended that:


     "Consideration should be given to some form of membership
     scheme for Football League clubs in England and Wales".


The difference between the two recommendations lies not
just in the type of membership scheme (the first being a
universal Luton-type scheme, the second being compatible
with partial membership schemes )j|'suggests a slight doubt
in Mr Justice Popplewell's mind as to whethr membership
schemes are the answer to football hooliganism.     This is
best gauged by reading the relevant argumentation in the
interim and final reports - see Appendix 1 and 2.


But not withstanding this slight shift of emphasis, Mr Justice
Popplewell's still concluded that consideration should continue
to be given to some form of membership scheme.    Since then,
partial membership schemes have not been successful, and
the "other promising schemes" which he hoped might emerge
have not materialised.   Football violence has continued.
                                  fl>   ppUhA       -


     spend so m uch m oney a n d time in controlling it, or why the dam age to p ro p erty a n d life an d limb
         be allowed to continue.
 s h o u ld


   g 35. In E urope, the problem has been solved by banning English supporters. T he tim e has          n o t yet come
 • Great Britain when it w ould be right to say th a t if football continues to a ttrac t violence      then football
 *    cease. But given th a t it is no t possible to control determ ined violence w ithout injury       an d damage,
 ® en when all precautions have been taken, o th e r steps m ust now be tak en to prevent               the situation
 continuing.

    6 36 I f it be a correct analysis th a t substantial violence a t football m atches arises by reason o f the
   onfrontation o f rival fans, then one solution w ould be to ensure th a t rival fans were n o t present a t the
  C„„}£ game. A ttem pts have already been m ade to prevent this by having all-ticket m atches. This is done
  L various means, either by selling the tickets during the week (which opposing fans c a n n o t readily buy),
  bv having vouchers in program m es, an d by other means. It m ay also be decided to play a game early in
  the day to discourage rival fans from travelling. All-ticket gam es in Scotland are used n o t to prevent visiting
| Ians getting into the ground, b u t solely to control num bers.

    6 37 U nfortun ately while these a ttem pts have in some cases been successful they have n o t been universally
  so Thus, while it m ay be possible to prevent Chelsea fans from getting tickets at N ewcastle, it is not
  possible to prevent E verto n fans getting tickets at Liverpool, or N e w p o rt at Cardiff, or A rsenal at
  Tottenham. Likewise, starting a game a t 11 am, while sometimes successful, has on occasion resulted in
  fans arriving overnight w ith now here to go and noth in g to do, save to drink, w ith chaos and violence
  ensuing in that p articu lar town.

     6.38 There has been an additional problem , which is th a t even when it has been an n o u n ced th a t a game
  is all-ticket, fans have arrived w itho u t tickets at a gro un d and dem anded entrance. F o r reasons o f security,
  the police would ra th e r have the fans inside the g rou n d an d accordingly they have been let in. This has
  become such c om m on knowledge th a t all-ticket games are not regarded now as being the complete solution
  to the problem.

     6.39 However, all-ticket games are, in E n g lan d an d W ales, one o f the ways to try to ensure th a t only
   home supporters are adm itted to the g round. Chelsea contem plated introd u cin g a sophisticated scheme,
   with the use o f com puters, for m em bership o f its ground. M em bership w ould have entitled a fan to sit in
  1the best parts of the ground. It was n o t, however, intended to exclude o th er fans, w ho w ould have been
   admitted only to less favourable p arts o f the ground.

     6.40 It was, however, a limited type o f m em bership scheme. G oing one step further, there is no reason
   why each club should n o t introduce a system, so as to ensure th a t only their own supporters are able to
   visit their own club.

 « J | 6.41 Quite clearly, nothing o f that sort could possibly be introduced in the im m ediate future a t all 92
   League clubs. However, it seems to me th at m em bership o f a club, an d o f th a t club only, as the condition
   of entry m ay go som eway to reducing the level and quan tity o f violence at a football ground. One suggestion
  Inade is th a t each club should be a registered m em bership an d th a t adm ittance to the ground would be
  iforbidden to non m em bers. I f the only people allowed into the ground o f club A h a d to be registered
 ,jmembers o f club A, there is evidence th a t the am o u n t o f violence a t club A is likely to be reduced. T hat
   % ^eme envisages no visiting fans a t all a n d mem bership restricted to one club.

    J16-42 It has, o f course, obvious disadvantages for the club. Firstly all gates are m ade up to some extent
  ‘i p visiting supporters; num bers vary from m atch to m atch and club to club, but on average they am ount
       some 10 per cent o f the gate. M ost clubs, I suspect, would be willing to lose the revenue from that 10
     Per cent if they could have a violence-free game.

    "2^43 .Membership o f a club will also effectively prevent the m an or w o m an w ho on the spur o f the
    # P lent wishes to go along to a m atch, the “ casual” visitor from so doing. T h at, in my view, is a price
    Jw ch the public an d the club have to pay to try and reduce football violence. It will also prevent a fan
     om belonging to m o re than one club. .

       6 4 4 Alternatively, if club A were willing, when playing club B, to allow registered m em bers o f club B
   f p n t e r the ground th a t w ould be up to club A, b u t it would force club B to take responsibility for their
      *n members and ensure th at those to w hom they issued m em bership cards were responsible.
   6.45 A t the present time the visiting club has no knowledge o f the so called supporters, or control over
them, and quite rightly disclaims responsibility. If a club is to be' made responsible for its members it must
take steps to ensure that it knows who they are and that they are people whom they are prepared to have
in their ground.

  6.46 Then, it is pointed out, that it may be an interference with the liberty of the subject to have to have
some form of membership or identity card with a photograph. But nobody objects if they have to show a
season ticket on the railway or have their photograph on a rail-card. Clubs already have season ticket
holders— a num ber have supporters’ clubs which, in some cases, is a form o f membership. It is an everyday
occurrence to prove identity in some form, either at work, to obtain credit, or in the use o f a m otor vehicle.
No doubt there will be difficulties at the turnstiles, if someone is challenged. There is, as always, room for
abuse, each club will have to be alert to ensure that a particular fan does not join m ore than one club.
Additionally, there will be problem s which arise when a non-League club plays a League club in a cup
game. Thus it m ay be necessary for non-league clubs to have membership cards.

   6.47 But these are problems which can, with goodwill and effort, be overcome. Unless urgent steps are
taken to produce some more efficient m ethod o f excluding hooligans, football may not be able to continue
in its present form much longer.

   6.48 The English and Scottish football authorities are against the introduction o f a membership scheme,
although the Football League in England has set up a working party to examine the problem. I am aware
of the difficulties. It may be that straightforward membership o f one club is not the only answer to the
problem. But th at is the easiest to administer and it is simple. Experience will no doubt show what in
practice is the best scheme to retain the desirable supporters and exclude the undesirable. I therefore
recommend that urgent consideration be given by football clubs in England and Wales to introducing a
membership system so as to exclude visiting fans. Such a scheme does no t appear on the evidence so far
before me to be necessary in Scotland.
  6.49 I do not pretend that this is the perfect solution, because home fans can be troublesome (as they
were as Birmingham) and decent fans m ay be kept away. N o r can I guarantee that it will cure football
hooliganism. It is not, however, possible for the present situation any longer to continue.

   6.50 F o r some reason crowd control does not appear to be such a serious problem with other forms of
sport in this country. That is not to say that there are not unhappy signs in other sports o f too much drink
being consumed, rowdiness, unpleasant racial overtones and a degree o f violence. It is not necessary yet
to recommend the application o f a membership rule to other sports bu t the m atter should be kept under
review.

Identification
   6.51 The third way in which the problem o f football hooliganism can be dealt with is by identifying the
hooligans in the ground when they behave like hooligans. A t some grounds I have visited, because a local
police force is involved, the same officers are able to be present at the ground at each home fixture, they
regularly go to the same p art o f the ground and they are able to identify the trouble makers. However, at
a ground like Chelsea, because a large num ber o f officers are drawn from a wide area o f the Metropolis,
this is not possible.

   6.52 Closed-circuit television o f one sort or another has been introduced at a num ber o f grounds and it
is clear that it has two very great advantages. Firstly, it m ay deter a hooligan to know that his acts are
being recorded and secondly, it enables the police, even when a game is over and an arrest has not
immediately been made, subsequently to identify a hooligan, to charge him and to prove to the magistrates,
by clear evidence, the identity o f the hooligan.

   6.53 The introduction o f closed-circuit television cameras at grounds will, in my view, have a marked
effect on the incidence o f hooliganism and the apprehension o f offenders. One o f the difficulties the police
have in identification and apprehension is that they m ay be too busy defending themselves or preventing
rival fans from attacking each other so that they do not have the time o r the ability to pick out an offender.
N or are they able, subsequently in court, to give a clear picture o f w hat happened. This the camerer'does
in the most graphic way.

  6.54 I therefore recommend the introduction o f closed-circuit television at League football grounds. It may
well be that because of cost and location this should only apply in the 1st and 2nd Divisions in England


                                                      46
                                    -     fl-t*   /V '* '                                    Prpp^p.              2.


  4.101 The Football T rust has made a substantial contribution towards the purchase o f this equipment
as they and the Football G rounds Improvement Trust have done in respect o f other fa c iliti^ a t football
grounds. This is much to be commended and they play a very im portant p art in ensuring/the welfare of
the game.                                                                            /

(vii) Radios                                                                           /
  4.102 I had occasion in my Interim Report, to m ake some observations a b o y tth e way that the police
radios had operated at Bradford (paragraphs 3.27-3.33). I recommended th^t early attention should be
given by the H om e Office D irectorate o f Telecommunications to considerJ tie practicality o f producing a
more suitable personal radio for the police.1                           /

   4.103 Subsequently, at one ground I went to I was able to observe the relative efficiency of the police
radio operated by a police officer and a commercial type o f radio/6f similar construction and appearance,
operated by a steward employed by the club. Messages from both were received in the police control room
situated in the ground, by an experienced controller. The reefeption from the steward’s commercial radio
was markedly better than from the police radio.          /

  4.104 One police force expressed confidence in th ^ r equipment. They had been able to purchase their
equipment on the commercial m arket and had fjsund no operational difficulty in its use. However, I
observed at one ground a Police Sergeant being^a^ked by a Chief Superintendent to send a message on his
police radio. H e was unable to do so, to general embarrassment, apparently due to the batteries having
worn out. The point has also been made b / t h e Fire Brigades’ U nion that their radios are not as good as
they would like because the batteries, [p4sed for any length o f time, tend to wear out. I see no reason,
therefore, to alter my view th at the quality o f both the police and the fire service radios (though each are
different) still needs to be review ed/m d the importance o f regular m aintenance emphasised. I am pleased .
to learn that a detailed study is being commissioned by the Hom e Office Directorate o f Telecommunications
into the problem o f personal radios.

(viii) Police Manpower          /
   4.105 In my Interim /R eport (paragraphs 6.9 and 6.10) I drew attention to the large num ber o f police
officers it is necessary to deploy for the purpose o f controlling crowds at a football m atch. It is a m atter
o f some concern thm such a large proportion o f police resources should be devoted to the task o f controlling
a football crow d/w hen there are so m any other aspects o f law and order to which they ought to be devoting
their time. T h /p o lic e are the first to recognise this.

  4.106 At a. recent M illwall/Portsm outh match over 500 police officers were required to be deployed in
and ou t^d e the ground (and properly so required) to control a crowd o f under 7,000 spectators. Any steps
w hich^an be taken to reduce the necessity for a police presence at a football ground are to be encouraged.
A sdccessful membership scheme may well have this effect.

B. The Clubs

(i) Membership Cards and the Football League Scheme
   4.107 I recommended in my Interim Report that urgent consideration.be given by football clubs in
England and Wales to introducing a membership system.2 N o other Recom m endation has given rise to
such discussion or indeed criticism. There were three criticisms o f the idea o f a membership system. Firstly,
that I was advocating an identity card system. I was not, nor did I so suggest in my Report. Secondly, that
a membership pass was the equivalent o f an identity card. It is not any m ore than a driving licence, work
pass, season ticket, credit card, bus pass, library ticket or the m any thousands o f membership cards o f
different clubs, both football and others, which presently exist. Thirdly, there was the suggestion that to
require a card or pass at a football ground was interfering in some way with the liberty o f the subject. This
1 have to say is simply emotional nonsense.

   4.108 There are, however, two much more serious objections which have real validity. Firstly, that any
system o f membership cards is likely to prove impractical at the turnstiles because there would not be
enough time to check the card presented, given the tendency o f football spectators to arrive at the very
last moment.______________________ ___________________ _______________________________________ __
 'In terim Report: R ecom m endation 3.
 2Interim Report: Recom m endation 20.



                                                      42
  4.109 The figures for Tottenham H otspur Football Club, for instance, support this objection. On 17
August 1985 when they played W atford, the final attendance figure was 29,884. A t 2.45 pm there were
19,217 in the ground, at 3 pm there were 27,785. The figures for Liverpool this season for five games show
that on average only 65 per cent o f to tal attendance were in the ground 15 minutes before kick-off and 92
per cent at kick-off. Thus, on average, some 9,000 spectators were still trying to get into the ground 15
minutes before kick-off and 2,500 were still outside when play began.

  4.110 The second objection is th at it would prevent a casual spectator, who wanted to go and visit his
own club on occasions, from so doing; and also th at the spectator, who supported a num ber o f clubs would
be prevented from attending matches. It was also pointed out th a t if away supporters were banned some
clubs would lose large revenues. In the lower Divisions, except for local derbies, away fans are only a small
proportion o f the crowd, bu t in the First and Second Divisions they m ay be very substantial.

  4.111 These were, and still remain, very strong arguments, m ore particularly as they come from a large
number o f the m ore responsible and reputable clubs. They have been repeated many times to me, both
orally and in writing, since my Interim Report. On the other hand, the Football Association, the Football
League, the Professional Footballers’ Association and the Sports Council all favour some form o f
membership scheme. So too do m any supporters’ clubs, and a num ber o f clubs who are introducing their
own scheme. A partial membership scheme has much to com m end it and, in fact, exists at m any clubs
already.

   4.112 A num ber o f matches this season have shown th at the casual supporter cannot, in fact, just go to
any game as he pleases. One example is what happened in the W atford versus Chelsea game in September.
It was played at 12 noon. It was all-ticket. I wanted to go on to the terraces. As a W atford supporter I
needed to be in possession o f a voucher from a previous program m e. As a Chelsea supporter I needed to
be a member o f the Supporters’ Club and to go and get a ticket from Chelsea during the week. W atford,
in fact, held 1,000 tickets for Chelsea supporters available at the ground on the day, though this was not
made public. Thus, if on the Saturday morning I had as a casual decided I would like to go to the game, I
would not have got in and thus I was no better off than I would have been under a membership scheme.

   4.113 All-ticket games in England and Wales involve a severe limitation o f those who can attend. A
 number o f big games are all-ticket. The usual m ethod o f distribution o f the tickets to the away team is to
 channel them to members o f their supporters’ club o r to season ticket holders. In those cases it is clear
 that the casual supporter will not get a ticket. This year all Leeds United matches, when they play away
 from home, have been designated by the Football Association to be all-ticket games; thus the casual
 supporter o f Leeds U nited is unlikely to be able to get a ticket to see his team when they are playing away.

   4.114 The system which Leeds United has adopted is to allocate their away tickets first to season ticket
 holders and shareholders: the remainder are distributed to the Supporters’ Club. I was told th at to be a
 member o f Leeds U nited Supporters’ Club you need to be proposed, interviewed and approved by a
 particular branch. Unless you are so approved you cannot join the Club; at some branches unless you are
 personally known you will not be approved; if you cannot join the Club you cannot get into an away
 match. It appears to be a membership scheme with very strict membership control. However, the alleged
 misbehaviour o f Leeds United fans at a recent m atch has caused the FA temporarily to ban all Leeds
' United supporters at away games.

     4.115 The Football League have set up a working party to consider the whole question o f membership
I- cards. This reported on 9 September 1985. Because o f its im portance, it is worth setting out some o f the
3 details o f th at Report.
           “14. Many football clubs have in recent years carefully considered how to attract desirable groups of
           spectators, such as families and children, to attend their matches . . .
       ‘                                                                                             .    .
           15. To this end accommodation has been set aside for these groups, and often admission to them is
                                                                                                                .
           controlled by the use of membership cards . . .
           16. In addition numerous clubs have established supporters’ membership schemes, open to individuals of
           good character who are not eligible for membership of family or children’s schemes and for season ticket
 sj|       holders.
           17. Safety of Sports Grounds Act regulations lay down strict guidelines for segregation of rival supporters,
           2nd these structures greatly facilitate the creation of reserved areas for members of particular schemes.


                                                            43
   4.124 The Football Trust and the D epartm ent o f the Environment recently commissioned the Sociology
D epartm ent at the University o f Leicester (who are very experienced in investigation o f football problems)
to examine and report on Leicester City’s membership scheme.

 4.125 The Leicester sociologists conclude that the most practical strategy would be to encourage the co­
ordinated introduction o f club-based schemes. “Such an approach”, they say, “would enable each club to
become familiar with the operation of its own scheme and, following that, it might be possible to establish and
to monitor a pilot project involving reciprocal arrangements.”

   4.126 I n my Interim R eport I set out the various problems o f a meftibership scheme and said that despite
the problems, these could be overcome with goodwill and effort. I did not pretend that any membership
scheme would necessarily be successful, or that I could guarantee that it would cure football hooliganism.
I suggested that clubs could keep away fans away if they were so minded. I did not then recommend this
as the only scheme, nor do I do so now. It is to be hoped' that a partial membership scheme which still
allows casuals to enter the ground will be the first step in trying to secure greater peace and harmony at a
football match. In the end, it m ust be for the football clubs to take whatever steps they think necessary to
ensure crowd control at football matches. M embership schemes are one, but certainly not the only step.
The Football League have taken an im portant step in this direction and their efforts are much to be
commended.

   4.127 Clubs in the Football League have reacted to the Football League’s proposal with varying degrees
o f enthusiasm ranging from downright opposition to warm acceptance. Given the history o f the Football
League clubs no one should be surprised that there is no agreement on this suggestion anymore than on
any other suggestion.

   4.128 The fact th at this season, as I write, trouble on the terraces has been appreciably less than last
season, is no ground for complacency. I recognise that the great majority o f football matches are trouble-
free, but any practical step which can be taken to lessen the risk is to be applauded. The W orking Party’s
Report is but a first step. So too are the experiments which I have recorded. N o doubt there are other
promising schemes elsewhere. It will have to be seen how successful they are and adjusted in the light o f
experience. F o r my part, I recommend that consideration should continue to be given to some form o f
membership scheme fo r Football League clubs in England and Wales.

(ii) Stewards
   4.129 I have already expressed my view about the responsibility o f the clubs, as private organisations
inviting spectators into their grounds for profit, to bear the responsibility for ensuring the reasonable safety
o f those spectators. To that end, I have already recommended that stewards should be pmp€fly selected
and properly trained. The days when all they are required to do is to act like an u sh eretreat a cinema to
show people to their seats should have gone. They have a very im portant public responsibility to ensure
the safety o f the spectators, as do the cabin staff o f an aeroplane. I have been htfpressed at a number o f
grounds which I have visited, by the steps which have now been taken (aJJjeft belatedly) to ensure that
there are competent stewards who are properly briefed. N o doubt the pre^erfce o f a large num ber o f police,
which is now the accepted practice on a ground, had led some clubs toj3e less energetic than they otherwise
would be in looking after their own property and the safety o f spepm ors.

(iii) Community Affairs
   4.130 Clubs like Aberdeen and W atford (no doubjxfnere are other shining examples) have involved
themselves in community affairs. They have prov id pd a place were families and children can attend. They
have encouraged a relationship between the c lu b ^ n d the local community which can only result in greater
harmony at the ground. The current financial^jroblems affecting a num ber o f clubs will no doubt result in
a rethink as to whether a football grouncLxnten used only for football once a fortnight, is being put to its
best practical use. Some 40 hours use in a year scarcely seems an economic use o f an expensive ground.
On the Continent, the sharing o f grounds and their facilities, not only for spectators and players, but for
members o f the public, has m ucjyfo commend it. This, o f course, cannot happen overnight. A number o f
forward looking clubs alreadvymvolve the community. M any do not and there can be no doubt that it is
to everyone’s advantage that'they should.

(iv) Behaviour O f Players
  4.131 The behaviour o f some players on the field o f play undoubtedly contributes on occasion to bad
behaviour on/fne terraces. This is not confined to football. Indeed some o f the antics o f cricketers and


                                                      46
