                                     D EPA RTM EN T OF THE E N V IR O N M EN T
                                     2 M A RSH A M S T R E E T L O N D O N SW1P 3EB
                                                     01-276 3000

                                     My ref:
”fi f c RETAK<2^
                                     Your r e f :



                                                                              ^   'eVXc1
                                    C               rvw M ^   ■



     I am aware of the interest you and your constituents have shown
     in the proposed national      membership  scheme   for  football
     supporters. I thought it might be useful if I describe in detail
     the background to the Bill, the effect of the UEFA decision of
     April 11 and respond to the particular points made on the
     postcards you have received.

     The Bill's purpose is to deal with the problems of hooliganism
     associated with football. It proposes that everyone who attends
     a designated football match in England and Wales should be a
     member of the scheme, or otherwise authorised by the scheme, and
     that designated matches should be played only on licensed
     football grounds. A member would be able to go to any designated
     match.   Those who are convicted of a relevant offence will be
     disqualified from membership of the scheme and the scheme itself
     will allow for the Football Membership Authority to ban others
     who misbehave at football matches.      The Bill also gives the
     courts powers to impose restriction orders on convicted hooligans
     to prevent them from travelling to specified matches abroad.

     The Bill does not prescribe the contents of the membership
     scheme.  Rather, it provides for the Secretary of State for the
     Environment to appoint a body, to be known as the Football
     Membership Authority (FMA), to draw up the scheme in detail and
     submit it to the Secretary of State for approval. The Football
     Association and Football League have decided that they will work
     together in the establishment of a joint body to be recommended
     to the Secretary of State for designation as the FMA and I
     welcome their decision.

     While I accept that the clubs and police have taken measures to
     deter football violence, I cannot accept the view that there is
     no trouble inside football grounds.    The level of arrests and
     ejections at football grounds both last season and during this
     one are in themselves unacceptable, but they alone do not give
     the full picture.    At too many matches violence remains just
     below the surface. Supporters of opposing teams have to be kept
     apart by physical barriers and by the employment of 5,000 or more
     police every Saturday during the season.    Outside grounds, the
     behaviour of rival groups of supporters makes life intolerable
     both for law-abiding football supporters and for those who live
     or trade nearby or wish to travel by train on the same day as a
     football match.
We believe that the scheme offers the real prospect of ending
football hooliganism both inside and outside grounds.    It will
remove the match as a central focus for the activities of
hooligans.  If hooligans know that they will not be allowed into
football matches, they will have no incentive to travel to one.
This has been the experience at Luton Town with its successful
100% home membership scheme. When the clubs adopt a positive and
constructive attitude to the marketing and development of the
scheme it could be of great benefit to them financially and
enable the scheme to be introduced without any charge being made
to members.

Introduction of the membership scheme will provide, for the
first time, an effective and comprehensive procedure to keep
hooligans away from football matches.    I am confident that it
will lead to the link between violence and football being broken
and that going to a football match will become a far more
enjoyable occasion than it has been for many years. Indeed, I
believe that many people previously deterred by the threat of
hooliganism will return to football.

I welcome UEFA's recognition of the progress that is being made
in dealing with football hooliganism.   By the beginning of the
1990/91 season (UEFA's target date for the possible readmission
of English clubs to European competition), our intention is that
the Football Membership Scheme will be up and working and powers
to prevent convicted hooligans from travelling to key matches
abroad will already have been introduced.

With determined action by the Government and the support of the
football authorities and fans, football can stay firmly on the
road to recovery.  By the time of readmission we will have the
mechanisms to control hooliganism both at home and abroad.




                              '"I




                                    COLIN MOYNIHAN
