                           HOUSE OF C O M M O N S                           1 0 AUG 1939
                               L O N D O N SW1A0AA
                                                                      HUNG INSTRUCTION^!
                                 London:     01-219 3594
                               Birmingham:    021-449 7228
                                                                       fm    m   .         J


Sir Robin Butler,                                             8th August 1989
Head of the Civil Service,                                    (Diet. 7.8.89)
Downing Street,            C_ ps/s»r c utfutmore -
London, SW1.
                                  Advice tr d ra ft reply p le a se

Dear Sir Robin,

I really must complain, about the way the Opposition were treated last Friday
in respect of the publication of Lord Justice Taylor's Report on the Hillsborough
tradegy. I telephoned Douglas Herd's private office the day before asking
if I could have the courtesy of an advance copy and was told by his secretary
that they would try and let me have a copy 30 minutes before publication
which she said 'is the procedure which we usually adopt with statements
as far as Roy Hattersley is concerned'. I explained that it was not a
statement in Parliament, not did not deal with State Secrets or matters
of that sort and I would need to read it in order to reply to the press,
radio and television.

On the Friday morning I was told by the same office that they were trying
to get the publication to my House of Commons office by 10.30 and in fact
it did not arrive until 11.00 which was supposed to be the time it was
due to be published. However, I was being telephoned by journalists well
before that hour and it was clear to me that they were reading directly
from the Report. This is an inexcusable discourtesy.

As I explained to Douglas Herd's private secretary the first duty of the
Civil Service is to Parliament and not to Ministers although of course
they have a prime responsibility to Parliament through serving Ministers.
It seems to me that the Civil Service these days totally disregards the
principle purposes although in this case I suspect very strongly that this
procedure was dictated by the Home Secretary himself.

I am sending a copy of this letter to Mr. Speaker as I think he will need
to consider how the interests of Parliament is protected in situations
of this kind. I am sorry to trouble you with this matter but having television
crews arriving at my home and having to tell them I have not seen the Report
I am sure you will understand my concern.

Yours sincerely,




Denis Howell.




                              Rt Hon D enis Howell M P
