                                             CONFIDENTIAL




                                       10 DOWNING STREET
                                          L O N D O N SW1A2AA
From the Principal Private Secretary                               29 January 1990



                       TAYLOR REPORT; HOME SECRETARY*S STATEMENT

       The Prime Minister has seen the draft of the statement
  attached to your letter to me of 25 January, and the letter of
  26 January from the Minister for Sport to the Home Secretary, to
  which was attached an alternative draft of the final paragraphs
  of the statement.

       She agrees with the Minister for Sport that it is helpful to
  present the Taylor proposals as an alternative strategy which is
  beipg adopted to replace the Football Membership Scheme.   She
  also agrees that it is desirable to include a reference to
  further work on membership schemes, as without it the threat to
  return to them, should the Taylor approach not work, is weakened.

       She feels, however, that the DOE draft goes too far in
  suggesting that it is simply a matter of technological
  modification to the existing scheme. The effect of the DOE draft
  is to sound rather grudging in accepting the main recommendation.

       The Prime Minister suggests that the final two paragraphs of
  the Home Office draft should be replaced by the passage attached.

       On the new offences and sanctions suggested by Lord Justice
  Taylor, the Prime Minister felt the Home Office draft was too
  Sir Humphreyesque, while the DOE draft went too far in committing
  the Government to adopting the Taylor proposals.  She felt the
  matter could be dealt with at the bottom of page 5 by

           "I shall look urgently and sympathetically at these
           recommendations".

           I also attach a sheet of other drafting suggestions.

       I am copying this letter to Alan Ring (Department of the
  Environment), Tim Sutton (Lord President's Office, John Gieve
  (H.M. Treasury), Richard Gozney (Foreign and Commonwealth
  Office), Philip Stamp (Office of the Minister for Sport), Jim
  Gallagher (Scottish Office), Juliet Wheldon (Law Officers'
  Department), Gillian Kirton (Lord Privy Seal's Office),
  Murdo Maclean (Chief Whip's Office) and Sonia Phippard (Cabinet
  Office).




                                                 ANDREW TURNBULL
  Colin Walters, Esq.,
  Home Office.

                                             CONFIDENTIAL
                   CONFIDENTIAL




             PROPOSED DRAFTING CHANGES


Page 1, para 2.
Although the reference to "careful and thorough
analysis" is literally correct as it refers to the
history of hooliganism, it could be quoted back in the
context of the N M S .    Try
"...   for the report, which sets out clearly why we
have had ...".


Page 2, line 5, "safety and that, in his view, they
also ...."


Page 2, middle paragraph.
It would be helpful either in the statement or the
speech for the debate, to include a criticism of one of
the major vices of modern soccer, the endemic habit of
disputing referees' decisions.


Page 2.
The Government should take more credit for promoting
all-seater stadia.       Two lines from the bottom to read:
"... and points out that Section 11 of the Football
Spectators Act specifically provides for this".


Top of page 3.
Include a reference to large and growing TV monies.


Top of page 4.
Again it is possible to take credit for provisions in
the Act:
"Lord Justice Taylor welcomed the establishment of the
Football Licensing Authority but would like us to go
further and extend its remit to cover ...".


Further down this paragraph which discusses the
extension to other sports, replace "we will have to
consider the matter further" by "we will have to
consider whether this is justified".

                   CONFIDENTIAL
                         CONFIDENTIAL
                             -   2   -




vii.    Bottom of page 4.
        Include a reference to the cost of policing or the
        numbers of police required (about 5,000 each Saturday).


viii.   Top of page 5.
        Add reference to the banning of alcohol.




                         CONFIDENTIAL
                             CONFIDENTIAL




                      PROPOSED CONCLUDING PASSAGE


I now come to the proposed Football Membership Scheme.        Lord
Justice Taylor examined the Invitation to Tender for a scheme
which was issued by the consultants employed by the football
authorities.     He came to the conclusion that he could not support
a scheme of that kind because he did not believe the technology
would work well enough to avoid the danger of congestion and
disorder.    He was also concerned about the call on police
resources.     Instead he proposes the measures to which I have
referred.


The Government have decided in the light of his advice not to
proceed with the establishment of a Football Membership
Authority.     Instead we propose to follow his strategy of
combining certain measures aimed directly at hooligans together
with progress towards all-seating, improved accommodation, better
facilities, improved arrangements for crowd control and better
training of police and stewards, which Lord Justice Taylor
believes give the best chance of eliminating or minimising
football hooliganism.


In the meantime Part I of the Football Spectators Act will remain
on the statute book and work will continue to see how the
shortcomings identified by Lord Justice Taylor could be overcome
in case we have to return to the matter again, should the problem
of hooliganism not be defeated by the alternative strategy
proposed in the Report.


The right course now is to implement Part II of the Act and to
give effect to Lord Justice Taylor's proposals in the way I have
indicated.     Mr. Speaker, we are giving the industry and the clubs
a final opportunity to put themselves in order.     The public will
not forgive them if they do not now act.




                             CONFIDENTIAL
