    Y SW YD D FA GYMREIG                                                             W ELSH OFFICE
        GWYDYR HOUSE                                                                 GWYDYR HOUSE
WHITEHALL LONDON SW1A 2ER                                                  WHITEHALL LONDON SW1A 2ER

Tel. 01-270 3000 (Switsfwrdd)                                              Tel.   01-270   3000   (Switchboard)
     01-270      (Llinell Union)                                                  01-270          (Direct Line)

Oddi wrth Ysgrifennydd Gwladof Cymru   Til© Rt HOIl Peter Wslksi MBE MP    From The Secretary o f State tor Wales


              CT/1960/89                                                  ,t3     March 1989




              FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL

              Thank you for your letter of 24 February.

              I noted with some concern that Alexander Hesketh had offered
              to consult on the exclusion of the Welsh clubs from the
              scheme if Lord Brooks and his supporters withdrew their
              Amendment to that effect- It is certainly not my wish that
              the clubs should be outside the scheme, and I am surprised
              if, following the earlier narrow defeat, it was felt likely
              that we would go down on this Amendment also. It is clearly
              essential that I should be able to designate matches
              involving the 3 Welsh clubs played at their own grounds.

              I remain convinced, however, that we should not at this
              stage state categorically that these matches will be
              designated. In saying that I would set up an advisory group
              I have given no indication that I would restrict its scope
              in this important way. To do so now would be unnecessarily
              provocative. But I also feel even more strongly that my
              approach is the right one now because it offers us the most
              convincing grounds for, in due course, arguing that we
              cannot exclude the clubs as Lord Brooks proposed.

              My advisory group will have its first meeting within the
              next few weeks. Although one of my officials will chair its
              subsequent proceedings, I shall myself attend that meeting.
              This will give those representatives of the sport in Wales
              whom I am inviting to serve on the group (including the
              Chairmen of the 3 clubs) a fair chance to put their points
              to me. It will also be an occasion for me very firmly to
              put to them our views, for example on the need for
              consistency between England and Wales as regards league
              matches. Thus while they may consider advising against the
              designation of league matches, they will have a pretty clear
              understanding that I would reject such advice.

                                                                           /After that


              Rt Hon Nicholas Ridley MP
              Secretary of State for the Environment
              2 Marsham Street
              LONDON
              SW10 3EB
After that meeting we shall be in a very strong position to
argue that we have listened to what the Welsh interest had
to say and answered them. This in turn will be the best
answer to Lord Brooks.                  '

I am copying this to the Prime Minister, Douglas Hurd,
John Wakeham, John Belstead, David Waddington, Bertie
Denham, Sir Robin Butler and the First Parliamentary
Counsel.
