PRIME MINISTER                                   21 February 1989



                    FOOTBALL MEMBERSHIP SCHEME

Yesterday's set-back in the Lords is psychologically damaging.
But it should not throw the timetable for the passage of*
the Bill into serious jeopardy.      Nor do officials expect
it to slow up work on the details of the membership scheme.
This is currently underway in a group of representing the
League and the FA, together with a senior official from
the Department of the Environment.


Parliamentary Aspects

Lord Harmar-Nichols' intention was to require the Football
Membership Authority (which is to run the scheme) to consider
phasing it in rather than introducing it simultaneously
in all 92 league clubs.     But his amendments would not have
                                                        ■______________ —_

had this affect.     You may like to looE~at the attached~no^§
at Annex A on the legal effect of his proposals.        They could
not be accepted as they stand, even if some form of phasing
were to be accepted.


Comment

The football authorities, and probably many of the clubs,
now accept that the membership scheme is not going to go
away.     The former are getting down to work.     Some of the
mists are clearing:


  - the technical problems - such as the time taken to process
    cards - are already looking much less formidable;


  - although there are still no firm figures for cost, it
    is quite clear that football as a whole could afford
    the scheme.




                                 1
Arguments that the scheme is technically impossible, or
that it is beyond the capacity of the game to afford, can
be dismissed.


But other worries, some of which are genuine, remain.


I recently visited Tottenham Hotspurs' ground to watch a
match.   Tottenham are a~rich~and progressive club.    They
had a lot of crowd trouble in the 1970s.     They have since
worked systematically to eliminate this, and have been largely
successful to date.


Tottenham believe that the secret to preventing hooliganism
at football grounds is a combination of good policing and
stewarding.     They have developed an effective relationship
with their local police division.     (This was confirmed independently
on a visit to Tottenham Police Division).     The Tottenham
stewards are relatively young and well trained.     They look
effective.    They are a far cry from the elderly pensioners
traditionally employed asstewards by some glubs.


Tottenham are building up their own membership scheme for
their own reasons.     They pride themselves on having been
able to dismantle all bu^_xuie-,of their fences.   They have
clearly taken the problem of hooliganism seriously, and
it is rather worrying that they do not think the national
membership scheme will help them at all. ^


Where clubs like Tottenham (there are unfortunately not
enough of them) differ from the Government is over the role
of the card in preventing hooligans without cards from hanging
around football grounds, or trying to get into games.     It
is the Government's belief that the membership scheme will
mean that football will cease to be a focus for hooliganism.
Colin Moynihan has argued persuasively that it is the crowd
atmosphere at games which generates the excitement which




                                 2
can turn into hooliganism.   If people know that they will
not be admitted to games, they       will not turn up.   But it
must be admitted that in the early days of the scheme, they
may well turn up in the hope that they will somehow get
in.   This, after all, apparently happens regularly in the
case of all-ticket matches which are sold out.


Conclusion

The opposition of the clubs to the scheme has been so extreme
- and much of it so misplaced - that it is difficult to
separate out genuine arguments from sand in the eyes.        This
hampers genuine dialogue.    But given the uncertainties as
to how the scheme will work, especially at the beginning,
the best course would be:


  - to make it clear that the Government intends to press
on with the scheme;


  - to point out that Lord Harmer-Nichols' amendments show
      that the principle of the scheme is how widely accepted;


  - but that whatever their intention, they are unworkable;


  - to explore in the working group the scope for genuine
      improvements to the scheme;


  - to avoid closing the door completely on phased introduction.
      Phasing in a form determined by the Government could
      be a useful card to play, particularly once the Bill
      reaches the Commons.




                        CAROLYN SINCLAIR




                                 3
