*
                                                          Q U E E N A N N E ’ S G A T E L O N D O N S W 1 H 9 AT




    The R t H on John Morris Q C MP
    A ttorney General -
    A ttorney General’s Chambers
    9 Buckingham Gate
    London SW1                      ^




                  \A^a/
                                        HILLSBOROUGH

    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has now submitted to me his report on whether there is any new
    evidence relating to the Hillsborough disaster. I understand that your office was provided
    w ith a copy of the report as soon as we received it. We need now to agree our response to
    his conclusions.

    A copy of the judge’s terms of reference, which we agreed, is attached. Essentially he had
    tw o tasks.

           (i)     to advise me whether any evidence not previously available is of such
                   significance as to justify a further public inquiry; and

           (ii)    to identify for you, the Director of Public Prosecutions and the chief
                   constable, as disciplinary authority, any evidence that might be relevant to
                   your statutory responsibilities that has not previously been considered.

    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s conclusions are clear. H e considers that there is no basis for
    establishing a further inquiry or re-opening the Taylor Inquiry. N o r is there any basis for
    a renewed application to quash the verdict of the inquest. N o r does he consider there is
    any material which might require re-consideration of previous decisions in relation to
    criminal or disciplinary proceedings. His report is very full and detailed. Having
    considered it carefully, I am entirely satisfied that his central conclusions are right.

    W hen I established the scrutiny on 30 June last year, I gave a commitment that the judge's
    report w ould be published, together w ith as much of the evidence which he considered as
    possible. M uch of the key evidence is contained within Appendices to his report. Most of
    the remaining material which he has considered is already in the public domain, such as
    transcripts of public proceedings. There is some material, however, which Lord Justice
    Stuart-Smith refers to but which has not so far been made public. This includes
particularly advice considered by the DPP in 1990 and 1997 about whether the evidence
available would support criminal proceedings. I would be grateful for your views on
w hether that advice can be placed in the Library at the House.

W hen the report is- published, I intend to confirm that I accept the conclusions and the
reasoning behind those conclusions and that there will be no further public inquiry. It is
im portant that, as far as possible, publication of this report should draw a line under
speculation about further investigations or proceedings. I realise that both your and the
D irector’s responsibilities require you to keep open the possibility that, should anything
new emerge, you would consider it. But it is essential that I should give as firm an
indication as possible about your views at this stage. If you agree, I consider that I should
say on publication of the report that you and the Director have considered its conclusions,
and on the basis of the material which it contains, the Director consider that there is no
basis which would justify fresh criminal investigations, and that you consider that any
application to the High C ourt for a new inquest would not have any realistic prospect of
succeeding. I would be grateful for your views.

There are tw o particular issues in the report on which I would be grateful for your views.
The first concerns the process by which statements of police officers subm itted to the
inquiry were amended. The report considers this process in detail, setting out exactly how
and w hy it occurred and confirming that it had no material effect on the outcome of the
proceedings. There are bound to be questions, however, about whether anything in this
process might am ount to misconduct of a criminal or disciplinary nature. Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith considers that it would not. It would in theory be possible to instigate a
further police investigation to confirm this conclusively, but I think the outcome would be
a foregone conclusion, and I do not consider that such an investigation should be
instigated. I would be grateful for your confirmation view on this point.

The second issue concerns the technical evidence put forward by South Yorkshire police
about the state of the ground. H e suggests that the condition of the terraces and the over­
estimation of crowd capacity was worse than Taylor suggested. If that inform ation had
been available at the time, it is possible that Taylor would have attributed a greater
proportion of the blame on the club and the local authority. However, it is clear that Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith does not think the issue would have had any material effect on the
balance of conclusions of the Taylor Inquiry.

One of the observations made by Lord Justice Stuart Smith is that it is unsatisfactory to have
an inquest where there has already been an inquiry, chaired by a judge, into a major disaster.
This issue was in fact considered by a Home Office Working Group on disasters and
inquests, whose report was published last March. This recommended that, where a major
disaster has occurred, and the Lord Chancellor is able to certify that a judicial enquiry into
the disaster will also constitute sufficient investigation into the deaths, the role of the coroner
should be limited by securing the adjournment of the inquest and not requiring its
resumption except in the most exceptional circumstances.

Although further comments on the report are awaited, in responding to Lord Justice Stuart
Smith's report I propose, subject to the views of Derry Irvine, to endorse the
recommendations in principle. In the absence of a suitable legislative opportunity, there are
no early prospects of implementing the recommendations (which require primary
legislation), but I think it will be important to flag up a willingness to remove one of the
causes of delay and difficulties for the families of disaster victims.

Publication of the-report will come as a severe disappointment to the Family Support
G roup, but, however painful for them it will be, I think we must try to draw a line here, I
will w ant to emphasise that that does not mean that those responsible have escaped blame -
the Taylor inquiry was clear about that. I will want to emphasise also that we are putting
right the shortcomings in the police disciplinary system which in part enabled the officers
in charge to avoid disciplinary action. I will want nearer the time to clear w ith you the
text of m y statement, but I would be grateful for your urgent agreement in principle to
what I propose.

M y aim is to lay the report before Parliament and to make an oral statement in the week
beginning 16 February. Ann Taylor’s office have suggested 18 February. The report is
very long (over 120,000 words) and detailed, and it will be impossible for MPs to read in a
short time. But it will inevitably provoke strong feelings and requests for farther debate.
If A nn agrees, I would like to head off those protests by indicating that we would be
prepared to make tim e available for the House to debate the report.

I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister, the Lord Chancellor, the President of the
Council, the D irector of Public Prosecutions, and to Sir Richard Wilson.




                                                     /




                                     JA CK STRAW
