                                                  QUEEN ANTE'S 6.\T £
                                                  LONDON SW1H9AT



                                               5 September 1989




        ]u r
    I attach briefing in the form of lines to take on football
hooliganism for the Prime Minister's interview later this
afternoon with Mr Lloyd of the Daily Express.

     I understand that DoE are providing briefing separately on
Part I of the Football spectators Bill (ie the national
football membership scheme).

    The latest information from Essex Police is that they now
do sot suspect foul play in relation to the death of Robert
Ayling, passenger on the Tor Britannia. It appears that
Mr Ayling jumped or fell from the boat while under the
influence of alcohol and LSD. Press releases front Essex
Police and Scandinavian Seaways are attached as background.




                                        MISS C J BANNISTER




Ms Caroline Slocock
Private Secretary
10 Downing Street
LONDON 5W1
North Sea Ferry Incident


This further hooliganism by English football supporters is one
more disgraceful incidents among, I regret, far too many. The
Government is determined to take very positive action to respond
to this continuing problem. Events on the ferry taking
supporters to a World Cup match with Sweden reinforce our
conviction that the Football Spectators Bill is the right way
forward.


I understand that Essex Police, who are investigating the
incident, are satisfied that no foul   play   W3S   iHYOiYed in the
death of Robert Ayling who was seen to go overboard and is
presumed drowned.  43 persons were arrested when the Tor
Britannia docked; all have! been released without charge except
for 8 who were released on police bail in connection with drugs
and criminal damage offences,


(Background - see Essex Police and Scandinavian Seaways press
releases, attached)


Whv not withdraw or endorse hooligans* passports?


Part II of the Bill is targeted directly against convicted
football hooligans, stopping them from travelling to certain
football matches abroad Xf the courts think it right to impose a
restriction order. Withdrawing or endorsing passports could have
a much broader effect on all travel abroad by the people
concerned. That would run contrary to the principle of a
passport facilitating travel. In addition such a scheme would be
impractical given the availability of British Visitor Passports
and No-passport excursions.
Football spectators BiU ~ Part^11

Part II of the Bill will enable the courts to impose a restriction
order on someone convicted of a football related offence, where the
court considers that will help to prevent violence or disorder at
designated football matches.


The effect of an order will be to make the person report to the
police when a relfevaht feotball watch is taking plaes outside
England and Wales. It will be an offence to fail to report when
instructed.


The Bill also makes provision to impose a restriction order in
England and Wales on someone convicted elsewhere of an offence
corresponding t& a faatball related 6££$n<26

HlllsbO.gQ.uqh and Taylor


Lord Justice Taylor's interim report was published last month and
identified what had gone wrong at Hillsborough on 15 April, when 95
supporters lost their lives. His recommendations for urgent action
have been drawn to the attention of the police and the licensing
and football authorities who have been asked to do all they can to
implement them quickly.     His final report is expected around the
end of the year*
Police response to football problems


The police invest considerable effort in maintaining public order
at football matches. There is well established liaison between
forces and clubs; some 5,000 officers are typically deployed to
police football matches each Saturday during the season; and a
new central police unit, the ’National Football Intelligence
Unit', is being established to co-ordinate information on 'hard­
core* football hooligans.


Recent developments in the Criminal Law

We do not hesitate to take new legal measures to control all
types of hooliganism, where those are necessary     and can be made
effective.


In 1985, following Heysel, Parliament made it a criminal offence
to be drunk at, or on entry to, a designated football match. It
was also made illegal to bring alcohol into such matches.    That
legislation is effective and now covers journeys on coaches,
trains or minibuses going to or from football matches. [Sporting
Events (Control of Alcohol etc) Act 1985]


The Public Order Act 1586 clarified and strengthened the law on
public order.   It created a new offence of disorderly conduct to
help the police to deal with hooligan behaviour and strengthened
the provisions against incitement to racial hatred.    Guidance was
given by the Home Office last year on arrangements for bringing
persons accused of hooligan offences before th9 Courts swiftly.
Guidance was also issued to the police and the courts drawing
attention to the wide powers available to the courts, licensing
justices and police to prevent and curb disorder.
                SCANDINAVIAN
©                SEAWAYS
                DFDS Group of Companies



lO'lOa** A W A /                if. S s /r /ftjf

Tor Britannia departed Harwich, Sunday 3*“<3 September at t63Q hours for
Gothenburg in 5 w ^   m   . On board        85$ Pa*«»nS ei*s f thB ^ j o r i t y or whom
were Swedish nationals but amongst whom were approximately *50 Britons
who are believed to be football supporters travelling to Sweden to attend
the England vs Svsflsn            on Wednesday 6th September.


Following a dieturbimc* on board, at approximately 2200 hours
last evening 9 British m«l« pasigflga** V®9 gQSn tO fill 8 Y t r & W ^

A eear^ll 9 f      area was carr ie d out in conjunction with the Dutch
Coast Guard h t lic o p W r but unfortunately no-on« wg$ found.


Pf was            that     the ship would not continu* its B u r n e y t,o Cothenburg
but r«turn tc Harwich whtre it i$ exptcled to arriv« at 11&5 hours today,
Monday *ith September.


Th* British Police are awaiting the arrival of the vessel and will conduct
interviews '■••ith those concerned on board lat«r today*


For futh$r information contact Scandinavian Seaways on Harwich 2*3*56 or
589SK PoliBB frS5S flffiSft in Ch«lmsford on Chelmsford *>91*191




0JJ/0?/G9




                                                                 **   TOTRL   PftGE. 0 7   **
RELEASE                                              ESSEX FULltl!-
                                                     P.O. BOX NO, 2, HEADQUARTERS,
                                                     SPRINGFIELD, CHELMSFORD.
                                                     ESSEX
                                                     CM2 6DA
                                                     Telephone: Chelmsford (0245) 491491
                                                     Facsimile: (0245) 452259
                                                     Telex: 99235 E X P O Q G
                                                     Fre$$0fflc§>
                                                     Telephone: (Diwct) (0249) 452450
                                                                  (Out of Hours) (0845) 452276
                                                     Facsimile

                                                                                                 Date as Postmark
                 Pm   J u m fy     5    s '6 f t :       r m
  Subject:-


      Essex Police are satisfied that there was no foul play involved in the

       disappearance of Robert AYLIHG who was seen to go. overboard froa the Dfl?5 ferry
      Tor Britannia in the North Sea yeiterday.                After an air and sea search, his body
      has not been found and he is presumed drowned,                  Mr AYLING was travelling to

      Sweden with other football SuJ^OEtftlfS ffflffl DfiVftft.


      Enquiries reveal that Mr AYLING had been drinking and was under the influence of

       the drug LSD.     During the trip fighting broke out amongst the England *upporter*
      and Hr AYLING received minor facial cuts and was treated by the Ship’s aedical

      pwp&e*

      The polite have besn told by witneeees that around mid-night; a number of the ship's

      fire extinguishers were          off. Sm       m   af    these wars   «f   ehe sawder type which
      created a cloud -when hitting the £loot. At that moment someone was beard to shout
       'fire\


      Mr AYLING was then seen to run out onto the deck and to go overboard, but it is

      m       known whether he jumped, dived or fall overboard.

      DJDS refused to allow some 200 or so football fan® to continue to Sweden. Theee

      wese removed and with the assistance of the British Transport Folice were put on
      a tpecial train to London.


      As a result of this incident a tota.1 of 43 persona w*re arrested and ware taken
       to Colchester and Hanrich Police Stations.                 All have now been r«i#ae«d without
      charge with the exception of eight, who were released on police bail in connection
      with drugs and criminal damage offences.
