                            From-- T h e P rivate S e c r e t a r y




                                     CONFIDENTIAL                      H ome O ffice
                                                                      QUEEN ANNE'S GATE
                                                                       LON DO N SWIH 9 AT



                                                                      26 April 1989




                               HILLSBOROUGH ENQUIRY


        The Horae Secretary saw Lord Justice Taylor yesterday to gain some
initial impressions of the progress of Sir Feter's enquiry."' Sir Clive
Whitmore and Mr Whalley, Secretary to the enquiry, were present.

        The Horae Secretary thanked Sir Peter for agreeing to undertake the
enquiry and expressed sympathy for the difficulties he had faced in the
days since the disaster at Hillsborough.

        Sir Peter said that he would be free of judicial duties after 27
April and would be holding a preliminary hearing on 28 April to settle
issues of legal representation.    He hoped to arrange the start of the
hearings for 15 May but would hear shortly whether the police could make
the necessary arrangements by then.       Sir Peter had quickly come to
appreciate the magnitude of the task in hand, which was both more complex
and more controversial than the task faced by Popplewell.     To make the
police exercise manageable he hoped it would be possible to concentrate on
a sample of witnesses representing the full range of opinion.  If a 15 May
start could be arranged he thought that some recommendations could be made
before the new football season:       however he would welcome the Home
Secretary's views.

        The Home Secretary said he could envisage three areas which Sir
Peter might wish to cover in his interim report. The first area was the
technical and physical aspects of safety which could be given attention
before the new football season. The second was the membership scheme set
out in the Football Spectators Bill. He was neither compelled to comment
on this, nor precluded from doing so.      This was in part an enabling Bill
creating an Authority to devise a membership scheme.                     There were
consequently several stages at which the eventual form of the scheme could
be influenced.    The Government's original intention had been to obtain
Royal Assent for the Bill by July. This target had shifted to the end of
the present Session, which in practice meant October.                 If he wished,
therefore, Sir Peter would be able to express an opinion on the membership
scheme in the expectation that the Government would consider his view
before the Bill's final stages were reached.         The Home Secretary realised
that the timetable for the Bill created a difficulty             for Sir Peter. The
revised timetable would, however, make itpossible to            take account of any
comments of principle Sir Peter wished to offer in               his interim report.
Finally, Sir Peter might have other matters to raise for which legislation
might be needed but which did not relate to the membership scheme or the
contents of the Bill. Any such points could be considered for inclusion in
the Bill or perhaps in a separate B i l l at a la t e r sta ge.


                                               1   .
                                      CONFIDENTIAL
                                CONFIDENTIAL


                                     2.


        Sir Peter responded that it would be necessary to devote the early
stages of his enquiry to establishing the facts of the disaster.        There
would be much disputation about the facts and the location of responsiblity
for what happened. It should be possible for a short interim report to be
produced in time for consideration before the mid-August start of the new
season, which in practice meant early to mid-July, to cover the question of
perimeter fences and one or two important matters of police procedure.    But
it would not be possible to give as wide ranging an interim report as
Popplewell had, since in the case of the Bradford fire there had been, little
disagreement over the basic facts presented to the enquiry.      He believed
that his enquiry would in practice have to deal with the question of member­
ship cards unless this issue was specifically excluded from its terms of
reference. But he did not see how he could offer a helpful recommendation
on the subject until he had completed much of the work. If membership cards
did form part of its remit he therefore could not promise recommendations in
time for consideration within the revised timetable for the Bill. Unless
the timetable for the Bill was again changed, Sir Peter accepted that the
Government might proceed without knowledge of what he might eventually have
to say on the subject.   Sir Peter stressed that he had a completely open
mind on the membership card issue at present: he did, however, perceive
membership cards as part of a set of interlocking factors such as stadium
design and ticket arrangements.

        The Home Secretary asked Sir Peter what he would be likely to say in
the summer if the Government went ahead with the revised timetable for the
Bill   and he was asked then for a view on the membership scheme:   would he
say that he had not yet formed an opinion? Sir Peter responded that this
would probably be his answer in such circumstances, although he might say
that he had a provisional view which he was not yet ready to divulge.

        The Home Secretary asked Sir Peter whether he was really quite sure
that   it was out of the question to form and express a view on the subject
of membership cards in the three and a half months which would be available
between the start of the enquiry, assuming 15 May would be achieved and the
end of August?     Sir Peter said that this was possible, but he was not
confident that it could be achieved.     Hearing the initial evidence could
take over a month. There would be cross allegations to hear on a number of
important points before moving onto more refined areas of judgment, which
could not be a priority. Sir Peter added that Popplewell had not said that
there should be a membership scheme, but that consideration should be given
to some form of membership scheme. Sir Peter's enquiry was certain to be
presented with the argument that a membership scheme would add to the
problems of crowd control outside football grounds. Before forming a view,
he would need to hear evidence of the answer to this argument. He was not
saying that it was impossible he would have formed a view by August or
September but there appeared at the present stage to be a high likelihood
that he would need longer.

        The following additional points were made in discussion:

          (i) Sir Peter expected to find a good deal of support for
              all seater stadiums, given especially the Liverpool
              decision to convert Anfield. He did not propose to go
              into   the question of who     should pay for such
              conversions.    The Home Secretary said that      the
              Secretary of State for the Environment would be
              pursuing this issue in parallel with Sir Peter's
              enquiry, without waiting for or depending upon his
              recommendations;

                                 CONFIDENT
                                CONFIDENTIAL


                                      2.


        (ii)   The Horae Secretary explained that he had considered
               whether    to  issue some fresh guidance      to  local
               authorities on the exercise of their powers while Sir
               Peter’s interim report was awaited, given that the
                football season had several weeks to run. Instead, he
               had decided to remind local authorities of the main
               points of existing guidance.     Sir Peter agreed with
                this approach. There was a danger of further incidents
                at the important end of season matches. But the clubs
               were alert to this danger and some had already taken
                action. If it was recommended that all fences should
               be dismantled there was a danger of disorder;

        (iii) Sir Peter had agreed that       his enquiry should be
               constituted as a Departmental enquiry rather than a
               Tribunal under the 1921 Act.    Further reflection had
               led him to conclude that the 1921 Act approach might
               have been the better course, since there would be much
               crossfire and some witnesses could be reluctant to
               testify in the absence of the protection afforded by
               the 1921 Act.    However, to change now would mean
               further delay and Sir Peter was content to proceed
              with a Departmental enquiry for the present.         If
               formidable difficulties arose during the course of the
               enquiry he might have to ask for the enquiry to be put
               onto a 1921 Act basis;

        (Iv)   when he held his preliminary hearing on 28 April Sir
               Peter intended to make a statement announcing that the
               costs of witnesses would in normal circumstances be
               met from central funds. This was in keeping with the
               Popplewell precedent and been agreed with the Home
               Office. Sir Peter would also say something about the
               constructive purpose of the enquiry which he hoped
               would help to reduce tension.

        The Home Secretary thanked Sir Peter for sharing his thoughts on
how the enquiry would be taken forward. The Government would reflect on the
difficulty which remained over the timetable for the Football Spectators
Bill. The thoughts of the Home Secretary and his colleagues went with Sir
Peter in the weeks which lay ahead.

        Copies of this note go to Andrew Turnbull (No 10), Stephen Catling
(Lord President's Office), Nick Gibbons (Lord Privy Seal's Office) and
Trevor Woolley (Cabinet Office).




                                           s=>m’' S   t'-W A C.




                                               C J WALTERS


Alan Ring, Esq.

                                 CONFIDENTIAL
