The Prime Minister was concerned at the length of time it took
for her to be put fully in the picture on Saturday afternoon
and the Government's response to the Hillsborough disaster.
We agreed it would be useful if I set it out chronologically
with any lessons which occurred to me.


The Duty Clerk telephoned me a little before 1530 to report
that Ceefax was showing that the match at Hillsborough had
been stopped, that some people had been hurt, and that
pictures were now coming in on Grandstand.    Having turned on
the radio and television myself to hear the news the Duty
Clerk telephoned again a couple of minutes later to say that
Mr. Powell had already telephoned to say that Carol Thatcher
had informed the Prime Minister and that she was now watching
the events unfold on television.


I then sought to get in touch with the Home Office, South
Yorkshire police and DOE to get a fuller picture.      Neither
Home Office nor DOE were contactable until 1630 (indeed even
the duty officer at DOE had only an answerphone).      At about
that time the Duty Clerk phoned me to say that the Chief
Constable had been contacted and had reported the latest tally
of casualties which the Duty Clerk had passed on to the Prime
Minister.   Also then I was able to contact the Home
Secretary's and Mr. Ridley's offices to ensure that their
Ministers were fully informed and suggested that one of them
should go up to Sheffield that evening.     Just after 1650 the
Chief Constable phoned again with the latest figures which I
relayed to the Prime Minister.     She then raised with me
whether or not she should go.    I agreed to come back to her
when I knew other Ministers' movements.     At about 1730 the
Home Secretary came through and agreed with the Prime Minister
a joint visit to Sheffield the following morning.      Shortly
before 1800 I agreed with the Prime Minister the response for
the press, a shortened version of which went out on the later
evening news.   At 1800 Mr. Ridley's office were able to
                              -   2   -




contact Mr. Moynihan and made arrangements for him to go up
that night (he arrived at about 2230).     The rest of the
evening was, of course, spent planning for the following day.


Allowing for the fact that the South Yorkshire police lines
were jammed and, when contacted, their information was patchy,
I think there are nonetheless two lessons:


     (i)   departments need to make sure    of their own duty
           officer arrangements whereby the Secretary of State
           or the duty Minister can always be contacted
           within, say, a maximum of 20 minutes;


    (ii)   that duty private secretaries    in departments should
           be equipped with pagers, even    if not with pager and
           mobile phone, as we are.


Had both of these been available I think the very slow
response time could have been cut at least by an hour.


If you agree, I will make arrangements with departments so
that this could be set in hand should the need arise in
future.




DOMINIC MORRIS


17 April 1989




SL2AUT
