                                             D E P A R T M E N T OF TH E E N V I R O N M E N T
                                             2 MARSHAM STREET LONDON SWlP 3EB
                                                        01-276 3000
                                             My ref:
                                             Your ref:
                                                                   26 January 1990



PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL


The Rt. Hon David Waddington MP
Home Secretary
Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London SW1H 9AT




     Your Private Secretary invited comments on the further draftf
of your statement which you circulated last night. I indicated
to you when we discussed this yesterday afternoon that I did not
believe that my Secretary of State would find a draft on these
lines acceptable, and I have since confirmed with him, by
telephone, that this is so.
   i                       '.       -                    ■      •
     The central difficulty is that the Government has argued
cogently during many hours of debate in both Houses that a
National Membership Scheme will prove a powerful weapon against
football hooliganism.    In doing so, we have firmly rebutted
every one of the contrary arguments put forward by Lord Justice
Taylor except his scepticism about whether satisfactory
technology is available (Which can only be established on the
basis of a ^propfer technical appraisal of the tenders now
submitted).    If we do not now proceed with Part I of the
Football Spectators Act, our position in relation to football
hooliganism will therefore be indefensible unless we put forward
a crediBle alternative.              —— .

     Taylor, of course, provides us with such an alternative in
the form of his package' of measures against hooliganism
including new criminal offences, an extension of attendance
orders^ arid electronic tagging.    It is therefore perfectly
defensible for us nor to proceed with Part 1 of the Act

          provided we act on Taylor's proposals, and
                                'I   w h m


    -.    provided we continue to develop the Football Membership
          Scheme technology so that, if regrettably it should
          prove necessary to do so, a scheme can be introduced
          quickly.     .

     These two key issues are correctly recorded in the minutes
of the No. 10 meeting on 23 January/ and were reflected in the
draft paragraphs Chris Patten sent over to you on Wednesday
indicating how he thought this part of the Statement might read.
Chris understood from his discussions with you immediately
before his departure for Nairobi that you were able to accept
the bulk of his suggestions and that these issues would
therefore be fully reflected in vour Statement.     i am afraid,
however, that the latest draft does not achieve that.          I
recognise, of course, that you do not wish to commit yourself to
implementing the Taylor recommendations in precisely the form
which he proposed, but the present reference to looking. "...
carefully and sympathetically at the case for making these
changes gives the impression that they might not be implemented
at aj-1♦    There is no reference to further development of
Football Membership Scfieme "technology, merely the negative
statement that "Part I of the Act will remain on the Statute
Book".   If the impression conveyed by this draft were true, we
would be defenceless, if there were to be another Heysel
incident, against the charge that we had neither -followed
Taylor's recommendations nor developed our own alternative7

     In discussion with Robin Ferrers after our meeting yesterday
afternoon I had in fact accepted a draft of the relevant parts
of the statement which is attached to this letter.        it would
stand in place of the last sentence on page ^5, and the two
paragraphs on p a g e 6 of the draft circulated "Tl’st night.  The
draft attached deals ~much more satisfactorily with the two key
issues of implementation of Taylor and testing— o f the
technology7 and I fiope that: it, or something very like it, can
be substituted for the version which you have now circulated.

     I am sending copies of this letter to the Prime Minister,
the Lord President, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, the Foreign
Secretary, the Secretary of State for Scotland, the Attorney
General, the Lord Privy Seal, the Chief Whip, and to Sir Robin
Butler.




                                                CcUv,.
                                         COLIN MOYNIHAN
                                                               CONFIDENTIAL



                DRAFT


                    .   I shall look expeditiously at how best these measures can
                be implemented against the background of recent changes in the
                criminal law.I



                    I now come to the proposed Football Membership Scheme. Lord
               Justice Taylor examined the Invitation to Tender for a scheme
               which was issued by the consultants employed by the football
               authorities. He came to the conclusion that he could not support
               a scheme of that kind because: he did not believe the technology
               would work well enough to avoid the danger of congestion and
                                 < = ov-on*-*-**   o J p a u J k r fcM. C cO A . & ^   f c T U tt         c tS
               disorder.         Instead he proposes the measures to which I have
                         A
               referred.



                        The Government have decided in the light of his advice not
               to   proceed      with       the         establishment                               of   a Football      Membership
               Authority.         Instead               we        propose                   to       follow      his    strategy   of
               combining certain measures aimed directly at hooligans together
               with progress towards all-seating, improved accommodation, better
               facilities, improved arrangements for crowd control and better
               training     of   police             and         stewards,                    which        Lord    Justice    Taylor
               believes give the best                           chance                 of      eliminating         or    minimising
               football hooliganism.



                    In the meantime Part I of the Football. Spectators Act will
               remain on the statute book          iractical concerns expressed
               by Lord Justice                  :ype of scheme envisaged in the
               Invitation to Tender                                                       explored in the light of the
               available advice                                                        from the specialist companies
               who responded to                                                           Tender Tj
               ■fca   i'Mr-4




4    a   )                                                                                                                  PW .
Rtc^uo Papc*
                                                            CONFIDENTIAL                                                                f.U
                                 CONFIDENTIAL



       •*             _      {o*~
       V£ hooliganism fcs not defeated bv the alternative strategy .
proposed            in the Report
 ___---------------------- :   —
                                    Cjtnd if at aomo—
                                  f*.
                                                       ftrttMfe— jfcdbnte— a— workable
                                                  ^ t^S-4k

mefflbe^shdp-seheme_Gan-be-^©tSateed7iwe w±±l then be in a position
fee-eome bade to the^.Itease and seek the appreval -Qf the House- for




      The right course now is to implement Part II of the Act and
to give effect to Lord Justice Taylor's proposals in the way I
have indicated.       Mr. Speaker, we are giving the industry and the
clubs a final opportunity to put themselves in order.                   The public
will not forgive them if they do not now act.




                                CONFIDENTIAL
