                                                                                Cyfj
                                               QUEEN ANNE'S GATE LONDON SW!H 9AT

                                                                      16 JUN « s r



The Rt Hon John Morris QC MP
Attorney General
9 Buckingham Gate
LONDON
SW1E 6JP




THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

Thank you for your letter of 10 June about the proposed independent
examination of the alleged new evidence about the Hillsborough disaster.

I am grateful to you for your agreement in principle with what i proposed.
I understand your concerns about the terms of reference and the statutory
responsibilities which rest with you and the Director of Public Prosecutions.
Although I would prefer terms of reference which invited more explicit
recommendations, I am broadly content with the amended terms which you
proposed. I would, however, like to suggest some small changes to refer
explicitly to my role as Home Secretary, and to allow the person appointed to
advise on any other action which should be taken in the public interest. I
suggest therefore terms of reference along the following lines:

      To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
      Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 19 89 which was not available:

      (a)   To the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or

      (b)   To the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General for
            the purpose of discharging their respective statutory
            responsibilities; or

      (c)   To the Chief Officer of the South Yorkshire Police in relation to
            police disciplinary matters;
      And in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously
      available is of such significance as to justify establishment by the
      Secretary of State for the Home Department of a further Public Inquiry;
      and in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not
      previously considered by them which which may be relevant to their
      respective duties; and to advise whether there is any other action which
      should be taken in the public interest.

i would be grateful if you would confirm that you are happy with the slightly
amended version.

I am grateful to Derry Irvine for proposing that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith might
take on this task. He seems to me very suitable for what we have in mind. If
Derry is able to confirm that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith is willing to take on the
task, I suggest the next step might be for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to meet
officials to discuss his requirements. The appropriate official is Paul Pugh,
Head of the Operational Policing Policy Unit here (0 1 7 1 -2 7 3 3 1 4 1 ).

I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, the
Lord Chancellor, the President of the Council, the Minister without Portfolio, the
Secretary of State for National Heritage, the Director of Public Prosecutions and
to Sir Robin Butler.


                         y*vs>>




                                  JACK STRAW
