               covering PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL



K027                                  FROM: P J C MAWER
                                      DATE: 23 January 1990
                                        cc: Sir Robin Butler




MR TURNBULL

HILLSBOROUGH AND THE TAYLOR ENQUIRY

I attach a draft letter you may wish./ to send the Home Secretary'
                                   ’/
principal Private Secretary recording this morning's meeting at
No 10.                          /




                           P J C MAWER




               covering PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL
                      PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL



DRAFT LETTER TO:                                               / w U s 'b u



Colin Walters Esq
Principal Private Secretary
Home Office



     Tlie, Prime Minister discussed with the Home Secretary this

morning hi^sminute of 22 January about the handling of the final
report of LordSqjistice Taylor's inquiry into the Hillsborough

football tragedy. \The Lord President, Lord Privy Seal,
                   X                         V*-*
Environment Secretary X^Chief Whip (Commons) a«d Minister for

Sportywere also present.


     The Home Secretary said that Lord Justice Taylor had ,
X                                      fct*
concluded that he could not support the implementation of^Part I
                                                                 «


of the Football Spectators Act 1989.       Lord Justice Taylor had
                                                No-'VSCv-aA.
looked at the invitation to tender for the Ftoextefeall Membership

Scheme and had expressed grave doubts about the adequacy of the

technology involved, the feasibility of the scheme, its impact on

police resources and its implications for crowd control and

safety.   He doubted whether the scheme would eliminate
hooliganism inside or outside grounds.^f Lord Justice Taylor had

put forward a variety of recommendations for improving crowd

control and safety, including fcfee progressive iftti"odu'ct-±-©fi—of

all-seat accommodation, and the establishment of an independent




                      PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL
                     PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL



body to supervise the responsibilities of local authorities for
safety of sports grounds.   Preliminary advice was that even if

the football membership scheme was not set up, the Football

Licensing Authority could be appointed to exercise this
responsibility, at least in respect of football grounds.     There

were also a number of recommendations directed to the criminal

law, such as the creation of new offences covering certain types
of behaviour at football matches: while it was likely that these
were already caught by the existing law, the proposals could be
implemented if that was thought desirable.      Similar
considerations attached to Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations

on ticket sales and attendance centre orders.     Together therefore

there was the basis of a convincing package which could be put

forward to Parliament./? As to the handling of the report, the
Government had all along made clear that Part I of the Football
Spectators Act was an enablinc             ’’       posed that the
Government should accept Lord Justice Taylor's advice then. Part I

should not be implemented at least at this stage.     He would make

clear in an early statement, however, that Part I would be left

on the Statute Book and could be implemented at a later date if

necessary.   Meanwhile the Government would rigorously pursue that

-percfc of Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations that fell to it,
much of which built on action which the Government already had in

hand.




                     PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL
                                 PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL




        The Secretary of State for the Environment said that Lord

Justice Taylor's report was flawed in a number of respects.
Nevertheless, he accepted the Home Secretary's conclusion that it
                                          t<la^VNOv_A-
would not be possible to proceed with the football Membership

Scheme in the face of Lord Justice Taylor's findings.

Hooliganism remained a serious problem, however, which the
forthcoming World Cup would emphasise. A convincing alternative

package would therefore need to be assembled which picked up Lord
Justice Taylor's proposals afi4—should a 1                               4nve3rve -testJjgg__gpme
ty ^ e s ^ rf-n ^ e m t ^ r s liip '"'SCtTems~'Trrtlr"± iid l ^ i d u a l --f 0 0 tb a4^e-lrVit>g---tee~--see



It would also be highly desirable to implement Part II of the

1989 Act on Restriction Orders before the end of the current

football season, in order that the provisions were in force

before the World Cup.



f       in discussion, the following points were made:


        a.       Lord Justice Taylor's report contained a number of

        factual inaccuracies and it was doubtful whether some of his

        recommendations would prove effective.                               It was right that an

        opportunity should be found to expose these shortcomings,
        although the Home Secretary's statement should not itself




                                  PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL
                  PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL



dwell on them.     One means of doing this might be if an

Adjournment Debate were mounted on the report shortly after

its publication.      The points could also be brought out in

response to questions about the report.


b.     It was unclear whether Lord Justice Taylor would be

holding a press conference about his report.       There was no

doubt that if he did so he would be questioned closely by

journalists about a number of his findings.


c.     None of the arguments advanced by Lord Justice Taylor

in support of his conclusion on the football membership
scheme was novel and the Government had won the- dobata tm

all of them in Parliament.      It-wa-
                                     3 e-
                                        l-ear-.—        that the



scheme -in                                                  But
                 — --------        —-He—A-J-tf
     was right that the enabling powers in^the Act should be

kept in reserve, in case Lord Justice Taylor's

recommendations proved ineffective or advances were made in

technology or otherwise wiiich overcame Lord Justice Taylor's
             (w         V}                        fa fcrcfVWA
objections.



                                                       would

have to be done with the consent of the football clubs
                                                            ZXjr*   1



                  PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL
                    PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL



concerned.    This might be difficult to get in the wake of
publication of the report                        U* &-*-
but                      S                '


e.    The great majority of Lord Justice Taylor's
recommendations built on work which the Government had

already set in hand.             This point should be brought out

clearly in the Home Secretary's statement.                 The report also
made clear that the primary responsibility for^tackling
hooligan behaviour lay on the clubs.             Implementation of Lord

Justice Taylor's recommendations would have substantial cost
consequences, about which clubs would be bound to protest.
             L m«   l./ff iff—                                 , Jr   y
-B»t the reportimade no firm recommendation for Government
financial assistance to the clubs, and it was right that the
onus for finding the money should be on the clubs, who were

earning very substantial sums, for example, from the sale of

rights to televise matches.


      Lord Justice Taylor had suggested that an independent

body should supervise the responsibilities of local

authorities for the safety of all grounds covered by the

Safety of Sports Grounds Act.             This recommendation would

require legislation, however, and it was not clear that

there was a case for implementing the recommendation




                    PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL
                            PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL



            immediately in respect of sports other than football (where
            section 13 of the 1989 Act provided the necessary powers).



       g 3$.     The Opposition would be bound to seize on the report to

            try to embarrass the Government.                      There was a risk that the

            contents of the report would leak if publication was
            delayed.   Nevertheless, the Government could be criticised

            if it rushed to publish the report without making an
            adequate number of printed versions of the report available

            through HMSO.   On balance it was preferable to hold to the

            plan to publish the report immediately sufficient properly

            printed versions of it were available.


jT i        The Prime Minister, summing up the discussion, said that it

 was clear that Lord Justice Taylor's report was flawed in a
 number of respects.         Its inaccuracies could be brought out in

 response to questions following the Home Secretary's statement.

 Nevertheless it was clear that the Government could not proceed

 with Part I of the Football Spectators Act in the face of Lord
       /v
 Justice Taylor's findings.           Part I was, however, an enabling
 provision, as the Government had made clear all along, and it was

 right that it should be left on the Statute Book for use at a
                                  0 '»t A   -h ie   sH j3c-T>~.             .

 later date should this seem desirable.^ The Home Secretary's

 statement should make clear that for the present the Government




                            PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL
                    PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL



would proceed expeditiously with a package based on Lord Justice
Taylor's recommendations, many of which built on action the

Government had already put in hand.   In addition to Lord Justice

Taylor's own recommendations, the package could embrace further

testing of membership schemes provided that clubs were willing to
assist with this.   The Home Secretary's statement should make

clear that the report identified that the primary responsibility
for the present situation and for remedying it lay with the clubs
themselves.   The Home Secretary should make his statement on

Monday, 29 January and should take advantage of an earlier
Question to acknowledge that he had received the report and to

set out the expected timetable for publishing it.   He should

circulate the text of his draft statement in advance to

interested colleagues.


6~   I am"copying this letter^js^ the Private Secretaries of

Ministers present^atthe meeting and the Secretary of State for

Scotland, and to Sip^obih^utler and Philip Mawer (Cabinet

Office) . _ .. — .............                      ^




                     PERSONAL AND CONFIDENTIAL
