                          CONFIDENTIAL



PRIME MINISTER



TAYLOR REPORT:   HOME SECRETARY'S STATEMENT

The Home Secretary has circulated a draft of his statement -
Flag A. A letter setting out DoE reservations and an
alternative draft is at Flag     There are two main points of
disagreement:

          how does Government present its decision not to
          proceed with the National Membership Scheme?

          what degree of welcome is given to Taylor's suggested
          offences and sanctions?

The first of these is the most crucial. The Home Office have
adopted a minimalist route - see page 6. In effect, they are
                     -—        »".■■■.—
saying that Taylor has said he cannot support, we will
therefore not proceed, but will leave Part 1 on the Statute
Book in case we have to return to the matter.

DoE think this is too much of a retreat. By making no
reference to efforts to overcome the shortcomings identified by
Taylor we do not give credibility to the "finger on the
trigger" Mr Patten referred to at the meeting. The Home Office
argue~that it is unrealistic to expect an early return to the
NMS, that it is better to accept this with good grace in order
to concentrate attention on the measures already in train and
the adoption of the further measures recommended by Taylor.

I think DoE are right in arguing that the Home Office have gone
too far in dumping the scheme and in leaving too little by way
of threat. A reference to further work is essentiaT.

On the other hand, the DoE draft is open to the objection that
it is too dismissive of the Taylor^criticisms of the scheme
(what he referred to as "grave doubts" and "serious misgivings"
appear merely as "practical concerns"). There is also a
flavour in the DoE draft that it is all just a matter of

                          CONFIDENTIAL
                          CONFIDENTIAL

                             -    2    -




technology and that better turnstiles and a new smart card
will sort it all out. The reference in their draft to seeking
the approval of the House for the scheme gives the impression
that all that is needed is to re-present the existing scheme
with a few technical modifications.

I suggest that you adopt DoE's draft - its reference to an
alternative strategy is helpful - but with some amendments
which recognise that quite a lot of work may be needed to get
the scheme into a shape which could command support. I have
marked my suggestions in manuscript.    f         iaJLfdA

 On the second issue, the Home Office do not believe new       vr‘
 offences are necessary as they can be encompassed within
 existing legislation, and I detect a lack of enthusiasm for the
 proposal on attendance orders. They are therefore trying to
 avoid too much of a commitment to adopting them. DoE want to
"show greaterwillingness to~implement the proposals in order to
 build a credible alternative which would justify the shelving
 of the NMS.

I think the DoE do go too far in committing Government to
implementing the proposaTs7~but equally the Home Office's "look
 v — "  ’
carefully and sympathetically at the case for making these
changes" is Yes Minister-speak for kicking into the long grass.
I suggest
     "I~shall look urgently and sympathetically at these
     proposals".

Content to lean towards DoE, subject to these modifications?

There are also a number of drafting changes which would improve
the text:                    >—       -- —         ---■     ....

i.    Page 1, para 2.
  ,   Although the reference to "careful and thorough analysis"
      is literally correct as it refers to the history of
      hooliganism, it could be quoted back in the context of the
           -------------T __
                           _ _
      NMS. £—suggest 1^

                          CONFIDENTIAL
                                                                                                       %
                                        CONFIDENTIAL i     _
                                                         V^/N—
                                                                 V ..   j —   v/u^
                                                                              k   ** /9   .A   c   ^




                                                - 3 -


                  "... for the report, which sets out clearly why we have
                  had ...".
~P^r^s*u. **>■> ~o                 Cb s+*H r4
         11   .   Page 2, middle PJ^agragh^ „ ^ w    {_ b,   ,
                   [t would be helpful^to include a criticism of one of the
                  major vices of modern soccer, the endemic habit of
                  disputing referees' decisions.

      iii. Page 2.
           The Government should take more credit for promoting all-
           seater stadia. Two lines from the bottom to read:
           "... and points out that Section 11 of the Football
           Spectators Act specifically provides for this".

      iv.         Top of page 3.
     ^            Include a reference to large and growing TV monies.

                  Top of page 4.
                  Again it is possible to take credit for provisions in the
                  Act:
                  "Lord Justice Taylor welcomed the establishment of the
                  Football Licensing Authority but would like us to go
                  further and extend its remit to cover ...".

     vi.          Further down this paragraph which discusses the extension
                  to other sports, replace "we will have to consider the
     ✓            matter further" by "we will have to consider whether this
                  is justified".

     vii. Bottom of page 4.
          Include a reference to the cost of policing or the numbers
          of police required (about 5,000 each Saturday).

     viii. Top of page 5.
\/        Add reference to the banning of alcohol.



     ANDREW TURNBULL
     26 January 1990

                                       CONFIDENTIAL
