                                       CONFIDENTIAL




                               lO DOWNING STREET
                                   LONDON SW1A2AA
From the Private Secretary                                  17 April 1989




                             HILLSBOROUGH GROUND DISASTER

         The Prime Minister held a meeting with Ministerial
colleagues this morning to discuss the Government's response
to the disaster at Hillsborough ground on 15 April.             Present
were the Home Secretary, the Secretary of State for the
E n v i r o n m e n t , the Lord President, the Chief Whip and the
M in i s t e r for Sport.

        I should be grateful if recipients of this letter
w o u ld restrict circulation to those officials with a strict
operational need to k n o w .

        The Home Secretary said that in the atmosphere of
general shock and sorrow after the disaster there was,
temporarily, a time when attitudes would be more flexible
and the possibilities of securing support from other
political parties and the footballing authorities for new
steps might be greater than for some time past.     The first
element in a new initiative would need to be the move away
from terraces in games.     There needed to be better
leadership in the football world.     It was also for
consideration whether there were implications for the
Football Spectators Bill.     One possible way forward would be
to hold a meeting of the Football Association and League and
set a programme, w orking with Government and money from the
Football Trust to carry through the abolition of terraces.
The Football Spectators Bill should carry on but it should
be m a d e clear that implementation would follow, and take
account of, Lord Justice Taylor's recommendations.     In
d is c ussion the following points were made:

    - It was important that Lord Justice Taylor should have
      the broadest terms of reference to enable him to
      consider the circumstances of the disaster, enquire
      into the events at Sheffield and to draw such
      conclusions as he saw fit.  Lord Justice Taylor would
      however need to be asked to produce his report
      briskly.

    - The argument would be advanced that Part I of the
      Football Spectators Bill might pre-judge the
      conclusions of Lord Justice Taylor's Inquiry.      These
      arguments were misgu i d e d since Part I flowed from the


                                       CONFIDENTIAL
                             CONFIDENTIAL
                                 - 2 -


     recommendations, in Justice Popplewell's earlier
     report, for a m e m b e r s h i p scheme. Others who were
     already opposed to the Bill would seek to make capital
     out of the Hillsborough disaster by asserting that the
     disaster had been caused by crowd--problems outside the
     ground and that there was the risk that a National
     Membership Scheme mi g h t make things worse.       There would
     be the desire, from some Government supporters for a
     delay in the passage of the Bill until Lord Justice
     Taylor had reported, or at least had been prepared to
     offer a view, on the public safety aspects of the
     membership scheme.        Against that, the Hillsborough
     disaster had taken place under existing arrangements;
     it would be unfair to ask Lord Justice Taylor to give
     an off the cuff reaction - he would want quite
     reasonably to take all the evidence before coming to
     his own conclusions.          A delay of that length would
     jeopardise both Part I of the Bill and Part II, which
     appeared to command all-party support but which it
     would be impractical to separate at the current stage
     of the Bill's passage.

   - There was in any case no need to defer the Bill on
     account of the Inquiry.  Any recommendations on the
     Membership Scheme could be taken fully into account
     because the Bill contained an "Appointed Day" Clause.
     It was therefore open to the Government to press ahead
     and pass the Bill but not to implement the provisions
     which the enabling powers gave until Lord Justice
     Taylor's recommendations had been made and digested.
     It should still be possible on this basis to stick to
     the target of implementation of the B i l l ’s provisions
     from Spring 1990.

   - It might however be unseemly to press ahead with Third
     Reading in the Lords of a contentious Bill on football
     at a time when grief and passions aroused by the
     Hillsborough disaster ran so high.  There was a strong
     case for deferring, for a week or two, the Third
     Reading debate.

   - In view of the very strong arguments from all quarters
     about the self-evident dangers of football terraces
     there was a very strong case for going ahead now, ahead
     of Lord Justice Taylor's report, with moves to secure
     their abolition in major grounds.

        Summing up the mee t i n g the Prime Minister said that
Ministers were agreed that the Home Secretary's statement to
the House should make clear that the Government remained
firmly of the view that the future of football remained with
an all-membership scheme at designated grounds.          It should
also make clear that, in the light of Hillsborough, it now
seemed necessary to move to an all-seat game w i th i n the
ma j o r grounds.  The Government would need to hold up further
consideration of the Bill briefly while it considered how
the Bill might be strengthened to that end or whether some
other route, such as a M o tion by both Houses, would be the
best means of signalling Parliament's determi n a ti o n to see


                             CONFIDENTIAL
                              CONFIDENTIAL
                                 - 3 -


the abolition of terraces at major grounds.      The Home
S ecretary and the Secretary~~of State for the Environment
wer e invited to examine urgently with legal advisers the
a ppropriate route for licensing powers__to deal with
terraces.   It was also right that Third Rea d i ng in the Lords
should be deferred for a w eek or two while the nation marked
its shared concern at the Hillsborough disaster.

        I am copying this letter to/Roger Bright (Department of
the Environment), Steven Catling (Lord President's Office),
Mu r d o Maclean (Chief Whip's Off ice) ,y Philip Staiffp (Office of
the Minister for Sport), Nick Gibbofis (Lord Privy Seal's
Office) and Trevor W o o l l ey (Cabinet Office).




                                   (DOMINIC MORRIS)




P h i l i p Mawer, Esq.,
Home Office.




                           CONFIDENTIAL
