                                                                -f*   ft




LORD HARMAR-NICHOLS' AMENDMENTS


No, 1 is introductory to the other amendments.   It does not,   by
itself, require the phasing of the scheme.

No. 44 makes it obligatory for the scheme to be introduced in
stages. It amends Cl 5(2) of the Bill which is concerned with
those matters for which the scheme must provide. It adds to that
group a requirement that


"The scheme must make provision        for its implementation in
stages,   following   an   investigation  and   report  by   the
administrator on the best methods of achieving a phased and
orderly introduction of the scheme;"


DOE . lawyers have spoken with Parliamentary Counsel.      As I
understand it, his advice is that if the Bill were to be amended
to require the phasing of the scheme. Clause 5 would not be the
appropriate place. The Bill would be unworkable if Clause 5 were
to be amended in this way.

No.65 deals with the matters which the administrator must
investigate and report on, as required by No.44. It requires him
to examine whether phasing should be achieved on the basis of one
or more of the following:


       (a) ground capacity;

       (b) present membership of the club; and

       (c) average attendance at home games over the past three
       seasons.


Nos. 86, 87 and 89, taken together, remove the provisions
bringing Part I of the Bill into force. They appear designed to
be an- alternative means of achieving phasing, to amendments 44
arid 65.

Nos. 86 and 87 delete the provisions which bring into force (a)
the offences under Part I (in clauses 2 and 7); and (b) the rest
of Part I .

No.89 replaces the deleted provisions by a provision that the
Secretary of State may not bring Part I into force until the
administrator has investigated and reported to the Secretary.of
State on the desirability and feasibility of implementing its
'provisions •in four stages: - 1st stage - 1st Division; 2nd stage
 -2nd Division; 3rd stage - 3rd Division and 4th stage - 4th
Division. But it does not go on to deal with how or when Part I
will come into force; they provide no means for it to do so.
These amendments are also unworkable in another sense. The
Administrator cannot be appointed until Part I has come into
effect - here it says that before bringing Part I,into effect the
Administrator must do certain things - it doesn’t work.
