                                                                $   /                     ^
                                                                        * MARSHAM s t r e e t
                                                                        LONDON SW 1P 3EB
                                                 CONFIDENTIAL           01-212 3434

                                                                        My rof:
                   Steven Catling
                                                                        Your ref:
                   Private Secretary to the Lord President
                   Privy Council Office
                   Whitehall
                   London SW1A 2AT



                                                                                  Z Z m labs



                   FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL ,/    L   C

                   Andrew Turnbull's l,e*tter to me of 18 May recorded that the Prime
                   Minister had agreed that there should be an announcement this week
                   of the Government's intention to resume Parliamentary
                   consideration of the Football Spectators Bill.

                   I understand that the Business Managers in the Lords are proposing
                   that there should be a very brief statement in the Lords either
                   tomorrow or on Wednesday to the effect that Third Reading of the
                   Bill will be on Friday 16 June and referring to^efssociated PQ
                   Answer.  There, will then be written answers to inspired PQs in
                   both Houses the same afternoon.

                   My Secretary of State agrees that it would be helpful to make a
                   brief announcement about the Government's intentions in relation
                   to the Bill/ rather than simply mention the date of the Third
                   Reading in Forthcoming Business in the Lords.  We said there will
                   be a pause in the Bill's proceedings following the Hillsborough
                   disaster and there will have been a gap of more than two months
                   between Report Stage and Third Reading.  In the circumstances a
                   brief announcement seems appropriate.

                   This would allow Ministers to take the initiative by announcing
                   the Government's intention to return the Bill to provide for two
                   Parliamentary debates following the receipt of Lord Justice
                   Taylor's final report and to ensure that we can then take account
                   of relevant recommendations that he may make.  If we volunteer no
                   information about these plans now, we will be pressed to do so
                   over the next three weeks and part of the picture will emerge when
                   Government amendments are put down for Third Reading in the Lords.
                   That would leave it open to the Bill's opponents to take the
                   initiative and puts us on the defensive.




     100X                                     CONFIDENTIAL


RECYClfD P A K *
                           CONFIDENTIAL


My Secretary of State would therefore prefer to take a positive
line on the amendments which Ministers have decided to make by
giving the attached draft answer to inspired PQs in both Houses.
Subject to the views of his colleagues/ he will propose to make
this announcement on Wednesday.

Copies of this letter and the attachement go to Andrew Turnbull
(No 10)/ Colin Walters (Home Office)/ Carys Evans (Chief
Secretary's Office)/ Nick Gibbons (Lord Privy Seal), Murdo Maclean
(Chief Whip's Office)/ Philip Stamp (Mr Moynihan's office) and*
Trevor W o o l l y and Shaun Munday (Cabinet Of f ice)    ^




ALAN RING
Private Secretary




                          CONFIDENTIAL
 DRAFT PQpfe


 To ask [the Secretary of State for the Environment]            [Her Majesty
 Government] whether [he]      [they] propose(s)     any changes to the
 Football Spectators Bill,      following the Hillsborough disaster.


 ANSWER


 My Right Hon Friend, Lord       Denham,   [has given notice]     [will give
 notice]    that Third Reading of the Football Spectators Bill is
 [provisionally] set for Friday 16 June.


There has been a pause in the Bill's proceedings following the
Hillsborough disaster but the Government believes that it should
resume its progress next month.         The need for the measures
proposed in the Bill to deal with football hooliganism has been
further demonstrated by recent incidents of violence inside and
outside football grounds.        The government believe that it is
essential that the Bill should be enacted this session.


The timetable will make it possible for us to propose amendments
to the Bill to deal with any relevant r e c o m m e n d a t i o n s which Lord
Justice Taylor may make in an interim report on the Hillsborough
disaster,    which require legislation and which the Government
accepts.


We will propose amendments to the Bill to provide two further
opportunities for Parliament to debate and vote on the national
membership scheme,    after receipt of Lord Justice Taylor's final
report: the first before the Football Membership Authority is
appointed and is required to submit a scheme for approval;             the
second following my approval of the scheme submitted to£meJ £jV\y
Amendments to achieve these two further opportunities for
Parliament to consider the scheme will be put down for Third
Reading jjTn another placeT] Yje will also propose further amendment
to the    Bill, at a later stage, to ensure that any relevant
recommendations which Lord Justice Taylor may make in his final
report and which the Government accepts may be taken inta account
before the scheme is approved.
