PRIME MINISTER




FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL


The Lord President and the other Ministers concerned with the
Bill have had a meeting to discuss timetabling and are coming
to see you at 9.30 am so that a position can be established to
put to Cabinet at 10.00 am.          Bernard will be under strong
pressure at 11.00 to give an indication of Cabinet's thinking.


The Chief Whip is still in pessimistic mood.          He believes that
if a vote were taken now the Government could not achieve a
second reading.       He still believes that as the wider messages
of the incident sink in, in particular the contribution of
crowd behaviour, some- of those drifting away can be won back.
The current expectation is that Lord Justice Taylor will be
able to produce an interim report, mainly on physical aspects
of security, in June or July,' with his final report at the end
                  .   .     _   _

of the year.   The timetabling options are:


  (i)   Third reading in the Lords by 8 May with second reading
        in the Commons not long after with the aim of achieving
        Royal Assent by July.         This would allow the Order
        setting up the football membership authority to be
        debated in the overspill which in turn would allow a
        membership Scheme to be run on a trial basis in April
        1990 so that it can start in earnest with the new
        Season in August 1990.


        The advantage of this is that it keeps up momentum and
        ensures implementation of the Scheme at the start of
        the 1990/91 Season.         The disadvantage is that it is
        unlikely that any account could be taken of the Taylor
        report in the Bill - indeed the interim report could
        come out at some awkward moment like third reading.          It
                                -   2   -




         should be possible to take account of the Taylor
         interim recommendations in the design of the Scheme.


 (ii)    Delay third reading in the Lords a bit and aim to
         achieve Royal Assent in the overspill with the Order
         being debated at the start of the new Session.            This
         would still require second reading and some Committee
         work before the Recess but it might be possible to
         confine this to $art           This would allow
         recommendations from the interim Taylor report to be
         reflected in the Bill (though some of the
         recommendations might be outside its scope).           The
         disadvantage is that a trial run in April 1990 would be
                                                           'I

         unlikely and the start of the Scheme would be delayed
         until1 a few months into the 1990/91 season.           It would
         still not be possible to take account of
         recommendations in the full report.


(iii)    Drop the Bill and reintroduce it in the next Session.
         This loses momentum completely and throws away what has
         been achieved in the Lords.        Would allow the full
         Taylor report to be taken account of but probably
         delays the Scheme by a whole year.


The meeting is likely to be a re-run of Monday with you having
to stiffen the resolve of doubters.




ANDREW TURNBULL
19 April 1989
KAYAUI
