                                CONFIDENTIAL
                                                  fsC   2 MARSHAM      STREET
                                                        LOND

  CNiviaC5                                              01-276 3 000


                                                        M y ref-

                                                        Your ref •




The Rt Hon Douglas Hurd MP
Home Office
Queen Anne 1s Gate
London
SW1                                                                May 1989




                                  \

FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL AND SAFETY AT FOOTBALL GROUNDS


The letter from my private secretary to the Prime Minister's of
17 May said that I would discuss with you the relative merits of
using the licensing provisions of the Football Spectators Bill or
the Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 to achieve any amendments
to legislation on safety which Lord Justice Taylor may recommend.
Having now given further thought to this subject, I think that we
have to look at these possibilities in the context of the
relationship between the licensing authority which the Bill
presently  proposes  and   local  authorities  who  issue  safety
certificates under the Act.

In organisational terms,       I think that we have three options:


             A. maintain the existing role of local authorities as
             "safety authorities" under the Safety of Sports Grounds
             Act and run alongside them a separate licensing authority
             under the Football Spectators Bill, with a procedure for
             resolving disputes between them;

             B. take away local authorities' safety role in relation to
             designated football grounds and give it to a new national
             safety authority,    for which we would provide in the
             Football   Spectators   Bill  and  which  would   also  be
             responsible for the licensing functions already in the
             Bill;
        C. give the Bill's licensing authority the additional task
        of ensuring that local authorities' were carrying out
        their responsibilities under the Safety of Sports Grounds
        Act in such a way as to achieve a consistent standard of
        safety at designated football grounds.


The House authorities have taken such a generous view of the
possibility for extending the Football Spectators Bill to cover
safety matters that it may be that, in legal terms, any of these
options could be achieved by using the Bill. Whether they are
politically achievable, or desirable,    is of course    another
matter.


A. Keep the licensing and safety authorities separate

This is the line that we have taken in the passage of the Bill so
far. We ^ have argued that there was no reason why different
authorities should not work together in dealing with football
grounds as other licensing authorities do when working in similar
areas.  I am afraid that the Hillsborough disaster,         and the
unsubstantiated assertions that the national membership scheme
 would have made it worse", have increased the risk that a small
number of local^ authorities might seek to use their role as
 safety authorities" to disrupt the national membership scheme
for example by refusing safety certificates to football grounds
on the basis that the national membership scheme was "Unsafe".
Sheffield and Lewisham have already made noises about t h i s .

We have, of course, always said that we would not introduce the
national membership scheme until we were satisfied that it was
workable, ^ and safe and we would not expect       a mischievous
intervention ^by a local authority of this kind to stand up to
judicial review. We could also take steps to avoid confrontation
between the Bill's licensing authority and local authorities by
inserting in the Bill some form of appeal in the event of a
disagreement - to the court or perhaps to me, if I do not take on
the licensing function. This would not of course eliminate the
potential for conflict.

If we were to pursue this option, and Lord Justice Taylor were to
make acceptable recommendations specifically about the, contents
of safety certificates, you would presumably wish to use the
powers which I understand that you have as a result of the Fire
S a f e t y _ and Safety of Places of Sport Act 1987, to direct local
authorities to act upon the recommendations. As far as a move
towards all—seater stadia is concerned, I would prefer to use the
licensing authority established by the Football Spectators Bill,
because I think that this is an issue which is best tackled on a
national basis.

I recognise that the more that we extend the powers of the Bill's
licensing authority, the greater the potential for confusion and
conflict between it and local "safety authorities". In view of
these potential problems I have concluded that we should not
pursue this option.
B.   A national safety authority for football grounds

If we were starting from scratch now, rather than with a Bill
that has already almost completed its passage through the Lords,
this is the option that I would propose to you - a single
national authority to deal with both the licensing of designated
football grounds for the national membership scheme and with
safety matters at those same grounds.       I am aware that the
Popplewell report was broadly supportive of the working of the
Safety of Sports Grounds Act. But I understand that there has
been criticism of it since then,        from inside and outside
football,  on the grounds that it is inconsistently applied
between local authorities. The Hillsborough disaster itself is
obviously further cause for anxiety. And the more that we
consider what needs to be done to deal with both hooliganism and
safety at football grounds, the more that I think that they
should be looked at together from a national perspective. A
national authority could,    of course,   carry forward whatever
safety measures Taylor recommended.

I recognise, however, that it may be politically difficult to
adapt the Football Spectators Bill to make such a radical
amendment to the Safety of Sports Grounds Act in the Bill, in
advance of Lord Justice Taylor's final report. If we attempted to
do so, we would find it difficult to resist the criticism that we
were anticipating Taylor- in a major respect. I£ Taylor does in
fact recommend a national safety authority in place of local
authorities,  I would hope that we could take the necessary
legislation through very quickly. In the meantime, I think that
the most we can do is my third option.


C. Give the Bill's licensing    authority   power   to   monitor   local
"safety authorities"

Subject to your views, I have it in mind that we might add to the
functions of the licensing authority for which the Bill currently
provides, two additional functions in respect of safety: (i) a
duty to ensure that safety certificates are being applied in such
a way as to achieve a consistent standard of safety at football
grounds designated under the Football Spectators Bill; and (ii) a
power to require that additional .■ safety measures which the
authority considers necessary are taken.

The licensing authority would need to employ an inspectorate to
monitor clubs' compliance with the national membership scheme,
the   operation  of   the  safety   certificate  and   any  other
requirements which the authority had imposed. The authority's
powers would have to be drawn wide enough to enable us to ensure
that local authorities could not use their safety certificates to
disrupt the national membership scheme and that decisions taken
by the national licensing authority would take precedence. The
licensing authority would monitor local authorities' performance
in granting and operating safety certificates and enforce any
directions which you might make about the contents of safety
certificates in the light of Taylor. The second power should
enable the licensing authority, inter alia, to require selected
clubs to move towards all-seater stadia, which I understand may
not be within the scope of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act.

This would no doubt be resisted by the local authority lobby, it
would be said that we were interfering with local authorities'
safety role, in advance of the Taylor report, to protect the
national membership scheme. But I think that we could resist such
criticism on the grounds that a nationally consistent approach to
safety, as well as to counter-hooliganism measures, at football,
grounds is desirable whatever Lord Justice Taylor recommends and
that we are leaving the primary responsibility        for safety
certificates with local authorities. I do not think that it would
be appropriate to make the establishment of the authority with
these functions contingent on Lord Justice Taylor's final report
but it would, along with the rest of the Bill, be the subject of
commencement order provisions (though not in this case, 'to
Parliamentary procedure).

If you agree that this is the right approach to pursue, I suggest
that our officials should work up a detailed proposal for
collective Ministerial approval and explore possible amendments
to the'Bill with Parliamentary Counsel. I think that a licensing
authority of' the kind that I _ am proposing would be more
appropriately housed in an NDPB, to which you and I would both'
make appointments, than in a Government Department, though I
share the Prime Minister's h es i ta ti on .about creating another new
public body. We would of course consult the Treasury about this
proposal.

I would not wish to contemplate giving powers of this kind to the
Football  Membership  Authority which will      run the  national
membership scheme itself, unless we also had to take over the
running of the Football Membership Authority. For the moment, I
continue to hope that we can leave the Football Membership
Authority to the football authorities though I shall wish to take
a close interest in its composition and constitution and it may
be desirable to appoint some of the same people to the licensing
authority and the Football Membership Authority. We may need to
amend the Bill to ensure that this is possible.


Conclusion

Are you content for us to work towards option (C) as proposed in
paragraph 13 above? I am copying this letter to the Prime
Minister and the Ministers present at her meeting of 9 May and to
the Chief Secretary to the Treasury and to Sir Robin Butler.

                                      ■- )    S > v \ ^ \A /


                                                        \J1\
                                 NICHOLAS RIDLEY
                                                                    \
                                       \y O   ...C -X
