                                                                                                           Q
                                                                  D EPA R TM EN T O F THE E N V IR O N M E N T
                                                                                                                      \
                                                                                                                      13
                                                                                                                           c
                                                                  2 M A RSH A M S T R E E T L O N D O N SW1P 3EB
                            <S2
                                                                                  01-276 3 0 0 0

                                                                  My re f:
                           ^C R E TA P ^S                         Your ref:




                            Miss Caroline Slocock
                            Private Secretary to the
                             Prime Minister
                            10 Downing Street                                          ^
                            LONDON                                                         September 1989
                            SW1A 2AA




                            Football Hooliganism:     Ferry incident

                            I enclose a copy of the statement which Mr Moynihan is issuing to
                            the press at lunch time today and which he mentioned on the phone
                            to Bernard Ingham this morning.

                            Mr Moynihan also mentioned       to Mr Ingham England's match against
                            Holland in Rotterdam on 13      December. He is planning to write to
                            Mr Millichip, Chairman of       the Football Association, later this
                            week to ask them to cancel       this match.

                            I am copying    this   letter   to Catherine      Bannister        at    the       Home
                            Office.

                                                             V



                                                                  PHILIP STAMP
                                                                  Private Secretary




        100%




R e c y c l e d Pa p e r
STATEMENT FROM MR MOYNIHAN



Colin Moynihan,   Minister for Sport,     today reaffirmed the

Government's determination to take tough action against

football hooligans.   Commenting on the incidents which took

place on board the Tor Britannia, he said:


"I deplore the disgraceful incidents which took place aboard

the Tor Britannia on Sunday evening.      it is intolerable that

holiday makers and other travellers should be terrorised and

delayed by the disgraceful behaviour of English football

l^oligaris.

"The Government is determined to pursue its tough package of

measures dealing with football hooliganism.      The Football

Spectators Bill currently before Parliament will provide a

major deterrent to incidents of hooliganism overseas.     For

the first time the courts will be able to stop convicted

hooligans from travelling to matches abroad for up to 5

years.   If the courts make a restriction order those

convicted will have to report to police stations when key

international matches are being played.      This will be a far

better deterrent than attempting to withdraw passports under

present arrangements when those concerned can simply apply

for a British Visitors Passport at a Post Office."
FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL: BULL POINTS



-         The Bill was introduced in to the House of Lords on 16
           January has completed Commons Committee Stage and awaits
           remaining stages in the spill over period;

          The Bill provides:-
                       i)      the statutory framework for a national membership
                       scheme for football spectators to be drawn up in detail by
                       the Football Membership Authority established by the Bill
                       to administer the scheme;
                       ii)     the courts with power to impose restriction orders
                       on convicted hooligans to prevent them travelling to
                       matches abroad for up to 5 years.

■-*       The Bill proposed that everyone who attends a designated
           match in England and Wales should be a member of the scheme,
           or otherwise authorised by the scheme, and that designated
           matches should be played only on licensed football grounds.
           Troublemakers inside and outside the ground, would be banned
           from membership and thereby prevented from attending games;

-         The Bill was introduced because of the need to take further
           powerful measures to fight football hooliganism.  That need
           remains;

          In spite of the efforts of the Government and the football
          authorities over 5,000 police officers are still needed every
          Saturday to contain the problem,       to protect the true
          supporters and those living near football grounds;

-         The reputation of our football supporters abroad is as low as
           it can be.     The Bill will   provide a major deterrent to
           incidents of hooliganism overseas, a more effective one than
           the withdrawal of passports under present arrangement since
           those concerned can simply     apply for a British Visitors
           Passport at the Post Office;
      "   V ‘;V'V‘ V   ■

          The Government recognises that Lord Justice Taylor's Final
          Report may make comments which will be relevant to the scheme
          and of which Parliament would wish to be aware before any
          final decisions are made on the implementation of the
          scheme;

          Government amendments to the Bill have therefore provided
          Parliament with two opportunities to debate the scheme after
          Lord Justice Taylor's Final      Report - before the FMA is
          appointed and after it has      submitted the scheme to the
          Secretary of State for approval.
