                      FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL


       A note from the Conservative Research Departmeat




     During Question Time in the House of Commons today, the
Prime Minister set out the Government's case why the Football
Spectators Bill needs to be passed during this Parliamentary
Session.


     That case is set against the background of four decades
of problems with crowd safety and two decades of hooliganism
in this country.     Nearly 300 people have died - the worst
record in the developed world.


     For Parliament to refuse to pass the Bill this Session to
deal with the problems already identified,       and to remove the
legislative vehicle by which to respond immediately to the
lessons from Hillsborough - notably the need for all-seat
accommodation for spectators at major grounds - would be a
grave decision.     Not to proceed with the Bill this Session
would delay by 12 months any response to these serious
problems.


     The Football Spectators Bill does not pre-empt the
results of the inquiry by Lord Justice Taylor.       The Bill is an
enabling measure.     It does not prescribe the Football
Membership Scheme.     It provides for the Football Membership
Authority to propose a scheme for the approval of the
Secretary of State.     His approval of any such scheme would
then be subject to Parliamentary approval under the Negative
Resolution procedure.


     Provided that Lord Justice Taylor is able to complete his
inquiry in broadly the same timetable as that of the previous
inquiry by Mr. Justice Popplewell    (nine weeks from appointment
to Interim Report and eight months to publication of Final
Report), then the design of the scheme will be able to take
full account of the Final Report of Lord Justice Taylor's
                                 -   2   -




current inquiry.     Indeed, the Bill will provide the
legislative vehicle to enable the Government to implement
any relevant recommendations     in Lord Justice Taylor's Interim
Report.   But without the Bill this possibility is lost for a
whole year.


     1990 will see the World Cup in Italy in June, and in
September English clubs are seeking to get back into Europe.
To delay the Bill would give no means of preventing convicted
hooligans from travelling abroad.


     Finally,     it is important to remember that the Bill is
designed to implement Mr. Justice Popplewell's recommendation
for a Membership Scheme.     He made this recommendation in his
Interim Report and confirmed this in his Final Report,
supported then by the Football League Working Party.      His
Reports addressed many of the concerns about a Scheme which
have been raised     (see paragraphs 4.107 to 4.128 of Mr. Justice
Popplewell's Final Report).


     His recommendations were made more than three years a g o .


     The Government urges Parliament not to delay for yet
another year but to support the passage of the Football
Spectators Bill this Session.




 2 0 April 1989
