                                                                                       foi_f
                                       L ru m   I'm-: P r i v a t e   S e c re ta ry
                                                                                                                    N‘6
f .   -//A                                      CONFIDENTIAL                             H   ome    O     f fi ce
                                                                                       Q l'E E N ANNE'S GATE
                                                                                        L O N D O N SWIM 9 AT



                                                                                       20 April 1989


                                                                          |\           mT
                                         Zm n.iyj?                    ^ jj


                           \                                                                   °T/o n s

                                       HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER:
                           IMPLICATIONS FOR THE FOOTBALL SPECTATORS’ BTLL


                 The Home Secretary, the Lord President, the Secretary of State for
         the Environment, the Chief Whip, the Minister for Sport and officials met
         yesterday evening to consider further the implications of the Hillsborough
         disaster and subsequent events for the Football Spectators' Bill.

                 The Ministers noted that this Bill would need to receive a Lords
         Third Reading early in May and Royal Assent by the end of July if the target
         of implementing the membership scheme for the start of the 1990/91 football
         season was certain to be met.     It would be possible to add provisions to
         the Bill dealing with all-seated stadiums in England and Wales and still
         meet this timetable.   An additional procedural instruction which would be
         needed in this eventuality might lead to a Division:    this would, however,
         be over- shadowed by any Division which took place on Commons Second
         Reading, probably the same day.     Introduction of these provisions in the
         Lords would have procedural consequences which would destroy the current
         timetable for the Bill.   Provisions dealing with stadium seating would not
         be unpopular in
         themselves, although it would be necessary to canvass them with the football
         authorities, with whom a meeting had been arranged by DOE for next week.   It
         would be possible to press ahead in this way and undertake that Judge
         Taylor's comments would be reflected in the detailed implementation of the
         Bill.

                     It appeared, however, that there was little hope of obtaining a
             Commons Second Reading for the Bill in present circumstances. Although the
             mood among backbenchers might change as a result of further revelations
             concerning the disaster, the Government was being pressed for an early
             announcement of its intentions.   Some backbenchers previously loyal to the
             Government on the Bill despite personal reservations were taking the
             present opportunity to withdraw their support. Offering to take the Bill
             through the special Select Committee procedure was unlikely on its own to
             win back this support, while it would delay the Bill by a month and create
             fresh opportunities for public criticism.      In the Lords, there was a
             widespread view that Parliament should be given an opportunity to consider
             Judge Taylor's recommendations before the Bill's passage through Parliament
             was completed.




                                                            1.



                                                CONFIDENTIAL
                                CONFIDENTIAL




                                     2   .


         Judge Taylor had now let it be known that he visualised an interim
report in June or July which would coyer aspects of physical security at
football grounds needing attention before the start of the 1989/90 season.
It was hoped that his final report would be available by the end of 1989.
He was not required to comment on the Bill but would be pressed to do so!
Commons Stages of the Bill might well coincide with the hearing by Judge
Taylor of evidence critical of it.     To press on with the Bill in these
circumstances could draw an adverse reaction from Judge Taylor, although
the Judge was aware of what the Home Secretary had already said on the
subject.

        It could be presented as reasonable in these circumstances to delay
the Commons Stages of the Bill until the spill-over.   It would be important
to present the reason for such a delay as the need to leave the Government
an opportunity to take account of Judge Taylor's interim report, and not the
need to see whether Judge Taylor supported the national membership scheme.
An alternative would be to withdraw the Bill altogether and legislate
instead in the new Session of Parliament:     since overspill completion of
the Bill would in any case delay implementation of the national membership
scheme for several months, a little further delay would not be unacceptable
and might allow for the Bill to include any fresh points arising from Judge
Taylor's final report.  Such a Bill would, however, have to be found a place
in the 1989/90 programme, and from the business managers' point of view the
prospect of the present Bill completing the remainder of its Parliamentary
course was much more attractive.

        Slimming up the discussion, the Home Secretary said it was agreed
that the Prime Minister should be invited to discuss the available options
with Ministers the following day.     They were:   to press ahead for Royal
Assent in July, the Bill expanded to include provisions on stadium seating;
to proceed to Lords Third Reading in the near future but delay Commons
introduction until the overspill;    and to postpone legislation until the
following Session of Parliament.

        Copies of this'note go to Murdo Mclean, Kick Gibbons and Alan Ring.




                                               C J WALTERS




Stephen Catling, Esq.




                                CONFIDENTIAL
