                              F ro m : T h e P rivate S ec r e t a r y




                                                                          H o m e O ffice
                                                                         QUEEN ANNE’S GATE
                                                                         L O N D O N SW1H9AT

                                                       fevv.
                                                                         12 September 1989




  /I
            FOOTBALL HOOLIGANISM:        CONTACT WITH SWEDISH GOVERNMENT

         The Home Secretary has asked me to record the gist of a conversation
he had with Mr Bengt Johansson, the Swedish Minister for the Public Sector,
 on the evening of Friday, 8 September, about the disturbances in Stockholm on
ithe occasion of the England v Sweden football match on 6 September.

              Mr Johansson gave the Home Secretary an account of the disturbances
 and said that 102 English fans were arrested before the game, two later, and
 >104 Swedish fans were alrrested after the game.        The behaviour of the English
’f a n s w a l worse before the gaTn'e and that o't the Swedish fans was worse after.
 There were a few cases! of theft but not enough evidence to put before a co u r t .
 The Swedes would have prosecuted the English fans if they could.

         The Home Secretary thanked Mr Johansson for his call.    He said that
he had been concerned about the point of principle that Article 5 of the
Council of Europe Convention on Spectator Violence and Misbehaviour at Sports
Events, and in particular at football matches, to which both countries were
parties,   encouraged the identification and prosecution of         spectators
committing criminal offences.     He understood that the Swedish police had
powers to make preventative arrests, but it had seemed from reports received
in this country that some offences had been committed but had gone unpunished.
The Swedish Minister confirmed that there wa¥ no real evidence with wish to
pursue any cases except one.   The person concerned had been charged and was
still being held.

        The Home Secretary said that he would say to the English press that
Mr Johansson had courteously telephoned and explained what had happened during
the disturbances.   He had also explained that it was not a question of
offences being overlooked in the desire to be rid of British hooligans but
rather that the Swedes had done all they could to bring the fans to justice.

        In the light of this conversation, the Home Secretary did not write
to Mr Johansson, as he had originally intended.
                                    2.




        I am copying this letter to Roger Bright and Philip Stamp at the
Department of the Environment and Bob Peirce at the Foreign & Commonwealth
Office.




                                          MISS C J BANNISTER




Ms Caroline Slocock
No 10 Downing Street
LONDON,   S.W.1.
