                                     CONFIDENTIAL



    PRIME MINISTER

                                                                 %
                               FOOTBALL SPECTATORS BILL




    DECISIONS AND OBJECTIVES
    1.     When the Cabinet considered the handling of the Football
    Spectators Bill on 20 April, following the Hillsborough disaster
    on 15 April, it was thought that Lord Justice Taylor was likely
    to produce an interim report in June or July, though the final
    report would not be available until the end of the year.         The
    Cabinet agreed that there was a very strong case for proceeding
    with the Bill in the present Session to provide the Government
    with a vehicle for carrying out any urgent recommendations that
                    r                                        ^

    Lord Justice Taylor might make.


    2.     Lord Justice Taylor has since told the Home Secretary that,
    while it should be possible to produce a short interim report
    before the mid-August start of the new season, to cover the
    question of perimeter offences and one or two important matters
    of police procedure, it would not be possible to give as wide-
         " --   '       "»                ^         (   (
    ranging an interim report as Popplewell had because, unlike the
    Bradford fire, there was considerable disagreement over the cause
    of the disaster.         In particular, he could not promise that any
A   rsr.rmmiendations he might make on membership cards would be in
    time for the passage of the Bill in the current Session.         Lord
    Justice Taylor has since told the Home Secretary that he had a
    completely open mind on membership cards at present.


    3.      Lord Justice Taylor has since told Sir Clive Whitmore that
    he would not sav publicly that his interim report was unlikely to
    deal with the question of the national membership scheme, and if


                                     CONFIDENTIAL
                             CONFIDENTIAL



asked by the press he would say that membership cards were
clearly part of his remit and that he would proceed as
expeditiously as possible.    However, he reiterated that it was
too earlv to sav precisely when he would be able to give his
views on membership cards.


4.   The purpose of this meeting is to consider the handling and
timing of the Football Spectators Bill in the light of the
probable delay in any recommendations by Lord Justice Taylor on a
national membership scheme.    You may wish to discuss:


     (i)    the timetable for the national membership scheme;


     (ii) whether Ministers have given any undertakings which
     would make it politically difficult to take the Bill to
     Royal Assent in advance of the receipt of Lord Justice
     Taylor1s recommendations on a national membership scheme;


     (iii) any problems in handling the Bill if it were decided
     to try to take it to Royal Assent before the receipt of Lord
     Justice Taylor's recommendations on a national membership
     scheme;


      (iv) what further steps should be taken to encourage support.
     from Government backbenchers for the enactment of the Bill
     during the present Session;


      (v)   whether the Government should proceed only with Part II.
     of the Bill (on restriction orders, to prevent travelling
     abroad) during the current Session in the event of it being
     decided to postpone the main provisions of the Bill to next
     Session;


                              CONFIDENTIAL
                            CONFIDENTIAL




     (vi) the Government's line on the interaction between the
     Taylor inquiry and the Bill;


     (vii) the deadline for a final decision on whether the Bill
     should proceed in the present Session.    You may wish to
     ensure that Lord Justice Taylor is consulted again before
     that time to establish his latest forecast on the timing of
     any recommendations he might make on a national membership
     scheme.


5.   If it were decided to postpone either the w hole Bill or
Part I of the Bill until next Session, the Lord President and QL
would need to consider in due course whether any Bills in the
provisional programme for 1989/90 would need to be deferred to
make room for it.    You will recall that the programme already
omits some Bills, notably the Planning Bill, to which you attach
considerable importance, and the postponement of the Football
Spectators Bill would clearly make it more difficult to find room
for them.


BACKGROUND
6.   Part I of the Bill provides that entry to a designated
football match will be restricted to members of the national
football membership scheme together with those who are otherwise
authorised (clause 1).    The Secretary of State is required to
designate a Football Membership Authority (FMA) to administer the
scheme (clause 3).    The FMA is required, as soon as reasonably
practicable after its designation, to draw up a draft scheme for
approval    (subject to any modification that may be agreed) by the
Secretary of State (clause 4).    The Government undertook at
Report Stage in the Lords to bring forward amendments to require


                             CONFIDENTIAL
                            CONFIDENTIAL



that the scheme should be subject to the approval of both Houses
of Parliament.   Persons convicted of football-related offences
will be di ^qualified from membership of the scheme for a
specified period (clause 7).   Grounds at which designated
football matches are played are required to be licensed by the
Secretary of State or by a person appointed by the Secretary of
State for this purpose (clauses 8-11).


7.     Part II of the Bill empowers the courts to make restriction
orders in respect of persons convicted of football-related
offences (clause 13).    Persons who are subject to such orders
will be required to report to a reporting agency during the
period of overseas football matches designated by the Secretary
of State.


8.     As you noted at your meeting on 20 April, a formal
Instruction would need to be moved at some point after Second
Reading to enable a power to be added to the Bill to allow the
requirement of all—seated accommodation to be part of the
licensing arrangements to be made under the Bill.


MAIN ISSUES


 (i)   Timetable for the national membership scheme
9.     It is now clear that the timing of the introduction of a
national membership scheme will depend on the timing of any
recommendations which Lord Justice Taylor m ight make about card
entry systems.    We understand that the football authorities are
claiming that it could take around 16 months from the approval of
a scheme before it could come into operation in order to allow
time for the tendering procedures and for the installation of the
necessary equipment, though DOE officials believe that this


                             CONFIDENTIAL
                           CONFIDENTIAL



period can be reduced to about 10 months.   However, even the
shorter period would cast considerable doubt on whether the
scheme could come into operation at the beginning of the 1990-91
football season.   It would suggest instead that, assuming that,
say, Lord Justice Taylor were to submit any recommendations in
January and the scheme were to be drawn up and approved by
Parliament by March, introduction of the scheme in January or
February 1991 would be a more realistic target.


10.   The football authorities may well seek to spin out
implementation of a national membership scheme until afte.r_a
possible General Election in 1991.    The likelihood of this would
increase if the Bill were to be postponed until next Session.
You mav wish to seek the views of the Environment Secretary and
the Minister for Sport on the scope for reducing the period
between approval of the scheme and implementation below the
period of 10 months which DOE officials are apparently presently
urging on the football authorities.


(ii) Ministerial statements on interaction between the Taylor
Inquiry and the Bill
11.   Attached are copies of the main comments which Ministers
have made in Parliament about the interaction between the Bill
and Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry.    At Prime Minister's Questions
on 20 April, you stressed the enabling nature of the Bill and
pointed out that it would be possible to take account of anything
which Lord Justice Tavlor might propose because the Bill itself
           -       ‘                                    ..


does not provide a national membership scheme but instead sets
out an pnahling framework for establishing such a scheme.     In
Business Questions on 20 April, the Lord President said that


      "It is clear that, during the course of this Session, there


                            CONFIDENTIAL
                                                                               CONFIDENTIAL



                      is time to make progress on the Bill, and not to finalise i/t
                      until we have had time to consider what it is hoped will be
                       important recommendations."


In the second half of this sentence, the Lord President was
clssrly referring to the finalization of the scheme rather than
the Bill.


12.                     You may feel that there is nothing in the attached
s t a t e m e n t s that would preclude the Government from proceeding
with the Bill in the current Session, on the footing that
Parliament would be given the opportunity to debate the scheme
made under the Bill.                                                       Notwithstanding what Ministers have
actually said, however, some Government backbenchers are said to.
be under the impression that the Bill will not be taken to Royal
Assent until after the receipt of Lord Justice Taylor's
recommendations on a national membership scheme.                                                       You will wish
----------------------------------------------------------- — ----------            "— V

to probe this point with the Environment Secretary and with other
Ministers present.


  (iii)                                         Prospects for the Bill
5|©»x.may also wish to ask the Chief Whip for his assessment of the
 Bill's handling in the present Session once it became known that
 Lord Justice Taylor's comments on a national membership scheme
were not likely to be received in time for the debates on the
 Bill.


   (iv) Further steps to secure support from Government backbenchers
  for enacting the Bill during the present Session
  q_3 ,                  You may wish to consider what further steps should—be— taken
 to persuade Government backbenchers of the importance.of
 p r o c e e d i n g with the Bill in the current Session.                                             The Government


                                                                                CONFIDENTIAL
                           CONFIDENTIAL



has already stressed that the Bill is an enabling,,framework for a
scheme that requires Parliamentary approval. It may well be
necessary now to undertake that the scheme would not be finalised
until after Lord Justice Tavlor had submitted any recommendations
concerning a national membership scheme, and that Parliament, will
undoubtedly be given the opportunity to debate the scheme.      The
Lord Privy Seal may have views whether that promise should apply
to the Lords as well as the Commons. You may also wish to ask the
Environment Secretary and the Minister for Sport whether there
are anv other initiatives which could usefully be taken.


(v)   Whether to proceed with Part II if the main provisions of,
the Bill were deferred until next Session
14.   If, in the event, it were decided to defer Part I of the
Bill until after Lord Justice Taylor had reported, there might be
a case for proceeding with Part II alone.    This would enable the
arrangements under which convicted football hooligans would be
required to report to the police during the period of designated
overseas matches to be in place by the time of the World Cup in
Italy in June 1990.   (These arrangements would, of course, have
limited effect at first because they would apply only to those
convicted after the Bill has come into force.)    But postponement
of Part 1 to next session would spread football legislation over
two sessions.


 (vi) Government line on the interaction between— the— Taylor
inquiry and the Bill
15.  Ff®, the present, there seems no need to change the current
Government line, which is that it is right to allow a period of
reflection but that there is a very strong case for proceeding
with the Bill in the current Session.




                            CONFIDENTIAL
                                                CONFIDENTIAL



            16.          Critics of a national membership scheme might object that,
            as the Bill stands, the designated authority is required to draw
            up a scheme, and it might be left in the position of doing so
          — even if the Government had decided not to proceed with it.
     p»                                                                 •

     ^ ~ Mr Turnbull has already asked DOE to consider a suitable
y,          amendment to the Bill, for example to provide that the
            authorities should draw up a scheme only if required to do so by
            th e s e c r e t a r y of State.   A possible alternative would be to
            undertake that the relevant provisions of the Bill would not be
            brought into force until after Lord Justice Taylor has submitted
            any recommendations that he might have on a national membership
            scheme.

            17   e   You may also wish to consider what the Government should say
            if asked whether it would proceed with a national membership
            scheme if Lord Justice Tavlor were to recommend against it .            The
            Minister for Sport's office have suggested the following line:


                     The Government would have to give very great weight to Lord
                     Justice Taylor's views although it would need to study
                     carefully why he had taken a different view from Mr Justice
                     Popplewell.     It would then be for the Government and
                     Parliament to decide.


            However, you may feel that it would be less provocative simply to
            say that the Government would naturally give very careful
            consideration to anv recommendations which Lord Justice Taylor
            might make.


             (vii)    Timing of Final Decisions on the Handling of the Bill
            18«      The Bill is currently awaiting its Third Reading in the
            Lords.      I understand that the Lord President and the Chief Whip


                                                 CONFIDENTIAL
                           CONFIDENTIAL



are likely to say that, unless some accommodation can be reached
with the Bill's critics, it would be necessary for the Bill to
complete its Second Reading in the Commons and probably at least
part of its Committee Stage, before the Summer Recess in order to
allow sufficient time for its remaining stages to be completed in
the overspill.   This suggests that, while the present meeting
does not need to reach final decisions on whether or not to
proceed with the Bill in the current Session, a final decision
would be needed around the beginning of June in order to allow
the Bill to make sufficient progress before the Summer Recess.
However, vou will wish to check this with the Business Managers.


HANDLING
19.  You may wish to open the meeting by asking the HOME
SECRETARY to report on what Lord Justice Taylor has told him
about the timing, and possible content, of any recommendations he
might make on a national membership scheme.   You may then wish to
go through the issues in the order set out in this brief.




                               A J LANGDON
8 May 1989




                            CONFIDENTIAL
