                                                                                                                           5IS
                                                                                                                           CPS
                                                                                                                          Central Casework

   Facsimile                                                                                                                 United House
                                                                                                                                  Piccadilly
                                                                                                                            York rO t IPQ

                                                                                                                 Direa Line:
                                                                                                                Swtchbcxird:
                                                                                                                  Fttcs'tmU:
                                                                                                                     DX Vo. 6520* York 5
Attention of:     |§

Address:    4 l- k S .( S |.

Fax iVo:    0{Si -     Z& h -      ^

From:      CD, (4.
CPS Division:

Date:                      Time:

This fax transmission consists of this page plus .^ o th e r s

Please acknowledge receipc:


If transmission is not property received please call 0 1904-




                                                                                                     c t'sx i                  bc| jfesir.
                           Crown prosecution S e n tc e   •   Working in the interests o f justice
Miss D. H. Sharpling
Chief Crown Prosecutor
                                                                                                            CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                            United House
                                                                                                            Piccadilly
                                                                                                            York YOl IPQ

                                                                                                 Switchboard: 01904-450070
 r                                                        i                                           DX No: 65204 York 6

       Ms Ann Adlington
                                                                               Facsimile: 01904-
       Hillsborough Family Support
       Group                                                                 Direct Line:   01904-
       1st Floor, Central Buildings
       41 North John Street                                                Our Reference:            YBF/GC/3341/89
       LIVERPOOL L26RR
                                                                          Your Reference:




       Dear Ms Adlington

       Thank you for your letter o f 1 December 1998 addressed to Miss Sharpling which has
       been passed to me for reply. I hope you have received my letter of 1 December 1998.

       As mentioned in that letter, I regret the delay in finalising the CPS decision. You will
       appreciate that the Crown Prosecution Service has received a lot o f material from you
       and we have to consider in detail representations from you as well as those from
       solicitors for the defendants. The material and representations were received at
       various points during the period since the defendants ask that we take over the
       conduct o f the proceedings. It is true that five months have passed since the request
       to take over was made but I should point out that we received some representations as
       recently as 9 October 1998 and these had to be considered. I can say, however, that a
       decision is imminent. Much o f the time has been taken in preparing a detailed
       internal report which is currently being considered by senior colleagues. As
       mentioned in my letter of 1 December 1998 I anticipate that a decision will be made
       and promulgated on or before 18 December 1998.

       I note your point regarding the use o f Section 23 of the Prosecution of Offences Act
       1985. There are cases where the complexity and size of the case is such that the
       review process can take a period of months. Bearing in mind that the test we apply in
       deciding whether to take over and discontinue a private prosecution is different from
       that set out in the Code for Crown Prosecutors, it was important that a thorough re­
       review took place. It was always likely that this tragic and difficult case would take
       rather longer than most.

       You mention issues o f alleged unfairness, the passage o f time and the alleged
       concealment of relevant evidence. I note what you say and I can assure you that the
       CPS decision making process is very much focused on the tests set out by Mr.
       Croston in his letter o f 27 July 1998.




                         Crown Prosecution Service   •   Working in the interests of justice
I do folly understand that many people will be affected by the CPS decision and I
regret the time it is taking to finalise that decision. I can assure you, however, that the
time is being taken to ensure that this decision is the right one. We are not concerned
with defending or distinguishing the early decision not to prosecute and in this regard
I refer again to the letter of 27 July 1998 which sets out the tests we are applying. In
that letter, Mr. Croston also acknowledges that there is a distinction between the test
we are currently applying and the Code for Crown Prosecutors.

I am aware of the date the matter is listed before the court and I am conscious of the
responsibilities of the parties to the court. For this reason, I wrote to the solicitors for
the defendants and also to the court in similar terms to my letter to you o f 1 December
1998. As the Crown Prosecution Service is not currently a party to the proceedings
before the Leeds Magistrates Court, I am unable to do anything other than to give you
an indication of when the CPS decision can be expected.. It is a matter for you and
the defence solicitors as to what representations you make to the court about the
conduct of the case on 7 December 1998.

I apologise for the delay but would like to further assure you that we are doing all we
can to finalise the CPS decision. So far as the decision is concerned, the date o f 18
December 1998 has been notified to the court, the parties to the proceedings and also
to all those currently involved in the decision making process.

I hope this letter is helpful.


Yours sincerely,


       (4fr
Christopher H. Enzor
Branch Crown Prosecutor
