J MERVYN JONES MSc                                              FURNIVAL HOUSE
ASSISTANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                       Furnival Gate
       1LLSBOROUGH I N Q U IR Y T E A M                         Sheffield S1 4QN
 .ll
                                                                Telephone: 0742 731546
                                                                                               r
                                                                Fax:        0742 731483
WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                          Medico Legal Centre
Colmore Circus Queensway                                        Telephone: 0742 726105
Birmingham B4 6NQ                                               Fax:       0742 726247
Telephone: 021 -2 3^ 5000, extn. 2025
                                                                Your Ref:
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION
Fowler Street
                                                                Our Ref:     JMJ/VSC
Birmingham B7 5DA
Telephone: 021-359 3332
                                                                Date:
                                                                             30 October 1989



 C Newell Esq
 Assistant Director of Public Prosecutions
 Room 401
 Dacre House
 Dacre Street
 London   SW1




 HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY - TELEVISION DOCUMENTARIES

 The purpose of this letter is to advise you that early on in Lord Justice
 Taylor's Inquiry approaches were made by the BBC and Yorkshire Television
 companies to be permitted to make, respectively, a television documentary
 on the Hillsborough investigations. The approach was originally made to
 my Chief Constable Mr Geoffrey Dear, and he took up the requests with
 Lord Justice Taylor who agreed that the filming could take place.

 Since that time both television companies have invested an enormous
.amount of time and money into making their documentaries. Initially it
 was agreed that they would not show their documentaries until the time
 of the publication of Lord Justice Taylor's final report, which was
 anticipated at the beginning of 1990. Before the documentaries were
 shown an opportunity would be given to Lord Justice Taylor and Mr Dear
 to view the finished product.

 Of course, since that original agreement the investigation has moved on
 to involve your good selves. As a consequence I have spoken to the
 senior executives both in the BBC and Yorkshire Television companies and
 advised them of our responsibility for the criminal and complaints
 investigations. This new involvement means that their original
 publication dates cannot now proceed, given that the investigations have
 yet to be concluded, decisions to be made and followed by the
 possibility of proceedings. There is also the Coroner's Inquests to
 consider. As a result of my meetings both television companies are
 examining the material they have and are putting the matter to their
 respective legal advisers. It would seem, however, that neither company
 feels confident to be able to show a worthwhile programme for some
 considerable time.




       PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE A T     .Lloyd. HPlJSe,Biripinghanj
      *..
% .
♦




                                           -   2   -




        Most of the filming has now been concluded and there is, therefore,
        unlikely to be many further requests for access. However, I will be
        grateful if you would indicate what your feelings are on this particular
        subject.
