From:   G J DEAR QPM DL LLB                                       WEST MIDLANDS POLICE
        CHIEF CONSTABLE                                           HEADQUARTERS
                                                                  PO Box 52, Lloyd House
                                                                  Colmore Circus Queensway
                                                                  Birmingham B4 6NQ
                                                                  Telephone: 021-236 5000




         P Wright Esq CBE O.St.J CBIM                             GJD/AMS
         Chief Constable
         South Yorkshire Police
         Snigg Hill
         Sheffield
         S3 8LY                                                   17 August 1989


                                                            C.i                    Q_ljg.


                     iW,
         INVESTIGATIONS INTO THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER

         I refer to your letter of 16 August 1989 in which you formally request
         us to undertake a full criminal enquiry - wider than just the Police -
         into the events at Hillsborough on 15 April 1989.     Ihave noted the
         Director of Public Prosecutions' interest and advice.    I also note that
         you would like us to undertake responsibility for any police
         disciplinary aspects which may emerge.

          Given that we have already undertaken a considerable investigation on
          behalf of Lord Justice Taylor and presently for HM Coroner, it is
          logical that we should take on the added responsibilities for any
          criminal aspects and any police disciplinary matters which may emerge.
          We will willingly take on these added responsibilities to our current
          investigation.  My Police Authority have asked me   toseek a written
          assurance that expenditure incurred by us will bemet in full by South
          Yorkshire Police with or without Home Office assistance.

          In respect of the financing of the investigation I have had sight of
          Lord Ferrers’ original letter to your Police Authority and I am aware of
          a subsequent letter which clarifies the definition of the 'investigation'
          to be in the widest sense.  It would appear, therefore, that if your
          Police Authority, which I understand will meet on Friday of this week,
          agrees the original Lord Ferrers offer, as clarified, then all financial
          costs will be met by the Home Office over and above an agreed
          contribution by the South Yorkshire Police Authority.  Subject to your
          Police Authority agreement there appears to be no impediment to our


                                                                       cont
\o   hQ

                                           2


      pursuing the investigations without delay.  After your Police Authority
      has had its meeting it would be helpful to me if you could acquaint us
      with their decision so that I can keep my Police Authority fully
      informed.

      The investigations will continue on a day to day basis to be headed by
      Mr Mervyn Jones with his existing team which will be increased for a
      short period to address the added responsibilities.  In your letter you
      asked if we would like to take on the three matters of public complaint
      made by Mr Trevor Hicks as well as a fourth complaint of alleged
      corruption.  Before taking on these responsibilities I think it would be
      helpful if the meeting with Mr Hicks takes place on 23 August.
      Thereafter I can see advantages in there being a meeting between
      ourselves, yourselves, a representative of the Director of Public
      Prosecutions Office and Mr E N Taylor of the Police Complaints
      Authority.  At that meeting we could agree what responsibilities we are
      undertaking, the terms of reference, lines of communication and
      accountability.

      I trust this satisfactorily addresses the issues raised in your letter.
