                                                CJn^-                       0 *^0!'s



                                                f\5                                 G x fc L


 C C I -J - .-.H U I *                           N L ^ .-                               ^
  1OUah cwJr * t**- t'-av/oW ,                                            ^noo<s_

  1 AstaJv, lo^.                                 | .        ,

 H o .       A   aaj^    j   * U   U I . -      C   t e W   k )     •


oHuJOj^-vO^KQje-Qx                                              (
-S (> f!L C U V ^|>q)< ) j/» .JIm lS ^   .£ •                   V .,^ *
                                                                                                 5 2 - 4 ,2 -
    .V
r


                    THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY
                    Room 528
                    50 Queen Anne’s Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
                    Direct Line 0171 273 4046 Fax 4028



                                                                        Your reference:
         Dame Barbara Mills QC
         Director of Public Prosecutions                                Our reference:
         Crown Prosecution Service
         50 Ludgate Hill                                                Date:                          July 1997
         LONDON EC4M 7EX                                                                                 aoMMPl
                                                                           CP-S.HEADCUARTER8              KS   I
                                                                              PRIVATE ( : ' ■ ‘ ' ' ' - Z
                                                                                 REC

                                                                                25 JuL 1997
                            I
                                                                        COPIES TO:
         HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER


          Further to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s recent letter, please find enclosed a copy of his terms
          of reference, as requested.

          Please do not hesitate to contact me if you have any further queries.


          Yours sincerely



                                                                                                                    - i r .7


          Mike Ward                                                to




                                                                          d       I   '
                                                                                             '   2 _




                                                                                                               )o
Terms of reference




To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available;


      (a) to the Inquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor; or


      (b) to the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney
         Generalfor the purpose of discharging their respective
         statutory responsibilities; or


      (c) to the Chief Officer of South Yorkshire Police in relation to
         police disciplinary matters;


and in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously
available is of such significance as to justify establishment by the
Secretary of State for the Home Department o f a further public
inquiry; and in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to their attention any
evidence not previously considered by them which may be relevant to
their respective duties; and to advise whether there is any other action
which should be taken in the public interest.
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
Hillsborough Scrutiny
Room 528
50 Queen Anne’s Gate
LONDON SW1H 9AT




RE:    THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY


Further to the Director’s letter of 30 July 1997,1 enclose two schedules showing the material
held by the CPS.

As the Director indicated, the material falls into two distinct parts, the material relevant to
the 1990 decision not to prosecute and that relevant to the recent 1997 decision not to
prosecute.

The schedules are comprehensive and list all the material held at the CPS or viewed by the
CPS. All the material we hold is currently at United House in York. Rather than reproduce
in our own schedules all the lists contained in the West Midlands Police Report, I have
attached a copy of the master index of witnesses and documents as an appendix to the
schedule of pre August 1990 material.

You will no doubt wish to discuss access to the material. There is one further item which
is not covered on the 1990 schedule, about which the Chief Crown Prosecutor will be writing
to you separately.

I look forward to hearing from you.

Yours sincerely




Chris Enzor
Branch Crown Prosecutor
                                          HILLSBOROUGH REVIEW

                           LIST OF MATERIAL CONSIDERED AT 1997 CPS REVIEW


MATERIAL                       DATE OF ITEM     ORIGINALS PRODUCED     COMMENTS
                                                OR HELD BY


HFSG letter                      4/3/97         Trevor Hicks           Received 4/3/97

T. Hicks draft statement                        T. Hicks

Opinion of Alun Jones QC                        T. Hicks               Obtained by HFSG

Annexes A to G of Opinion                       T. Hicks               See Appendix 1

Lord Justice Taylor’s
 Interim Report                  1/8/89         CPS

Joint Opinion of
  Gareth Williams QC and         6/8/90         CPS
  Peter Birts QC,
  concerning allegations
  of criminal misconduct
  by police

 Background Note sent to
  Attorney General               Undated        CPS                     Circa 1990
Statements of P.C Ryan       5/5/89
                             9/1/90   South Yorkshire Police

Statements of P.C. Bichard   5/5/89
                             9/1/90   South Yorkshire Police
Notebook of P.C. Bichard     2/5/89

Master Exhibit Index for
 Lord Justice Taylor’s                South Yorkshire Police
 Enquiry

Computer Exhibit List for
 Lord Justice Taylor’s
 Eqnuiry re Exhibits
 TB/1 AND 2                           South Yorkshire Police

Master Video Schedule for
 Lord Justice Taylor’s
 Enquiry                              South Yorkshire Police

Compilation Tape schedule
 for Lord Justice Taylor’s
 Enquiry                              South Yorkshire Police

Compilation Video Tape
 (Taylor Eqnuiry Document
 142 and Inquest Exhibit
 €238)                                South Yorkshire Police   VHS Master Copy seen
Exhibit TB/1 and TB/2
 Video Tape Schedules for
 Lord Justice Taylor’s
 Enquiry                                        South Yorkshire Police

Exhibits TB/1 and TB/2 Video
 Tapes                                          South Yorkshire Police   VHS Master Copy seen

Inquest Exhibit List                            South Yorkshire Police

Inquest Exhibit C539
  Video Tape                                    South Yorkshire Police   VHS Master Copy on show at Inquest

Inquest Transcripts of
  evidence of P.C. Bichard
  P.C. Ryan, P.S. Goddard
  P.S. Killoch                                  South Yorkshire Police

Copy correspondence re
 viewing of Unused Material
 at Nechells Green Police
 Station prior to Inquest
 Hearings                                       South Yorkshire Police

Original Statement of
 Dr. Edward Walker             20th July 1989   South Yorkshire Police   Copy with CPS

Police Action message
 referring to warning
 of Dr. Walker for Court       2/4/90           South Yorkshire Police
Statements of James Wardrope,
  Consultant                     6/6/89    South Yorkshire Police

Transcript of Inquest
 Evidence of James Wardrope      18/4/90   South Yorkshire Police

Body File of Philip Hammond
 No. 93                                    South Yorkshire Police

Transcript of Inquest Evidence
 of Professor Alan Usher
 Pathologist                               South Yorkshire Police

Transcript of Inquest Evidence
 of Dr. David Slater                       South Yorkshire Police

Transcript of Inquest Evidence
 of Dr. Ernest Gumpert                     South Yorkshire Police

Transcript of BBC Radio 5
 Broadcast                       13/4/97   Tellex Monitors Ltd.

Inquest Video Tape showing
  production of Exhibit C539
  in evidence                              South Yorkshire Police

Granada Drama re Hillsborough              CPS

Home Office PPD: questions and
 police replies                20/12/96    South Yorkshire Police

Hillsborough Case Chronology               CPS
34      Correspondence File                                 CPS                                Between CPS and HFSG/Home
                                                                                               O ffice/LSLO /Police/R elatives of
                                                                                               Victims


NOTE:   Items 21 - 28 form a special evidence bundle prepared by South Yorkshire Police for the 1997 review - See Appendix 2.
                                       HILLSBOROUGH CASE

     SCHEDULE OF MATERIAL KNOWN TO HAVE BEEN CONSIDERED BY CPS PRIOR TO 30th AUGUST 1990


NUMBER     DESCRIPTION OF ITEM                                          COMMENTS

1          WEST MIDLANDS POLICE REPORT PREPARED FOR TAYLOR ENQUIRY

                 MASTER INDEX OF WITNESSES AND DOCUMENTS                Showing pagination and allotted
                                                                        part numbers plus amendments.
                                                                        See Appendix 1.
                 PART I INTRODUCTION
                 Report -                                               Pages 1 to 22
                 Statements -                                           Pages 1 to 348

                 PART I INTRODUCTION CONTINUED
                 Statements                                             Pages 349 - 751
                 Documents                                              1 -43

                 PART II
                 Report -                                               Pages 23 - 68
                 Statement -                                            Pages 752 - 1128
                 Documents -                                            4 4 - 108

                 PART III
                 Report -                                               Pages 69 - 83
                 Documents -                                            109 - 177
                 Statements -                                           Pages 1129 - 1144
PART IV
Report            Pages 84 - 118
Statements        Pages 1145 - 2456
Documents         178 - 191
PART V
Report            Pages 119 - 157
Statements        Pages 2457 - 3480
Document          192 - 207

PART VI
Report            Pages 152 - 165
Statement         Pages 3481 - 3706
Documents         Pages 208 - 220A

p a r t vn
Report            Pages 166 - 318
Appendices - A    Pages 319 - 335 (sequence of
                  events)
             -B   Pages 336 - 344 (correspondence
                  re Taylor Enquiry)
             -C   Transcripts of Interviews of
                  Graham Mackrell
                  Supt. Roger Marshall
                  Supt. Bernard Murray
                  Asst. Ch. Const. Walter Jackson
                  Supt. Roger Greenwood
                  Ch. Supt. David Duckenfield
2   ADDITIONAL LOOSE DOCUMENTS FOR REPORT AT 1 ABOVE

    Unumbered Document and Video                                  Criminal Interview with
                                                                  Peter Edward Smith
                                                                  Parts 1 and 2


    ADDITIONAL STATEMENTS FOR REPORT AT 1 ABOVE


    Statement of Brian Wallace dated 28/4/89                      Pages 2677 A - H
    Statement of Gordon Sykes dated 18/7/90                       Pages 2963 A - C




    TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS AT LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR’S ENQUIRY
    WITH CORRESPONDING STATEMENTS                                 Eleven folders covering dates
                                                                  15/5/89 to 28/6/89


    TRANSCRIPTS OF PROCEEDINGS AT LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR’S ENQUIRY
    WITH CORRESPONDING STATEMENTS                                 3 Bundles containing evidence of:
                                                                    D. Bownes
                                                                    G. Mackrell
                                                                    W. Eastwood
                                                                    ACC Jackson
                                                                    Ch. Supt. Nesbit
                                                                    Ch. Supt. Duckenfield
                                                                    Supt. Chapman
                                                                    Ch. Supt. Mole
                                                                    Supt. Marshall
                                                                    Supt. Greenwood
                                                                    Supt. Murray
WEST MIDLANDS POLICE INTERIM REPORT NUMBER 2                 Report prepared for CPS/PCA,
                                                             being revised copy of the one
                                                             prepared for Lord Justice
                                                             Taylor, dated 12/10/89. Table
                                                             of contents attached at Appendix
                                                             2.


ORIGINALS PETITIONS FROM HILLSBOROUGH FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP
AND OTHERS                                                   Three bundles


INTERIM REPORT OF LORD JUSTICE TAYLOR’S ENQUIRY


COUNSEL’S JOINT OPINION RE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER
DATED 6/8/90

CORRESPONDENCE FILES                                         Between:
                                                             CPS/Police/LSLO/
                                                             Other interested parties/relatives
                                                             of victims.

FIRST TUESDAY VIDEO TAPE

2 VIDEO TAPES ENTITLED MRE2/AE and MRE2/AF

QUANTITY OF LOOSE PAPER PERTAINING TO FORENSIC EVIDENCE
 ON CRASH BARRIERS
Dru Sharpling
CCP - Central Casework


        Robin Booth


                                                                     My Ref:
                                                                     Your Ref:




HILLSBOROUGH

1.   I have been considering the point about whether Adomako should be applied
     in this case and the extent to which the proper tests were applied by counsel in
     the 1990 advice when they went on to consider what was the appropriate test
     for involuntary manslaughter

2.   In his review, George briefly set out the applicable law in chapter 4. I have
      read and re-read Adomako this morning. The cases of Andrews and Bateman
      in 1925 and 1937 respectively indicated that gross negligence was then
      sufficient to found a conviction for manslaughter. The word ‘gross’ was not
      used on its own but was given as an example of the type of negligence under
      consideration.

3.   All would have been well had it not been for the case of Seymour in 1983
     where, in a driving case, the judge directed the jury in terms of recklessness,
     as defined in Lawrence. The House of Lords agreed that this was the correct
     approach.

4.   Despite this, Lord Mackay, in Adomako, said that Andrews was ‘the most
     authoritative statement of the present law’ and further that it was a ‘decision
     which [had] not been departed from’. I find this a little hard to reconcile, but
     the conclusion I am driven to is that Adomako clarified the law in that Lard
     Mackay specifically described Bateman and Andrews as ‘satisfactory as
     providing a proper basis for describing the crime of involuntary
     manslaughter’.

5.   I argue that Adomako did not change the law but clarified it.

6.   Thus, in my view, the appropriate test to be applied is the Adomako test, as set
      out by George in paragraph 4.2 of his review.

7.   The next question is whether counsel applied the correct test in 1990.
      Interestingly, one of the counsel who advised CPS in 1990 appeared for the
      appellant in Adomako!
8.    Counsel’s advice was principally directed to ‘reckless’ manslaughter, ie.
      where a person causes the death of another intending to do an act which
      creates an obvious and serious risk of causing personal injury (a) not giving
      thought to the possibility of such risk or (b) having recognised there was some
      risk involved, nonetheless going on to take it. Clearly this is not good law
      now.

9.    Counsel went on to say (paragraph 59 of the joint opinion) ‘it may also be
      manslaughter if the person causing the death intends to do an act, or omits to
      do an act where there is a duty to do so, being grossly negligent whether death
      or serious personal injury results’. In my view this is an adequate enunciation
      of the principles now set out in Adomako.

10. Counsel went on to say that the law was uncertain, and made reference to
    Seymour and also Kong Cheuk Kwan. Counsel particularly noted that in the
    1986 case of Goodfellow, it was said of Kong Cheuk Kwan that the question
    was whether the defendant was ‘guilty of recklessness (or gross negligence)’.
    Counsel then went on to say that they considered that the gross negligence test
    was sufficient to establish the offence of manslaughter.

11. Unfortunately, the matter does not stop there. In the 1990 advice, counsel
    referred to the case of R v West London Coroner’s Court, ex p Gray. The
    Divisional Court held that a Coroner should direct the jury in the following
    terms where the death is alleged to have been caused by neglect by the police:

      11.1 That they had to be satisfied of four ingredients, namely (a) that the
           police were under a duty to have regard to the health and welfare of the
           deceased, (b) that in the circumstances there was a failure to do what
           should have been done for the health and welfare of the deceased, (c)
           that the failure amounted to a substantial cause of death, and (d) that the
           failure amounted to recklessness.

      11.2 That the test of ‘recklessness’ was whether a police officer, having
           regard to his duty, was indifferent to an obvious and serious risk to the
           health and welfare of the deceased or, recognising that the risk to be
           present, deliberately chose to run it by doing nothing about it

      11.3 That a failure to appreciate that there was such a risk was not itself
           sufficient to amount to recklessness and

      11.4 That the jury could only return a verdict of unlawful killing if they could
           attribute the unlawful conduct to a single police officer.

12.   It is clear from the 1990 advice, that counsel felt that these points had a direct
      bearing on their advice (para 65).

13.   Exp Gray was cited in Adomako. Lord Mackay in approving of the use of the
      word ‘reckless’ in its ordinary sense in cases of involuntary manslaughter, said
      that ex p Gray was an example of a case where the word reckless had been
      used with complete accuracy. On the face of it, this is difficult to reconcile as
      the reference in paragraph 11.3 to recklessness appears to be something
      bordering on a Cunningham definition (note the reference to failure to
      appreciate that there was a risk not being sufficient to amount to recklessness).

14. I found the use of the word ‘indifferent’ difficult to reconcile here. I note,
    however, that failure to appreciate that there was a risk was specifically ruled
    out by the court as a sufficient state of mind for recklessness in this context.
    Accordingly, this only leaves a narrow scope for ‘indifference’ which I think
    must mean that the officer, bearing in mind his duty, must have deliberately
    shut his mind to the presence of the risk.

15.   In my view, ex p Gray cannot stand against Adomako and it should not be
      regarded as good law. How then does this leave counsel’s advice, bearing in
      mind that ex p Gray was in the forefront of their minds?

16. At paragraph 81 of the 1990 opinion, counsel were considering the position of
    the police as an organisation in relation to a possible charge of corporate
    manslaughter. The say ‘...there seems to us to be no evidence that in making
    what were undoubtedly errors of judgment and practice, the police
    organisation, or any individual within it, acted recklessly or in a grossly
    negligent manner’. This is highly significant because, even if counsel applied
    the recklessness test in ex p Gray, they also clearly considered gross
    negligence as a separate head. It must have been separate as gross negligence
    does not feature in exp Gray.

17. So far as Mr Duckenfield is concerned, the position is more difficult. The
    weight of the opinion in paragraphs 83 to 89 is towards recklessness. At
    paragraph 88, counsel opine that the omissions to act did not create a risk
    which was obvious at the time.

18.   Paragraph 89 says, and I quote in full: ‘We conclude, therefore, that there is
      insufficient evidence on which to found a charge of recklessness against Mr
      Duckenfield. Nor is there evidence that he was grossly negligent in failing to
      act as mentioned above. We bear in mind particularly the judgment of the
      Divisional Court in the West London Coroner’s Court case, the requirements
      of which are not in our view satisfied’.

19. Given that gross negligence and recklessness as defined in ex p Gray are
    substantially different, I am of the view that the reference in paragraph 89 to
    ex p Gray must be read as referring back to recklessness only and not to gross
    negligence. I recognise that this is a rather technical interpretation of
    paragraph 89 but I suggest it is nevertheless correct. After all, counsel quite
    properly directed themselves in the main to the current case law as understood
    by most people at the time (ie. recklessness was the test) and only added gross
    negligence out of a desire for completeness, bearing in mind their own views
    on the state of the law. It is a tribute to them that they were so accurate.
20.   If that is right, and I suggest that logically it must be, then counsel’s opinion
      can be said to have considered gross negligence manslaughter in the terms set
      out in Adomako.



Chris Enzor
Central Casework York Branch
DX 65204 York 6

FaJ
09 December 1998
                                                                                ftjx -



Chris Newell
DCE
CPS HQ
DX 300850
LUDGATE EC4



CC    Dm Sharpling
      Robin Booth
      George Croston




RE:   HILLSBOROUGH -
      THE ATTEMPT PERVERT COURSE OF JUSTICE CHARGE


1     I have spent some time over the last couple of days thinking about the
       complex issue of whether to take over the attempt pervert course of justice
       charge alone, i.e. intervening in part in the Hillsborough prosecution. I have
       looked very carefully at your letter to Stephen Wooler. I initially started this
       minute on the basis that I felt there were powerful arguments in favour of
       partial intervention. I have since reconsidered, but I thought it might be
       helpful to expose these arguments in case they are useful at a later stage in the
       event that the policy is rewritten.

2     In your letter you set out a tentative conclusion that it is possible to take over
       part of a private prosecution in order to discontinue it and leave the remainder
       of the case to be run by the private prosecutor. This follows the arguments
       contained in George Croston’s review and I support those arguments.

3     Further support for this view may be derived from the argument that our
      policy on private prosecutions is in effect a duty, where a request has been
      made by either party that we take over “the case” for whatever reason. It is
      important here to note that any ‘duty’ is very limited in its application.

4     The right to bring a private prosecution is enshrined in statute, of course. It is
      considered an important constitutional right and is one which should not be
      interfered with lightly. To intervene when it is not strictly necessary to do so
      would be to act to the prejudice of the private prosecutor. Our own policy
      states that where there is clearly no case to answer a prosecution commenced
in such circumstances would be unfounded and would therefore be an abuse of
the right to bring a prosecution. Thus we must be sure that there is clearly no
case to answer before stepping in to discontinue. The principle underlying the
policy here must be to give maximum effect to the right of the individual to
bring a private prosecution.

Dru has drawn my attention to the case of Doody -v- Secretary o f Statefor the
Home Department [1993] 3 All ER 92. At page 106, Lord Mustill summarises
the principles to be applied in the exercise of statutory powers. The following
principles can be summarised thus:

•    Statutory powers must be applied in a manner which is fair in all the
     circumstances
•    Standards of fairness are not immutable and may change over time
•    The principles of fairness are not to be applied by rote identically in
     every situation; the context must be taken into account
•    Fairness will often require the opportunity for a person affected to make
     representations either before or after the decision is taken
•    Fairness will often require that a person affected should know the gist of
     the case against him in order to make representations.

I suggest we should consider the principles set out in Doody in making our
decision.

If the relative seriousness of the charges were reversed, i.e. a private
prosecution consisted of several charges, the most serious of which was so
weak that there is clearly no case to answer. In those circumstances, I suggest
we would conclude that we would have little choice but to intervene in the
most serious charge and discontinue it. Our position on the other charges
would depend on our assessment of the strength of the evidence. If, as in
Hillsborough, we concluded that the charges fell between clearly no case to
answer and realistic prospect, I suggest we would let the private prosecution
continue on those charges only.

The question I pose here is whether there is any logical distinction of
substance which can be made between that hypothetical situation and the
Hillsborough situation? On one view, there is not and I refer to paragraph 4.1
of the Code, “if the case does not pass the evidential test, it must not go ahead,
no matter how important or serious it may be”. The Code does not permit a
distinction to be made on the basis of the seriousness of the charge when
applying the evidential test. It could be argued that there is a read across to the
private prosecution policy, ie. where there is clearly no case to answer the
charge must not be allowed to proceed no matter how serious (or trivial, I
might add) it is.

I think there are other arguments which militate in favour of taking over the
attempt pervert course of justice charge and I thought it would be helpful if I
briefly rehearsed these as I think there are some potential dangers for us if we
do not act.
•
    10   It could be argued that taking over the case in part is more readily justifiable
          than not intervening at all. In developing these arguments, I am mindful that
          our policy on private prosecutions has been exposed to both the prosecutor and
          defendants. I am also aware that the defendants are funded by South
          Yorkshire Police and further that they have each put together very powerful
          defence teams. There is every reason to suppose that they will go for judicial
          review whatever our decision.             There has already been a hint in
          correspondence when the defence argued that they considered the code tests
          ought to have been applied. To the best of my knowledge, there has not been
          a challenge on our policy on private prosecutions and the defence may well
          consider that this is potentially fertile ground for them.

    11   Leaving aside judicial review, I think there is still an issue in justifying a
         decision not to intervene in part on its merits. If asked about the attempt to
         pervert the course of justice charge, we could fairly quickly be backed into a
         comer on the basis that we considered we could intervene in part, we thought
         there was clearly no case to answer but we were influenced by our decision on
         the other charges. It might be difficult to maintain a justification. I appreciate
         that we could attempt to avoid the issue by declining to comment on an
         individual charge basis. In any event we would have to be extremely careful in
         what we say to the press as the case will still be sub judice, of course. Here it
         is appropriate to note the distinction between justifying our decision to the
         parties and justifying it more widely to the press.

    12   I agree that it would be difficult to explain a decision to intervene in part,
          given the tight limits on our ability to explain a decision in relation to a case
          which continues before the courts. It ought not to be impossible, however, and
          the decision would be capable of being justified to the parties on the basis of a
          proper application of our policy on a charge by charge basis. It could be
          argued that we would be in a stronger position should judicial review
          proceedings be commenced. We would then be able to demonstrate with ease
          to the court that we had considered our policy, we felt it should be applied on
          a charge by charge basis and we had applied it accordingly.

    13   The converse argument is that we might find it difficult to sustain the non
         intervention line before the Divisional Court as we would have to agree that
         we had not applied our own policy on an individual charge basis. This could
         taint, in the eyes of the Court, a decision in relation to the other charges. The
         defendants would have a better chance of persuading the court that the whole
         decision was wrong if they were able to point to part of it and criticise it. I
         pose the question whether this could in itself put the entire policy on private
         prosecutions at risk?

    14   Having exposed some of the arguments in favour of partial intervention, I
         readily accept that there are arguments which go the other way.

    15   In paragraph 8 1 pose the question whether there is a logical difference. At one
          level the answer is probably not, in pure logical terms. However there are
         powerful practical/rational arguments which enable a distinction to be made.
16    Where the more serious charge fails the ‘clearly no case to answer’ test, it
      would be likely that it would be appropriate to step in and take over and
      discontinue, even on a partial basis. It would be wrong for the defendant to be
      in before the court where there is clearly no case. Intervention would thus be
      necessary to achieve a fair result. Whilst the defendant would still face other
      charges, it would be unfair on the defendant to face the trauma of the more
      serious charge.

17    The distinction where the weak charge is less serious is that the defendant will
      continue to suffer the trauma of the more serious charges. It is unlikely that
      continuing to face the less serious charge would unduly add to the trauma of
      the proceedings. There can be little doubt that the manslaughter charges in the
      Hillsborough case far outweigh the attempt pervert charge in their seriousness.

18    Further, the defendant retains another remedy, ie. asking the court to discharge
      the charge at committal proceedings. True, this is available in the case where
      the weak charge is the more serious, but the trauma argument would still be in
      play. This can be put in another way, will the defendant suffer prejudice as the
      result of non intervention?

19    The question then becomes, is partial intervention necessary in the interest of
      fairness? In this context, necessary really means essential.

20    Taking all factors in account, the decision may be perceived to be finely
      balanced, with competing factors on both sides. That being the case, the
      decision ought to be exercised in favour of non intervention. Further, the
      Doody arguments lend considerable support to the view that the decision,
      unlike the Code test, must not be taken in isolation from other relevant and
      appropriate factors.

21    I understand that the view at this stage is that it is likely that the decision will
       remain in favour of non intervention. I hope that this minute may be helpful in
       exposing these arguments for use at a later stage in the event of a policy re­
      write.

22    George Croston has seen this minute and he agrees with the views expressed.




Chris Enzor
Branch Crown Prosecutor
Central Casework: York
14 December 1998
Tel:
Fax:
DX. 65204 - YORK 6
                                                                                                                                     C l , 2-1


      is D. H. Sharpling
m 'ef Crown Prosecutor                                                                                                    CPS
                                                                                                                          CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                                          50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                                          London EC4M 7EX


                                                                                                           Switchboard:   0171-273 8000
  r                                                              1                                              DX No:    300850 Ludgate EC4

       Miss A Adlington                                                               Facsimile:   0171-       273-8450
       Hillsborough Family Support Group
       1st Floor, Central Buildings                                                 Direct Line:   0171-       273-8099
       41 North John Street
       LIVERPOOL L2 6RR                                                           Our Reference:

  L                                                              J               Your Reference:



                                                                                                               9 September 1998




       Dear Miss Adlington

       RE: HILLSBOROUGH: ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

       Thank you for your letter of 9 September 1998. I have copied the letter to Mr Croston and
       asked him to research the point you have raised and respond to you direct.



                           ' A - C c j« C -i



                                           a
                                               ~ \
       M G KENNEDY
       Assistant Chief Crown Prosecutor




                                Crown Prosecution Service   •   Working in the interests of justice
r   m ~y
           v*
                                                                                                              n ^Cr<-
                                                                                                                  £■ {.<

                                                                                                 vSKWoa
      •   . •
                   p-
                   t3

      su p ?0 ^                                                                                    su ? ? ^
                             Hillsborough Family Support Group
                                                                                                 Legal Advisor
                                                                                                Keva Coombes
                9 September 1998



                Mr M G Kennedy
                Assistant Chief Crown Prosecutor
                CPS Central Casework
                50 Ludgate Hill
                London EC4M 7EX


                Your Ref: YBF/3341/89

                Dear Mr Kennedy

                Re: Hillsborough: Adlington v Duckenfield and Murray

                I thank you for your letter of 26th August 1998 and note the contents thereof

                My purpose in writing to you is to see whether you can offer any clarification that would assist
                us in that part of our submission to the Director of Public Prosecutions relating to the
                ownership of documentation arising out of the disaster. With this in mind, I enclose extract of
                a report written by Peter Wright, the then Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police, which
                was presented to a meeting of South Yorkshire Police Authority on 17thNovember 1989.
                You will note from paragraph 5.3 that on 15th August 1989, the Director wrote to the Chief
                Constable setting out his view that the matter should be the subject of a full criminal
                investigation. Are you able to provide me with a copy of this letter? If not, can you please tell
                me whose suggestion it was that Mr Geoffrey Dear be invited to undertake the investigation?

                I thank you for your assistance.


                Yours sincerely




                Ann Adlington
                Solicitor



                      Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151 236 1936. E Mail info@hfsg.org
           a        1st Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
Criminal Investigation of South Yorkshire Police O f f i c e r s

During   the     course of   the  Hillsbor oug h  Inquiry     the  question  of
manslaughter    by   the criminal  negligence    of  South Yorkshire  Police
officers was     Rai sed by counsel for the bereaved,     Mr Benet   Hytner QC.

Because this matter was not dealt wi th in^the Report of the
Inquiry the Chief Constable,    on the morning of the Report   p
referred  it   to  the Director of Public   Prosecutions,  asking       for

decision on the que sti on of criminal liability of any member of the South
Yorkshire   Police.   It   was considered appropriate,  at  that  time,  to
suspend   from duty the police commander of the Hillsborough event,   Chief
Superintendent David Duckenfield,    pending the outcome of the  Director s
deliberations.    Mr Duckenfield remains suspended.

On 15 August 1989,   the Director wrote to the Chief Constable setting out
his  view that   the   matter  should be    subject      of   a full    criminal
investigation.   The   West Midlands Police had already done        considerable
work in gathering evidence for Lord Justice T a y l o r ’s Inquiry.    It seemed
sensible,  therefore,   to  invite Mr   Geoffrey Dear QPM DL LLB,          Chief
Constable  of  the   West  Midlands  Police   Force,        to undertake    this
investigation.   His   report,  in due course,      will be submitted to the
Director of Public Prosecutions.
                                                                                                                                                      .Q r z& tccm
                                                                                                     Cs¥ '&

£   iss D. H. Sharplirg
    hief Crown Prosecutor                                                                                                                             CPS
                                                                                                                                                      CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                                                                      5 0Ludgate H i l l
                                                                                                                                                      London E C 4 M 7 E X


                                                                                                                                       Switchboard:   0 1 7 1 -2 7 3   8 0 0 0

    r                                                                                                                                      d x No:    300850 Ludgate EC4

     Keva Coombes Esq.
     Legal Advisor                                                                                             Facsimile:      0171-     273 8450
     Hillsborough Family Support Group
                                                                                                             Direct Line:      0171-
     1st Floor                                                                                                                           273 8099
     Central Buildings                                                                                     Our Reference:
     41 North John Street                                                                                                              YBF/3341/89
    LLIVERPOOL L2 6RR                                                              J                      Your Reference:




                                                                                                                                       27 August 1998



         ^ 0 L -f   ^



        RE: HILLSBOROUGH : ADLINGTON -y- DUCKENF1ELD & MURRAY

        Thank you for your letter of 17 August and enclosures. I understand Mr Croston in our
        York office has explained to Ms Adlington that he holds all the CPS case papers and is
        briefing me during Miss Sharpling’s absence on leave. This has resulted in a slight delay in
        responding.

        I note the concern you express about the papers remaining in the custody of the South
        Yorkshire Police. In the absence, however, of any indication of impropriety I do not feel
        it is appropriate for me to request the South Yorkshire Police to make alternative
        arrangements for the safekeeping of the original papers.

        It is our understanding of the correspondence you enclosed from the police that they are
        deferring the consideration of your request for voluntary disclosure until the CPS review
        decision has been made.

        We have no record of CPS guidance given in the terms you describe. It may be that there
        is some confusion between the policy on voluntary disclosure and that of the responsibility
        for storage of the material. However my understanding is that the material is the property
        of the South Yorkshire Police and the question of where the material is to be held is a matter
        for the Chief Constable to decide.

        It may be of assistance, and we would have no objection, if you were to discuss the
        disclosure point with Messrs Hammond Suddards, the solicitors representing the South
        Yorkshire Police.




                             C ro w n   P r o s e c u t io n   S e r v ic e   *W   o r k in g   in   the interests   o f   justice
»
    You will appreciate that the Police Complaints Authority(PCA) supervised the original West
    Midlands Police investigation which generated the material held in South Yorkshire.
    Accordingly you may wish to contact the Chairman, Mr P W Moorhouse, to ascertain
    whether or not the PCA feel they have a remit to assist.

    I appreciate your wish to obtain disclosure of documents in the possession of the police and
    the CPS as quickly as possible. It is my firm view that consideration of voluntary disclosure
    should be deferred until after the CPS review decision has been made. If our decision is to
    let the private prosecution continue then voluntary disclosure will be given as expeditiously
    as possible (except for material subject to public interest immunity or legal privilege).

    I understand Mr Croston has informed all the parties involved in the prosecution that the case
    review ought to be completed by the end of September. This is date may be subject to
    revision by any new material that is brought to our attention. The Director will then be
    consulted before any decision is made. I understand the next hearing is on 30 October at
    Leeds Magistrates’ Court and that provisional dates for an oral committal have been set for
    mid-December.

    Finally I want to make it clear that, although I have replied to your correspondence in
    Miss Sharpling’s absence on annual leave, I will not play any part in the review process
    which is being handled by Mr Croston. This is because I was involved in the case and
    decision not to prosecute which was made some years ago after the West Midlands Police
    enquiry. I say this because I received a file of material yesterday from Ms Aldington which
    has also been sent to M r Croston. I have sent this extra copy of the material on to Mr
    Croston.




    M G KENNEDY
    Assistant Chief Crown Prosecutor
                                                                                                               mi
 ks D. H. Sharpling                                                                     .   —
Ref Crown Prosecutor                                                                                       ^
                                                                                                               CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                               50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                               London EC4M 7EX


                                                                                                Switchboard-   < > 171-273 8 0 0 0
r                                                    1                                              DX a„.     ;>i>-k>50 Ludgate     EC4
 Ms A Aldington
 Solicitor                                                                Facsimile:    0171-    273 8450
 Hillsborough Family Support Group
                                                                        D irect Line:   0171-    ^ 7 3   8 0 9 9
 1st Floor
 Central Buildings
                                                                     O ur Reference:
 41 North John Street                                                                       YBF/3341/89
ULIVERPOOL L2 6RR                                    J               Your Referetxce:




                                                                                            26 August 1998




 RE: HILLSBOROUGH: ADLINGTON -v- DUCKENFIELD & MURRAY

 Thank you for your letter of 25 August and enclosures which I received today. This included
 a copy of a four page letter to Mr Croston, a copy of a three page statement marked 101 A,
 101B and 101C, and a red ring binder of material paginated 1-207.

 I confirm that I have sent all this material to Mr Croston at our York office from where this
 case is being handled.

I want to make it clear that, although I have replied to some recent correspondence as acting
Chief Crown Prosecutor during Ms Sharpling’s absence on annual leave, I will not play any
part in the review process which is being handled by Mr Croston. This is because, as I
believe you know, I was involved in the case and decision not to prosecute which was made
some years ago after the West Midlands Police enquiry.




M G KENNEDY
Assistant Chief Crown Prosecutor




                       Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests of justice
                   Hillsborough Family Support Group
25 August 199S
                                                                                   <2 Uf?

Mr M G Kennedy
Assistant Chief Crown Prosecutor
CPS Central Casework
50 Ludgate Hill
LONDON
EC4M7EX                                                                       ■■ C f(fi     J        0- &V-l^ cf

Your Ref: YBF/3341/89                                                   ^                                     ('“‘x-UU 3

                                                                            tp'fA, 10i (3 ^S' ( Q ( c *

                                                                                                ^ ( CCiUi ^                C
Dear Sir
                                                                  ^ Q a '4<.Si h t o l .
Adlington v Murray; AdUngton v Puckenfield

Please find enclosed a copy of my recent letter to Mr Croston, Prosecution Team Leader. I
am also copying you the file of papers referred to therein, as an indication of my concern as to
what might or could happen to them. Whilst I appreciate that Mir Croston has been nominated
to deal with the “review” on behalf of the Director of Public Prosecutions, I feel compelled to
take the extra precaution of supplying you with copy documentation. This decision is heavily
influenced by the unique circumstances of this case in which all of the original documentation
is in the sole custody of South Yorkshire Police.

You will note that in my letter to Mr Croston, I make reference to a poor copy of a three page
statement made by Inspector White and dated 6* May 1989. I now enclose a copy of the
same, enhanced by myself during preliminary tests. I should be grateful if you would insert
this document as pages 101A - 101C, together with a suitable note which indicates that, at this
stage, this is merely my attempt to decipher the contents of the statement. Even allowing for
that caveat, I am sure you will appreciate the significance of the statement.

I should be grateful if you would immediately confirm receipt of this letter and file of papers.

Yours faithfully



A Adlington
Solicitor



              Tel: 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151236 1936. E Mai*l info@hfsg.org
           1* Floor Central Buildings, 41 North John Street, Liverpool L2 6RR



                                                                                                                           i
r




                                                                                         vSBORqj.




                                                                                          St/ppQ'
                       Hillsborough Family Support Group

    24 August 1998


    Mr G R Croston
    Prosecution Team Leader
    CPS Central Casework
    United House
    Piccadilly
    York

    Your Ref: YBF/GC/3341/89


    Dear Mr Croston

    Adlington v M urray: Adlington v Ducfcenfifeld

    I look forward to your letter confirming the contents of our telephone conversation today.
    For the purposes of your review of the documents in this matter, and with reference to our
    continuing concerns that the South Yorkshire Police have custody of the relevant documents,
    we enclose a file of questionnaires, statements and letters. Tab 1 contains different versions of
    the questionnaire sent out to South Yorkshire officers soon after the disaster by Chief
    Superintendent Wain of that force for the purposes of their unsworn statements. Tab 2 is a
    sample of the different questionnaire used by West Midlands Police to put to spectators when
    formal witness statements were taken from them.

    Tab 3 contains a draft of the statement with a date of 17* July 1990 prepared by or for Chief
    Inspector Bettison, a copy o f which we have sent you already. The following tabs contain the
    original and edited statements o f a number o f officers, with highlighted marks for your
    convenience. You will see that the passages removed from the first three officers’ statements
    (Holmes, K. Frost, and Wilson) show careful excisions of factual matters which are adverse to
    the South Yorkshire Police, whereas many obvious comments, which are not adverse to that
    force, or which are adverse to Liverpool supporters, remain unedited in the second versions.
    A statement from Wilson was sent to the DPP in 1990, and occupies 9 pages according to the
    Master Witness List. Both the edited and unedited statements are 8 pages long.


                  Tel: 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151 236 1936. £ Mail info@hfsg.org
              l 11Floor Central Buildings, 41 North John Street, Liverpool L2 6RR
On page 63 and 68, we have highlighted an important sentence from the first statements of PC
Guest (one of the few South Yorkshire officers who made a formal witness statement to the
West Midlands Police) indicating that rt was obvious at 2.40 pm that the crowds outside
Leppings Lane could not be accommodated. This would also have been obvious to the
defendants in the current case. However, it was the case for the South Yorkshire Police at the
inquest that the overcrowding was not evident before the match started at 3 pm. This was a
critical issue at the inquest, and the Coroner took the view on the evidence called before him,
that the overcrowding was not evident before the match started at 3 pm. We note from the
Master Witness List of April 1990, that five or six pages of statements only from PC Guest
were sent. Guest died before the inquest, but no statement was read to the jury.

The statements of PC Titterton show the removal of important factual observations from the
end of the first statement, including, at page 88, matters going to the heart of all investigations
into the disaster. A statement from him is listed in the Master Witness List.

Inspector White’s first statement tab 9, included passages at page 100-1 that were deleted
from the second edited statement. (The first document came to us with the lines through the
relevant paragraphs). You will see that the first deleted paragraph contains the evidence that
White would always monitor the build-up of spectators in the Leppings Lane pens by climbing
the steps to the control box (occupied on the day of the disaster by the two defendants and
others) to get a good view.

There can be no honest reason for the deletion of this evidence. It is the kind of assertions
that Bettison at tab 3, pages 17-8 suggested, the following year, must be “clarified” where it
appears on other officers’ statements. The statement o f the next witness, PC Woodcock, tab
 10, demonstrates the central importance of the deleted parts of Inspector White’s evidence.
The passage at the middle of page 112 asserts that Inspector White normally diverted
spectators from the central pens, but on this occasion was told not to. If true, it proves that
paragraph 4 on page 15 in the statement of Bettison was wrong.

This issue is at the heart o f the case. The South Yorkshire Police claim that the diversion of
oncoming supporters from the central pens in 1988 was unknown to senior officers. Lord
Justice Taylor had found in his 1989 report that the failure to divert the spectators in 1989,
after the decision had been made to open the gates, was a “blunder of the first magnitude” and
the immediate cause of the fatal crushing. The 1988 events prove foreseeability, which is of
course critical to dvfl and criminal allegations of negligence. They are of the most obvious
relevance to the manslaughter issue in the prosecutions.

We have also received a very poor copy of a 3 page statement of Inspector White dated 6lh
t^ay 1989 which we expect to be deciphered for us soon by technical experts.

Faced with the evidence o f White and Woodcock, the honest course for the officers preparing
the evidence would have been to ask Inspector White to say whether Woodcock’s account
was true, and to produce his answers. Instead, the passages in both statements were excised
and the truth was suppressed. A seven page statement of White appears in the Master Witness
List. This may have been the first statement, submitted with the lines deleted.



                                                -2-
•
On the other hand, the Wilson statements, described above, were both eight pages long but
occupied 9 pages according to the Master Witness List This would suggest that only the
second, six page statement of White might have been sent, and the extra page, in his and
Wilson’s cases were a title or introductory page in the original bundles of evidence sent to the
DPP. We note that, in either event, no statement o f Woodcock appears in that list.

Associated with this subject is the statement of PC Lang at Tab 13. Neither the important
matters at the end of page 163 in the six page statement, nor any of the statement of 2nd June
1989, appears in the five page amended report at pages 167 to 171 of the file. The Master
Witness List shows that only a five (or possibly four) page statement of Lang was sent to the
DPP. It appears dear that the DPP did not know, therefore, of Lang’s 1988 experience,
which confirms the facts set out in the original statements of White and Woodcock.

We are not surprised to note that none of White, Woodcock or Lang was called to give
evidence to Taylor or at the inquest, at which they would have been cross-examined. Their
unrevised evidence shows that a senior officer used to monitor the pens; that a diversion from
the central pens took place in 1988; but that there was a failure to take this known and
obvious precaution in 1989, resulting in ninety-six deaths.

The statements of Pattison, Tab 11, Tissington, Tab 12, Kennedy, Tab 14, Dunn, Tab 15 and
Royle, Tab 16, show important deletions of factual observations adverse to the interests of the
South Yorkshire Police, and are samples of the dozens of examples we have discovered. Of
these, Tissington was called before the Inquest, and a statement from him was contained in the
Master Witness List. None of the others referred to in this paragraph were called at the
Inquest, nor were their statements recorded in the Master Witness List.

Although the West Midlands Police Questionnaire asked spectators for “Views or
Observations” (question 53, page 12), we know o f no cases in which such observations were
removed from their witness statements. There are innumerable examples of police statements
which, even after editing, contain hearsay and comment adverse to Liverpool supporters. You
will see that the process o f amendments and deletions to the police statements of matters
prejudicial to their own force goes far beyond that referred to in Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
report. We believe he was misled.

It is only at the insistence of the Home Secretary himself that we have been given access to
these statements this year. Before the report of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s “Scrutiny” we
knew virtually nothing o f all this. We shall send you a comprehensive analysis of all the
statements by 8* September, but you will see why we are so concerned that the South
Yorkshire Police are holding all the material, and, as the correspondence at Tab 17 shows, are
acting under the advice of Hammond Suddards, and particularly Mr Peter Metcalf. This is the
solicitor who, according to the Bettison statement at Tab 3, pages 15 to 18, was taking a
leading part in what Bettison describes as “clarification” of witness statements, in the context
of civil proceedings in July 1990. At the same time, of course, leading counsel was preparing
to advise the DPP in relation to criminal liability on the bass of a large number o f unsworn
statements which had already been similarly “clarified” to the advantage of the South
Yorkshire Police, the year before.




                                                -3-
•
We are sending a copy of this letter and the file to Hammond Suddards. If you cannot compel
the police to hand over the material, can you at least give them some guidance? Your review
will take several weeks as it is. The South Yorkshire Police are at present acting under the
guidance (see page 202) that you have given them, namely, that they might not wish to hand
over the material until your review is complete. Surely, in the light of this material, you can
revoke that guidance.

Quis custodiet ipsos custodes?

Yours sincerely




A Adlington
Solicitor




                                               -4-
                      w tiir-ffc


                                                                   pf» | y*A< -           "^Sr*.l''1. .
                                                                                                                                  CA^)
                                                                   B E C r*
                                                                   in g o      *•
io n                   pvw
                                                                   D M         ....
r.a                                                            O TH EH :: *
or Fases                                                             .to r i" .....                                                               S i jn«
                       D6 o S S f


  *                   *««        -fc *          *. »           x      , U           F   r W                ^        ^      “      • l" * “ l . t S h:
  ^ ^ .r m                 v tr * r s z < * r ™                               : - « r f f c * r w * •• w '* i n . » « « #n.
       i          ~                       • .#5*« *                  ^
                                                      '             „ '       j-u*s                            "•       .*tave oe»r» £n*M«*“*cr
  ■$■ shoutt) f i r s t ex?-**11 tnat l ” ^                                                     y         juTa/e. *«./«<•               bjf>cZb&,^
      i n cb»r<)* ■e f - t h 't t > te i 5 '-= r.a a n J , i 4 r r 4 c e s .

      c a lle d        u r n *            fcr^ -tU * * £ * •                            ft      » «y* « • ' —                                 •*'*“ ■'*
      aT 7Z ^ <                                                                               tn *        " ■* » .“ " • * « •
      ^ ‘ :4, - &,x,S»a&\ Stand prior ta "thm*. *U di parsing "to * t t l '“ ‘-ci
      a t w k 'c *                       » f *<» t 4 - ®             1^ , 5 j
      4 hi                                                t k » i t / * * * "*»*w * • ' ci*u i 'r “ ‘i ‘ y                        ,r i,# 4 * ~ ‘ r

           j   - u ** e ^ rv o t* W n 't t w                  tA    tc4     liofe a *                                                         ^       *"*

      WW h « * r f * « - * • / p r io r U                                 « « . > « * * * * « * 1 «**
       W          , r „ //;« «                i r ^ ; , 9 -t                w - f ^ w           .     < * .* .» ■

       < U ~ *                                                                                                                                    **“

       £ < * , * . - (S .* .M .                           s.'3 ne<( ^ « r c ia r                     ^5a*a ‘
                                 a       ^                ^          w ^                1 -     * ^                     >—        « * “
           ;              « i f w«f               tu iin * t i * c £ t o d *v»r W t « t r *c’ “ *”*r *

           W m 9 -                £                     D nty         fC1         9
             ^                   a M          . i r t t h * « er< l* L L U v * f f * * - * & » * “ ><
                                                      W                                                                  ' '* "
                         imp *       ■*“• '
»                          -        «

'' ‘              '                                                I           ■ ^ -tktL Vkct                                of      ^           9***™ '              Mm v

*a *l v * j * ^                          ^                                                              ^            ‘ r ^* * { u
                                                                                                                                a w3^r e x0 c/ U# n* U pY ,: ." , -f . *^



4h*y                       ^            ‘■ « « ir-                                                                                           ,uri pe„ l6 g a i -is,
    ^             ^                     * to U              * .»           ^         -o W       ^                  *’ * *                                                    „
         J                ,                       1 u          ± oe- o »             M ictrS                                     only ^                *°-e ^

                      I        » *        w            -           -       * * * * *        e^          r4we c                                                A
                      ,        ,.         n e tte d                i ' r t & i a<ct -to *                                            « « * eV acua ‘“ n ,      ,
    CrW                   w»                    * •                 ^                                                                o p tr M o n ,l « r * . » * ^
    -rteftU -W                                                      l * W P **4 ** »                W                1
        »/.^J'tf/"'                                                                                                          /           i                                       /iP
    tis 'itZ -                                                             t                    ■       x f r a c tii/z d $ V&rh&L rn*S$a?j& ° f ^


              “            •        *     ~       *        ?           ”       l Z     '        Z            £               L       *            <     • *       - -
        ^                 “     “         r       .* *                                                       * .         -       M           -   ' —              >



            > /u*y& Jhe£*                                      ^



             it               -to                     * r d * F n iC oir                        •        ,                   ,       S & 'ii

             b tfa r *          mJ            ^        ”3      & *■ " * *                                      i d               - tlu           a n ^ rJ     -fro.




                          •         • •                                               i w                        t           j. a *                                          w .« *
              (Vono * , ^                                                                       * * *                ^
               . . . . , . , .          * * * « »                                                                        d u f !             ^        * !> * * * ^       ^

                  .   ha„               «»r       0,                            ^           i       2                                                 U M 'M * " * * '
                   -       •* - 2                 •' ; -••ir'*‘
       ■‘ " J




                                                           v.-.e          v m f r '& il f » U c* w i r e /

feo* is iUu^tiJ * f tt* t*rn*r t f -the.                                 &tv«t M U ^ V L*»*-
i j l r n - » - £ * « « ./ * * * < « x « r « W                 ««*«>                    a p f n > « * - th * f « - e

                              *« - t t *               i« * « « W        * » *      U A f r m            ^

ya/cc'aa€ ^o»‘rft         i» fa .c ity am d r a te - o f - { i l l

4w<i. U w in .fit /KyA w r ix ? " i£J%

    .,... ,‘A t U      f& ie o d                                        * * • * « ■ * * * W& **M“ l
                c n u J isty * •           *«»»•       P   - ' ^ f th ^ P o L ^ C M                           * * *

i                      *> * 6 * « * * * £                                   i r
          »„      d * d ™       -4    * * * « * « * < * %                  /*>“ < * ^            rV^         f>-    *•'
       ..... . -,,     a n fU ix * ). i h d     0 ,e   t< u r .* iM S   w«rt   fr il-    i» ° a < th w e       ***=■«
        . .-„ : • , - - «MMl*r «.•■»*                           ««#•**. £Aav. 7 ,* ^ —                             ' -
        ; ., , , . '.,*' «           p a i ^      W ftrftn c * «L Sh-*tfi< iJ & * "< •* ■
                             Td^tid - “ - ...■ j           -----
                                                                                    suppO^*
             Hillsborough Family Support Group
                                                                                  Legal Advisor
                                                                                 Keva Coombes



17 August 1998

Your Ref: YBF/3341/89

Mr MG Kennedy
Assistant Chief Crown Prosecutor
CPS Central Casework
50 Ludgate Hill
London EC4M 7EX

Dear Sir

Adlington v Murray: Adlington v Duckenfield

1.     Thank you for your letter of 11th August, which we received on 14th. We are pleased
       that the matter will be considered at the highest level, and we appreciate that it will be
       helpful that you yourself are involved, having been concerned in the matter, we
       believe, in 1990.

2.    However, we remain concerned about the custody of the papers. You say in your
      letter to us that you appreciate our concerns about the propriety of the South
      Yorkshire Police holding the papers, but that you are not in a position to make any
      request for alternative measures “in the absence of a formal role”.

3.    However, the South Yorkshire Police are arguing, in stark contrast, that CPS guidance
      is the very justification for its “policy” of maintaining custody of the archive. We
      enclose copies of a letter from Mr Ian Dames, Assistant Chief Constable of the South
      Yorkshire Police of 3rd August, a letter of 7th August from Hammond Suddards, our
      letter to Hammond Suddards of 12th August, and their faxed reply of today’s date.

4.    You will see that it is said that the Crown Prosecution Service had issued a “response”
      to the effect that “the Chief Constable might wish to delay any voluntary disclosure of
      documentation until that [CPS] review was complete and a decision made.” This was
      “guidance” provided, it was suggested, pursuant to section 3(2)(e) of the Prosecution
      of Offences Act 1985, which it was said would be followed “impartially”. You will
      note that Hammond Suddards are also denying this material to the solicitors for the
      defendants.

                                              -   1
                                                  -




       Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151 236 1936. E Mail info@hfsg.org
     1st Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
We should point out that we regard it is inappropriate that the South Yorkshire Police
should be seeking your views under section 3(2)(e), since they take the position
apparently that there were no “criminal offences” at all.

However, they have done so, and guidance has been expressed. In the circumstances
we repeat our suggestion that you should request the South Yorkshire Police to agree
to the transfer of the papers, perhaps to a neutral third party of your choice, and that
they should allow the contents of the archive, subject to any proper claim to, for
example, legal professional privilege, to be examined by prosecution and defence under
suitable security conditions, with facilities for copying.

No doubt, the South Yorkshire Police will respond to any further “guidance”. Given
the scale of the task of examining the material upon which the CPS has engaged, and
the likely delay, we can see no reason why this process should await a decision under
section 6(2) and section 23(1). The power to take over and discontinue a case is
surely to be applied only in clear and exceptional circumstances. The right of a private
citizen to bring a prosecution was preserved specifically by section 6 of the
Prosecution of Offences Act 1985. The provision was reviewed in R v Bow Street
Magistrates Court, ex parte South Coast Shipping Company (1993) 96 Cr App R405.

We can see no statutory basis for delaying the magistrates’ court proceedings pending
a determination of this question. Under section 6(2), you may take over the conduct
of the proceedings “at any stage” in those proceedings before or after committal. Why
should the conduct of those proceedings before the magistrates’ court be delayed for
weeks or months before you decide whether to take them over? You will, we suggest
be in a much better position to make this decision if we have had access to relevant
and probative material obtained to provide further and additional support to our
allegations and the case has advanced. You will be free to monitor and observe the
progress of the case, and free to make reasonable requests of us for information and
submissions about the material.

Our case on the allegation of manslaughter and misfeasance is cogent and essentially
simple. Lord Taylor’s findings in his interim report on the disaster in 1989 were clear.
He said at paragraph 265 of his report:

“The immediate cause of the gross overcrowding and hence the disaster was the
failure, when Gate C was opened, to cut off access to the central pens which were
already overfull.”

This was a “blunder of the first magnitude”. The evidence of forensic pathologists
called at the mini inquests in 1990 was that in almost all cases death resulted rapidly
from unconsciousness that was caused by the crushing that followed the inrush of
spectators, in full view of the two defendants, following the order to open the gates
and a failure to divert the incoming spectators from pens 3 and 4. This finding has
been confirmed in the Court of Appeal Frost v South Yorkshire Police (CA) (1998)
259. where it was stated:
“The immediate cause of the disaster was a senior police officer’s decision to open an
outer gate without cutting off access to the pens. Liability for the deaths and injuries
of those spectators has been admitted by the three defendants the first of whom is the
plaintiffs’ Chief Constable.”

Mr Duckenfield was in overall charge, and primarily responsible for the decisions and
lack of decisions which led to the crushing. Mr Murray shares in this responsibility.
He knew the ground much better. He had been in an important position of
responsibility at the identical semi-final the year before, when the Liverpool supporters
were also at the Leppings Lane end of the ground. A similar concentration of
supporters in the pens 3 and 4 had occurred, and, we contend, was clear to him but
crushing had been avoided by the simple expedient of diverting the incoming
supporters from the tunnel which led to those overcrowded pens.

It is the case as Taylor found, that in 1989, Mr Duckenfield was entitled to call on Mr
Murray’s experience. Mr Murray failed in breach of his duty, like Mr Duckenfield
failed, in breach of his duty, to take, demand or recommend the obvious steps to avoid
the obvious dangers.

It is alleged that, the actions and omissions of the two were a substantial cause of
death; that they owed the deceased a duty of care and were negligent and that a jury is
entitled to find that the negligence was of such a gravity as to amount to a crime within
the principle in R v Adomako [1995] 1 AC 181.

“The essence of the matter which supremely a jury question, is whether having regard
to the risk of death involved the conduct of the defendant was so bad in all the
circumstances as to amount in their judgment to a criminal act or omission”. [1995]
1AC 187E (Annex 4).

This test was not thought to be correct in 1990 when the DPP decided not to
prosecute any individual in relation to the disaster. The prevailing legal view was that
involuntary manslaughter of this kind involved the complicated concept of recklessness
deriving from statutes setting out crimes of causing death by reckless driving and of
criminal damage.

In Adomako, the House of Lords did not change the law. It declared that gross
negligence rather than recklessness was and is the basis of the crime. That approach
governs the facts of this case.

You will know from previous correspondence that we allege that relevant information
was improperly withheld from the Director and other bodies in 1989 and 1990. We
have important copies of many witness statements, disclosed to us during the
“Scrutiny” of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, which we had never seen before, but which
strengthen Lord Taylor’s findings, and which it appears were not supplied to the
Director in 1990. Our letter of 4th August contains a regrettable error when we said
that w§ put to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith certain amendments. This of course was not
       the case. These representations were made by others and not by us personally.

17.    Against all this background, we do not understand how it can be right for the South
       Yorkshire Police, which has an interest of its own to serve, to deny us access to
       relevant and probative evidence, under your “guidance”. The practice to which you
       refer must surely apply only to those cases in which a police force acts as the impartial
       investigating body, examining allegations against civilians or its own junior officers.

18.    This case is of course very different. The South Yorkshire Police force was itself
       under investigation. It was concerned to defend itself as a combative litigant against
       claims of negligence. And yet, for reasons which remain unexplained, the West
       Midlands Police force entrusted it at some point with not only all the original
       documents and exhibits, but also its internal police report into the allegations, and even
       counsel’s opinion, obtained by the Director, on the question of criminal liability. Is
       there any precedent in the Director’s or police practice for sending to a person or body
       under suspicion the privileged advice of counsel, or the confidential police report into
       the crimes alleged?

19.    We respectfully invite you therefore to recognise that the South Yorkshire Police
       retain possession of the papers because the CPS has suggested that it should; but that
       that advice ought to be changed. We should inform you as a matter of courtesy that
       we propose to apply for a witness summons directed to Mr Daines, directing him to
       produce relevant statements exhibits and other documents. We shall raise this at the
       Leeds Magistrates’ Court on 20th August. No doubt someone from the CPS will
       attend and, if necessary, make representation.

20.    Above all, we should invite you to explain what possible damage to the interests of
       prosecution or defence, or justice could be inflicted at this stage by a simple transfer of
       documents from the possession of an interested party to an Uhcontroversial outsider
       and by an examination of that material by prosecution and defence?


Yours faithfully




Keva Coombes
Legal Advisor




                                               -4-
3 AUG ’ 9 8   10:19        FROM S . Y . P .     CHI EF . DEP T.                                    PAGE. 001


               Sou th Y orkshire
               POLICE                                             Ian Baines, BA(Hons) Dip.Ed.
               J U S T I C E wi th COURAGE                             Assistant Chief Constable




   Ref: ACC/ID/NMH

   3 August 1998

   Ms A Adlington
   Hillsborough Family Support Group
   Central Buildings
   41 North John Street
   LIVERPOOL
   L2 6RR




    Dear Ms Adlington

    Hillsborough Stadium Disaster

    I refer to your recent requests of statements and information, some made direct to South
    Yorkshire Police and some made to Mr M PYNE, Home Office Policing Policy Unit.

    You began private prosecutions on 26 June 1998 for alleged offences concerned with the
    disaster. The Director of Public Prosecutions is reviewing the case. I am awaiting legal
    advice on whether I should release information.

    I will write to you again a s soon as practicable.

    Yours sincerely




    fjp
    Ian Daines
    Assistant Chief Constable




                  Police Headquarters
                  Soig Hill
                  Sheffield S3 SLY
                  Tal; 0114 220 2020 Fax; 0114 252 3243
                  D irect D ial No: 0114 2523405


                                                                                     **   TOTAL PAGE. 0 0 1    **
                                                                                                  2 Park Lane
H ammond S uddards                                                                                Leeds
               SOLICITORS                                                                         LS3 1ES
                                                                                                  Telephone (0113) 284 7000
                                                                                                  DX No. 26441
                                                                                                  Fax (0113) 284 7001
                                                                                                  Peter.Metcalf@HaniniondSuddards.co.uk
 F.A.O. Ann Adlington
 The Hillsborough Family Support Group
 1st Floor
 Central Buildings
 41 North John Street
 Liverpool
 L2 6RR



 O u r R ef:                                                       Y o u r R ef                                                     D ate:

 PCM. SB. CHI. 57-9                                                                                                                 7 August 1998



 By Fax & By Post

                                                                                          l 1 AUG 1998
 Dear Sirs
                                                                                  L.
 Hillsborough Disaster Documentation

 We have been asked by the South Yorkshire Police to reply to your letter o f 3 August 1998
 addressed to the Assistant Chief Constable.

 As you are aware Summonses have been issued in the Leeds Magistrates Court against David
 Duckenfield and Bernard Murray in connection with matters arising out o f the disaster.

 In connection with those Summonses requests for documentation and information have been
 received from a number o f persons.

 The Chief Constable sought guidance pursuant to Section 3(2)(e) o f the Prosecution o f Offences Act
 1985 from the Director or Public IV osecutions in relation to those requests.

 The response was that the Crown Prosecution Service were reviewing the question o f whether to
 intervene in the private prosecutions and that the Chief Constable might wish to delay any voluntary
 disclosure o f documentation until that review was complete and a decision was mailed ~~      "

 The Chief Constable has accepted that guidance and accordingly will not respond to any requests for
 documentation or information until the CPS review has been completed and the decision o f the DPP
 is known.


 Offices also at:

 7 Devonshire Square              Trinity Court                      Pennine House                  •Suite 688 Lloyd's                       Avenue Louise 250
 Cutlers Gardens                  16 John Dalton Street              39-45 Well Street              One Lime Street                          1050 Brussels
 London                           Manchester                         Bradford                       London                                   Belgium
 EC2M 4YH                         M60 8HS                            BD1 5NU                        EC3M 7HA                                 Telephone (00) 32 2 627 7676
 Telephone (0171) 655 1000        Telephone (0161)830 5000           Telephone (01274) 734700       Telephone (0171) 327 3388/3399           Fax (00) 32 2 627 7686
 Fax (0171) 655 1001             _Fax (0161)830 5001                 F a x (01274)307239            Fax (0171)621 1217

 A list of Partners can be viewed at the above address. This firm is regulated by the Law Society in the conduct o f investment business.
                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                           7 August 1998
                                                                                    F.A.O. Ann Adlington
                                                                       Hillsborough Family Support Group

 In the interests o f justice and fairness this policy will apply to all requests received.

 Yours faithfully
-4 -1 .



 HAMMOND SUDDARDS




                                                        1998




                      RECEIVED
                         1 1 AUG 1998




                                                                                              chi.057-0009.let.0708.pcm
■>

                Hillsborough Family Support Group                                         Legal Advisor
                                                                                          Keva Coombes
Your Ref- PCM.SB.CHL57-9

12 August 1998

Hammond Suddards
Solicitors
2 Park Lane
Leeds
LS3 1ES

 Dear Sirs

     Arlington Y Mlirr*Y AHlinyton v Plickenffeld

     The purpose of this letter is to request to you _as a matter of urgm *


     soon as possible to some neutral third party.

     The HSFG is becoming increasingly concerned that all original
     South Yorkshire Police. Such papers as we have received from the H om e Office in the
     year have led us to believe that the South Yorkshire Police adopted a deliberate pohcyo
     w ith h old in g material and not revealing facts as disclosed by its junior officers in their first
     statements after the disaster.

     We have received both edited and unedited versions of the statements of              * ortehire
     Police officers The process of omitting material facts extending patently beyond that
     suggested in Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report, and makes us suspect                       m
     the course of his “Scrutiny”. We are in the process of preparing a detailed analysis.

      We have also received in the last year statements from spectators whose
      comoletelv unknown to us before. M o st o f        statements were not onAe MastCTWito^
                                                       t h   e s e


      List of statements submitted to the Director of Public Prosecutions in 1990 and m ost of these
      ^ ^ ^ o t called at the inquest. We suspect the DPP was given an unbalanced
      account of the evidence.
       We invite you to explain by what legal process the West Midlands Police entrusted all1the
       ftfimnai papers including copies of the West Midlands Police report and the advice
       counsel on the'sul^ect of prosecutions to a force that was under “ ^ ° ^ h' ^ £shire
       admitted negligence? Why should the papers b e in the possession of the South Yorksmr
       Police at all?



            Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 01S1
          1.. Floor C entral B u ild in g 41 North John Street Liverpool 1 2 6R »
              a copy of » document called the “Phillips Report”. This is not the.occasionJo
W e h a v e seen
com m ent upon it. We do, however, request you to explain to us how material
. .       ioUectgd bv the West Midlands Police came to be m the possession of the South
           P o S 1 W in otd er t h a t M r Phfflips might be invited to deliver his oponom upon
it?
Assistant Chief Constable Daines has already expressed the opinion publically that ‘It is hard
to imagine a private prosecution getting beyond the first hurdle . Is it right in these
Hr-™ ...™ *, that he should make, or be party to decisions about the disclosure s the
prosecutor of the material in his possession at a time when the very existence of the
 prosecution is under challenge.
 We in vite you to agree, without, of course, the slightest a t e s iM o f i^ o p r i^ .t t o t o
 papers should no longer remain in the custody of the South Yorkshire Police. Justice mu
 seen to be done The South Yorkshire Police have an obvious interest in the outcome of the
 prosecution, and there is at the very least a temptation to keep shrouded in secrecy relevant
 documentation, especially if it casts the force in a dubious light.

 Even if our suspicions are unfounded it is obviously in the interests of all parties to have
 simultaneous access to the archive. T h e r e may be material exculpating the defendants. We
 note that the South Yorkshire Potice accepted publically the findings of Lord Taylor. It must,
 therefore, take the position, as Lord Taylor did, as a central finding that the failure to arrange
 for the diversion of the supporters from the central pens when the gates were opened was “a
 blunder of the first magnitude”, and the immediate cause of the disaster.

  We ask you to explain therefore how it is appropriate that South Yorkshire Police continue to
  hold the papers when it has associated itself without reserve with an inquiry which has blamed
  at least one of the defendants, acting on its behalf, so comprehensively?

  We refer to our letter of 20* July to Mr Daines requesting the addresses of police officers with
  whom we wish to speak. There is no possible bona fide reason why the DPP’s review should
  prevent you from supplying this information. How can it be contrary to the interests of justice
  to give us these addresses so we can progress matters?

   The argument that you will no nothing until the DPP has made a decision to take over the
   prosecution is unreasonable in these circumstances. We invite you to reply positively to this
   letter before the end of the week, or we shall apply for a witness summons directed to Mr
   Daines requiring the production of all relevant documents. If there is another suitable person
   on whom the summons should be served, please let us know before 5 pm on Fnday 14
   August.

   Yours faithfully


                Cl
      Keva Coombes
      Legal Advisor

                                                   2
    J8   ’ 98    1 3 :0 8      FAX 0 1 1 3 2 8 4 7 0 0 1                             HAMMOND SUDDARDS                                                                           @002


                                                                                                      2 Park Lane
#        H ammond S uddards                                                                           Leeds
                                                                                                      LS3 1ES
                      SOLI CI TORS
                                                                                                      Telephone (0113) 284 7000
                                                                                                      DX No. 26441
                                                                                                      Fax (0113)284 7001
                                                                                                      Peter.MetcaJf@HanwroudSnddards co.uk
          F.A.O. K Coombes
          Legal Advisor
          Hillsborough Family Support Group
          1st Floor
          Central Buildings
          41 North John Street
          Liverpool
          L2 6RR


          O urR efi                                                   Your Ref:                                                         Date:

          PCM.SB .CHI. 57-9                                                                                                             17 August 1998


          Bv F a i & Bv Post


           Pear Sirs

           Hillsborough Documentation

           Thank you for your letter of 12 August 1998.

           We must advert directly to the final paragraph of your letter. Neither we nor our clients accept that
           it is “unreasonable” to obtain guidance from llie DPP and, having obtained that guidance, to follow
           it,

           That policy will continue to be applied impartially to prosecutor, Defendants and to any other party
           seeking information or documents until the CPS review is completed and the decision of the DPP
           known.

           The other points made in your letter (which are not accepted) would in any event only become
           matters for consideration if the prosecutions are to proceed.

           Yours fait!
                                                                                         becoved
                                                                                              1 7 AUG 1998
                                      UDDARDS

                                                                                                                                                        dji.O57-0009.h6g. 1708.t«m

           QKinihdit:
           7 Dnnnsfain Squam              Tiinity Court                    Pemine I louse                  Suite 688 LfcytTr.                     Avenue Louise 250
           CutfercCtatdem                 16 JohnM«onS«r**t                » 4 5 W«U Stoat                 0 » Linn Strut                         1030Brood*
           lindtn                         M andator                        BndJbid                         London                                 Belgium
           EC2M4TrH                       MS0SHS                           BD1 5NU                         EC3M7HA                                Tslephce« (00) 3 2 2 0 7 7 6 7 6
           Telephone (M 71) 6551000       Tdtpbroe (0161) £30 5000         Telephone (01274)734700         Telephone (0171) 327 3MWi3y*>          Fa*(00) 322 fi27 7616
           Fuc(0171)«55 1001                Fn(aifil)S0S001                Fax (01274) 307239              Fm (0171) 621 1217

            A list ofTa flw n cm be viewed illfec ab
                                                   QYCaddrea. T tis   is             by '.he LilW Society iath© conduct of investment business.
1 7 / 3 8 ’ 98 1 6 : 4 0   01512361936                     H F S G                    -->01712738450                          Pg. 01
                                                                                            ,

                                    T > 7 > 1 S^k                                                            ^ . .. *



                                Hillsborough Family Support Group q                                                             ^ ^

                                                                                                          h -J G u J f    U o i^ P C c y jj

                           v.                                                                         <jf iW P u ^ K ^ (.U.U,
       TO                  x v a . V         a       - \   k   m     o    -   i   .             ( D         ^       c .       o k j t f


        FAX NO:
                                                                                                ©     s     /   f         *t/sln,


        FROM:              W V ^ -               V tM ^            ^ v v lt i


         DATE:                  W                              V^^T'

         FAX NO:                0151 236 1936

         TELEPHONE NO:                       0151 236 1919


          NO OF PAGES TO FOLLOW:                                     *4

          MESSAGE:

                                         V       W     .             ^ o _ \ A                  W          M              0   - ^ j V v V




                                                                                                                m    Aua \ m



                             Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151 236 1936. E Mai! info@hfsg.org
                           1st Floor C entral Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR




n%
1 7 / M ’ 98 1 6 : 4 1     01 51 2 3 6 1 936            H F S G               -->01712738450                     Pg.


                                                                                                 ^   SORo%




y SU?
                              Hillsborough Family Support Group                                   Legal Advisor
                                                                                                  Keva Coombes


            17 August 1998

            Your Ref: YBF/3341/89

            Mr MG Kennedy
            Assistant Chief Crown Prosecutor
            CPS Central Casework
            50 Ludgate Hill
            London EC4M TEX

             Dear Sir

             Adlington v Murray: Adlinptony D uckgniield

             1           Thank you for your letter of 11* August, which we received on 14*. We are pleased
                         that the matter will be considered at the highest level, and we appreciate that it will be
                         helpful that you yourself, are involved, having been concerned in the matter, we
                         believe, in 1990.

             2.          However, we remain concerned about the custody of the papers. You say in your
                         letter to us that you appreciate our concerns about the propriety of the South
                         Yorkshire Police holding the papers, but that you are not in a position to make any
                         request for alternative measures “in the absence of a formal role ,

             3           However, the South Yorkshire Police are arguing, in stark contrast, that CPS guidance
                         is the very justification for its “policy” of maintaining custody of the archive. We
                         enclose copies of a letter from Mr Ian Daines, Assistant Chief Constable of the South
                         Yorkshire Police of 3rt August, a letter of 7* August from Hammond Suddards, our
                         letter to Hammond Suddards of 12* August, and their fixed reply of today’s date.

             4.          You will see that it is said that the Crown Prosecution Service had issued a “response”
                          to the effect that ‘the Chief Constable might wish to delay any voluntary disclosure of
                          documentation until that [CPS] review was complete and a decision made.” This was
                          “guidance” provided, it was suggested, pursuant to section 3(2)(e) of the Prosecution
                          of Offences Act 1985, which it was said would be followed “impartially”. You will
                          note that Hamm ond Suddards are also denying this material to the solicitors for the
                          defendants.

                                                                  -   1
                                                                      -




                                                                                                     iR
                         l,t Floor Central Buitamgs                                     *
17/Q8 ’ 98 1 6 : 4 2      01512361936                 H F S G               -->01712738450                        Pg. 03




          5         We should point out that we regard it is inappropriate that the South Yorkshire Police
                    should be seeking your views under section 3(2)(e), since they take the position
                    apparently that there were no “criminal offences” at all.

          6.        However, they have done so, and guidance has been expressed. In the circumstances
                    we repeat our suggestion that you should request the South Yorkshire Police to agree
                    to the transfer of the papers, perhaps to a neutral third party of your choice, and that
                    they should allow the contents of the archive, subject to any proper claim to, for
                    example, legal professional privilege, to be examined by prosecution and defence under
                    suitable security conditions, with facilities for copying.

           7.          No doubt, the South Yorkshire Police will respond to any further “guidance”. Give®
                       the scale of the task of examining the material upon which the CPS has engaged, and
                       the likely delay, we can see no reason why this process should await a decision under
                       section 6(2) and section 23(1). The power to take over and discontinue a case is
                       surely to be applied only in clear and exceptional circumstances. The right of a private
                       citizen to bring a prosecution was preserved specifically by section 6 of the
                       Prosecution of Offences Act 1985. The provision was reviewed in R v Bow Street
                       Magistrates Court, ex parte South Coast Shipping Company (1993) 96 Cr App R405.

              8.       We can see no statutory basis for delaying the magistrates’ court proceedings pending
                       a determination of this question. Under section 6(2), you may take over the conduct
                       of the proceedings “at any stage” in those proceedings before or after committal. Why
                       should the conduct of those proceedings before the magistrates5 court be delayed for
                       weeks or months before you decide whether to take them over? You will, we suggest
                       be in a much better position to make this decision if we have had access to relevant
                       and probative material obtained to provide further and additional support to our
                       allegations and the case has advanced. You will be free to monitor and observe the
                       progress of the case, and free to make reasonable requests of us for information and
                       submissions about the material.

              9.       Our case on the allegation of manslaughter and misfeasance is cogent and essentially
                        simple. Lord Taylor’s findings in his interim report on the disaster in 1989 were clear.
                        He said at p arag ra p h 2 6 5 of his report:

                        “The immediate cause of the gross overcrowding and hence the disaster was the
                        failure, when Gate C was opened, to cut off access to the central pens which were
                        already overfull.”

              10.      This was a “blunder of the first magnitude”. The evidence of forensic pathologists
                        called at the mini inquests in 1990 was that in almost all cases death resulted rapidly
                        from unconsciousness that was caused by the crushing that followed the inrush of
                        spectators, in full view of the two defendants, following the order to open the gates
                        and a failure to d iv e rt the incoming spectators from pens 3 and 4. This finding has
                        been confirmed in the Court of Appeal Frost v South Yorkshire Police (CA) (1998)
                        259. where it was stated:

                                                                -2-
17/18 '9 8 16:42     01512361936                 H F S G               -->01712738450                      Pg. 04




                “The immediate cause of the disaster was a senior police officer’s decision to open an
                outer gate without cutting off access to the pens. Liability for the deaths and injuries
                o f those spectators has been admitted by the three defendants the first of whom is the
                plaintiffs’ Chief Constable.”

         11.    Mr Duckenfield was in overall charge, and primarily responsible for the decisions and
                lack of decisions which led to the crushing. Mr Murray shares in this responsibility.
                He knew the ground much better. He had been in an important position of
                responsibility at the identical semi-final the year before, when the Liverpool supporters
                were also at the Leppings Lane end of the ground. A similar concentration of
                supporters in the pens 3 and 4 had occurred, and, we contend, was clear to him, but
                 crushing had been avoided by the simple expedient of diverting the incoming
                 supporters from the tunnel which led to those overcrowded pens.

         12.       It is the case as Taylor found, that in 1989, Mr Duckenfield was entitled to call on Mr
                   Murray’s experience. Mr Murray foiled in breach of his duty, like Mr Duckenfield
                   failed, in breach of his duty, to take, demand or recommend the obvious steps to avoid
                   the obvious dangers.

         13.       It is alleged that, the actions and omissions of the two were a substantial cause of
                   death; that they owed the deceased a duty of care and were negligent and that a jury is
                   entitled to find that the negligence was of such a gravity as to amount to a crime within
                   the principle in R v Adomako [1995] 1 AC 181.

                   “The essence of the matter which supremely a jury question, is whether having regard
                   to the risk of death involved the conduct of the defendant was so bad in all the
                   circumstances as to amount in their judgment to a criminal act or omission . [1995]
                   1AC 187E (Annex 4).

          14.      This test was not thought to be correct in 1990 when the DPP decided not to
                   prosecute any individual in relation to the disaster. The prevailing legal view was that
                   involuntary manslaughter of this kind involved the complicated concept of recklessness
                   deriving from statutes setting out crimes of causing death by reckless driving and of
                    criminal damage-

          15.      In Adomako, the House of Lords did not change the law. It declared that gross
                    negligence rather than recklessness was and is the basis of the crime. That approach
                    governs the facts of this case.

          16.      You will know from previous correspondence that we allege that relevant information
                   was improperly withheld from the Director and other bodies in 1989 and 1990. We
                   have important copies of many witness statements, disclosed to us during the
                    “Scrutiny” of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, which we had never seen before, but which
                    strengthen Lord Taylor’s findings, and which it appears were not supplied to the
                    Director in 1990 Our letter of 4* August contains a regrettable error when we said
                    that w£ put to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith certain amendments. This of course was not

                                                           -3-
    17/Q8 ’ 98 1 6 : 4 3     01512361936                 H F S G                -->01712738450                     Pg. 05
*




                      the case. These representations were made by others and not by us personally.

                       Against all this b ackg ro u n d , we do not understand how it can be right for the South
                                  VrsKr* which has an interest of its own to serve, to deny us access to




               18.
                       This case is of course very different. The South Yorkshire Police force was itself
                       under investigation. It was concerned to defend itself as a combative litigant against
                              of negligence. And yet, for reasons which remain unexplained, the West
                       Midlands Police force entrusted it at some point with not only all the original
                       documents and exhibits, but also its internal police report into the allegations, and even
                       counsel’s opinion, obtained by the Director, on the question of criminal liability. Is
                       there any precedent in the Director’s or police practice for sending to a person or body
                       under suspicion the privileged advice of counsel, or the confidential police report into
                       the crimes alleged?

               19.         We respectfully invite you therefore to recognise that the South Yorkshire Police
                           retain possession of the papers because the CPS has suggested that it should; but that
                           that advice ought to be changed. We should inform you as a matter of courtesy that
                           we propose to apply for a witness summons directed to Mr Daines, directing him to
                           produce relevant statements exhibits and other documents. We shall raise this at the
                           Leeds Magistrates’ Court on 20* August. No doubt someone from the CPS will
                            attend and, if necessary, make representation.

                           Above all, we should invite you to explain what possible damage to the interests of
                           prosecution or defence, or justice could be inflicted at this stage by a simple transfer of
                           documents from the possession of an interested party to an uncontroversial outsider
                           and by an examination of that material by prosecution and defence?


                Yours faithfully




                Kesva Coombes
                Legal Advisor




                                                                    -4 -
                                                                     6 > |e n j - s
       \




           tW * .           S



V- l       U    ak       a ^ i-           ^
                                              —               "S_-        I    j^ s Vj/W
                         V>       CJAAJ                       ^

     AO        0 * 4 +

     S t^> vo Jlrw ^ c A                  O fu '^     oUos^vca


 ^                              U iu tt   C I q jim . 0 $ .              /a ,h > iA

               (^ o jr t-       f a           A O ^ J u J ^ r tj              C & ts & f^




                                                  L ) / W         h



                              f m                     I   f          U
                                                                                                                 (2jP ^   ^    iA( C ^ n '
•#   »

                                                                                                                 m
     MW     . H. Sharpling
            rown Prosecutor
                                                                                                                 CPS
                                                                                                                 CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                                 50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                                 London EC4M 7EX


                                                                                                  Switchboard:   0171-273 8000
                                                                                                                 300850 Ludgate EC4
     r                                                   i                                            DX No:

       Keva Coombes Esq.,
       Legal Advisor                                                         Facsimile:   0171-
                                                                                                    273 8450
       Hillsborough Family Support Group
       1st Floor                                                        Direct Line:      0171-     273 8099
       Central Buildings
       41 North John Street                                           Our Reference:                 YBF/3341/89
     ^ Liverpool L2 6RR                                  j
                                                                      Your


                                                                                                     11 August 1998




          Dear Sir,

          RE: HILLSBOROUGH: ADLINGTON -v- DUCKENFIELD and MURRAY

          Your letter of 4 August 1998 addressed to the Director of Public Prosecutions has been
          passed to me for reply in the absence of the Director herself and the Chief Crown Prosecutor
          for CPS Central Casework.

          You raise two issues, the first of which concerns the storage of original statements. I do
          appreciate your concerns about the propriety of the South Yorkshire Police holding the
          originals, particularly as they were not the investigating force.

          In most cases, the normal practice is that the police retain the originals of witness statements
          until they are required for the purposes of committal proceedings or trial at the magistrates
          court. The CPS does not usually receive them until they are so required. (There are some
          exceptions where, for historical reasons, the police send the original statements at an earlier
          stage). This practice applies in all cases even where police officers themselves are the
          defendants or potential defendants.

           In the Hillsborough case, the matter is obviously sensitive, but it is not different in principle
           to cases where police officers have been investigated by their own force.

           The West Midlands Police carried out the investigation in this case but I understand that
           currently they have no involvement in the matter.

           The Crown Prosecution Service has no formal standing in the case at the moment as we
           decided some time ago not to commence proceedings ourselves. We are considering whether
           to take over the prosecution you have launched but we have not yet made a decision. In the
           absence of any formal role at this stage, I am not in a position to make any request for
           alternative measures in relation to the safe keeping of the original papers.




         I suggest that you raise any concerns w i* the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police.
•>
 *The second issue you raise relates to who will take the decision whether to take over and
  discontinue your private prosecution. A report will be prepared by Mr Croston, the lawyer
^ ih o is assigned to the case, after he has finished reviewing the evidence. Once that report
t f s been prepared, a decision will be reached in consultation with the Chief Crown
  Prosecutor for CPS Central Casework and the Director personally.

     I hope this reply is helpful.

     Yours faithfully




     M G KENNEDY
     ASSISTANT CHIEF CROWN PROSECUTOR
                                                                                                                  m
Daiffe Barbara Mills DBE QC
                                                                                                                  C PS
Director of Public Prosecutions
                                                                                                                  Headquarters
                                                                                                                  50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                                  London EC4M 7EX

r                                                            1                                    Direct Line:    0171-273 8098
    Keva Coombes Esq                                                                              Switchboard:    0171-273 8000
                                                                                                    Facsimile:    0171-329 8366
    Legal Advisor                                                                                     d x No:     300850 Ludgate EC4
    Hillsborough Family Support Group
    1st Floor Central Buildings
    41 North John Street
    Liverpool L2 6RR                                                                                                  X   W -/               Y
L                                                           J
                                                                                                  M s                                    r




                                                                                                            5 August 1998



                                                                                                                          r - f

              K /                  ^
    I am writing to acknowledge receipt of your letter dated 4 August 1998, addressed to Dame
    Barbara Mills QC.

    The Director is away from the office at present, and I have therefore passed your
    correspondence to Miss Dru Sharpling, Chief Crown Prosecutor for Central Casework, for
    consideration and substantive reply.

    Miss Sharpling can be contacted on 0171 273 1225.
    ^jOVyf S



                                                                                      a.                    ro-ftAj       lo      'ete


                                                                                                                                  (v
                                                                                                        UScflOB
    JANE GILL (Miss)                                                                                                               Lx)(^ j\
    Senior Personal Secretary to the                                                                        338
    Director of Public Prosecutions                                                               ■■r r m    r.
                                                                                                  ■ c 1 V i,                             W L ie




                            Crown Prosecution Service   -   Working in the interests of justice
                                                                                        3




                                                                                     su ppO**
              Hillsborough Family Support Group                                    Legal Advisor
                                                                                  Keva Coombes ,


                                                   C.P.S. HEADCUAKTERS
                                                       PR'VATF Or'rl^E
4 August 1998                                             RECEIVED:


Dame Barbara Mills D.BE                                - 5 AVO
Director of Public Prosecutions
50 Ludgate Hill                              I cov,i.s.-   T^'
London EC4M 7EX

Dear Madam

This letter is being written at the express request o f Alun Jones QC and he has asked that if at
all possible you consider it personally. This is because he takes the view that the situation is
very unusual perhaps unique and delicate enough to warrant your personal attention.

For some time now the HFSG has been trying to get originals of witness statements taken
either for the Taylor Inquiry or the Inquest or by a Police Force. A private prosecution
alleging inter alia manslaughter has now been commenced by way of summons and obviously
this makes it even more important we should have access to those originals. It is clear that, to
put it at its lowest there are significant amendments to statements and your office we are sure,
has not always been given the unamended statements. The degree of amendments is
significantly greater than we put to Stuart-Smith LJ so we are not simply as it were re-hashing
that point.

For the first time by letter dated 24 July and received here 31st we have now been told that
“for storage purposes” all the originals are now with the South Yorkshire Police. This is the
force that employed the Defendants and whose behaviour is at the core of the incidents. It
was not the investigating force nor did it take the majority of statements. Alun Jones has
asked that you consider the propriety of this arrangement and that you ensure that, if it is to
continue, what restrictions/security arrangements ought to control access to the material.

Mr Jones is presently in Spain otherwise he would have been in touch personally but I can say
this letter is being sent with his approval following a phone call between him and me.




                                               -   1
                                                   -



          Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151 236 1936. E Mail info@hfsg.org
        1st Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
    a general point Mr Jones is anxious that any momentous decision such as would be any
decision effectively discontinuing the existing prosecution be taken at the highest level and
asks that if at all practicable it be reserved to you and if that is totally impracticable the person
delegated (de facto not de jure only) be of similar authority and capability or as close as can
be.


Yours faithfully



                    QV\hKJ

Keva Coombes
Legal Advisor
From:      George Croston
To:        CPSHQL .C C U .KENNEDYM
Date:      Tuesday, 25 August 1998 3:46 pm
Subject:   Hillsborough: draft reply to HFSG letter

Mike

Here is the draft reply to the HFSG letter of 17August attached
below.

I have spoken on the telephone to Ann Adlington, their original
solicitor, and she knows that there is a delay in your reply as
I'm having to brief you.     I am dealing with the more routine
correspondence m y s e l f .

I shall send you an updated chronology on Thursday. I am at a
police conference on Friday and then on leave until Tuesday 8
September.  On my return I intend to lock myself away in a quiet
room for about ten days in order to produce this report.

George

CC:        CPSHQL.D C O S .GOWERS
0




    Keva Coombes Esq
    Legal Advisor                                                              273 8450
    Hillsborough Family Support Group
    1st Floor                                                                  273 8099
    Central Buildings
    41 North John Street                                                      YBF/3341/89
    LIVERPOOL L2 6RR



                                                                              25 August 1998




    Dear Sir

    RE: HILLSBOROUGH: ADLINGTON -v- DUCKENFIELD and MURRAY

    Thank you for your letter of 17 August and enclosures, and I apologise for my delay in
    answering.    I understand that Mr Croston in York has explained by telephone to Ms
    Adlington that as he holds the main bundle of papers in the case he has to advise me on the
    history of what has gone on before.


    I note your cea&BU&g concern as-to fee propriety of the papers remaining in the custody of
    the South Yorkshire Police, however as I stated in my previous letter to you I am not in any
    position to make any request for alternative measures in relation to the safekeeping of the
    original papers. My understanding of the enclosed correspondence from the police is that
    they are deferring the consideration of voluntary disclosure as requested by yourselves until
    the CPS review decision has been made. I do not accept that it is their argument that CPS
    guidance is the justification for a policy of maintaining custody of the archive. It may be that
    there is some confusion between the basis of the policy on voluntary disclosure and that of
    the responsibility for storage of the material. As it-was the Police Complaints Authority     €
    supervised the original investigation by the West Midlands Police that generated the archive
    material held in South Yorkshire, you may wish to contact the Chairman, Mr -P-W
Moorhouse, to ascertain whether or not he has any remit to assist you.          However my
understanding is that the material is the property of the South Yorkshire Police and it would
be a matter for the Chief Constable to decide.


While I appreciate your desire to obtain disclosure of documents in the possession of the
police and the CPS as quickly as possible, I can only agree with Mr Croston’s
recommendation to me and his guidance to the police that consideration of voluntary
disclosure should be deferred until after our review decision has been made. If our decision
is to let the private prosecution continue then voluntary disclosure will be given as
expeditiously as possible (except for material subject to public interest immunity or legal
privilege). If, however, we found that there was clearly no case to answer then we would
be bound to take the case over in order to discontinue it; in which case the extremely onerous
task for all parties to produce and/or examine the voluminous material would no longer be
necessary.


Mr Croston has now informed all parties to this prosecution that he hopes to place his report
before i nysclf and^the Chief Crown Prosecutor for Central Casework by the end of
September. This is a target date only and may be subject to delays occasioned by any new
material that is brought to our attention. The Director will then be consulted before any
decision is made. I notctfrat the next date-ef hearing is Ust 30 October at Leeds Magistrates
Court and that provisional dates for an oral committal have been set for mid-December.

         (V
I have read your representations on the facts and law in this matter with great interest, and
have asked Mr Croston to consider these points in the preparation of his report.


I hope this reply is helpful.


Yours faithfully




M G KENNEDY
Assistant Chief Crown Prosecutor
CPS Central Casework
02/93           12:16                                                                                  NO.141                         001

                                                                                              ^                          O S M. S

                                      The Ri Hon John Moms QC MP                                          o i            z % .
                                                                                             9 Bu c k i n g h a m g a t e

                                                                                                    L O N D O N S W 1 E OJP
                                  U r      rc J l_

Oi7ta29 1B8-*               (O               <£^A t
                                            D ^2.£-0-                                                                        \Z 0 7 j& :
  T h c Rt H o n J a c k S tra w MP         f             o     . -
  S e c re ta ry of S ta te for th e H om e D ep art <tientA.       „ /                       r Ibu/ jAu'ft
  H om e O ffice                                                                                            I V-
  5 0 Q u e e n A n n e 's G a te
  LONDON S W 1H 9A T                                       1 1 -f t -

   12 F e b ru a ry 1998                                                                 /v A /           O c/ A J ^


                                                                       11£ S >fkArp lp f~
                                                                    [ H r £ t v ^ u | t r 'il & G S '/ c Q B Y
                                                                                                           11 to
                                                                                                      12 FEB 1998

                                    COPIES TO:
  H ILLSBO RO U G H

  T h a n k y o u fo r y o u r le tte r of 9 F e b ru a ry 998 a b o u t th e R ep o rt b y Lord J u s tic e
  S tu a rt-S m ith follow ing h is review o f the evidence re la tin g to th e H illsb o ro u g h
  D is a s te r. Y ou in v ited m e to ag ree th e P ro p o sed h a n d lin g .

  T h e R ep o rt Is im p re ssiv e a n d will. I bt h e v<e. co m m an d re s p e c t even th o u g h th e
  fam ilie s of th e H illsb o ro u g h victim s a re )ound to be d isa p p o in te d . T he R eport
  c le a rly c o n firm s ih a t th e re is no b a sis for a n a p p lic a tio n to th e H igh C o u rt
  u n d e r S e c tio n 13 o f th e C o ro n ers Act Ill 88 a n d I am c o n te n t th a t you sh o u ld
  s a y th a t o n m y b e h a lf w h ilst recog nising; th a t I w ould h a v e a n ongoing d u ty to
  c o n s id e r a n y fre sh a n d cogent evidence w hich m ight la te r em erge. T he sa m e
  g o es for th e DPP in re la tio n to h e r decij ion on p ro se c u tio n .

  T h e p ro p o sa l to p lac e in th e L ibrary a t t: ie H ouse of C o m m o n s th e legal advice
  receiv ed b y th e DPP d o es, how ever, give rise to difficulty. S u c h advice a ttra c ts
  legal p ro fe ssio n a l privilege a n d Jt is th e firm policy of th e DPP n o t to p u b lis h
  s u c h d e ta ile d d o c u m e n ta tio n re la tin g t( th e m e rits of in d iv id u a l c a se s w hich
  h a v e n o t b e e n before th e c o u rts. T h en ; a re cogent re a s o n s for n o t doing so
  w h ic h w ere rec o g n ise d by th e P h ilips Ro al C om m ission on crim in al p ro c e d u re
  - n o t th e le a s t b e in g th e p o te n tia l u n falrfi e ss to th o se in re sp e c t of w hom th e re
  h a s b e e n a d e c isio n n o t to p ro se c u te .

   So fa r a s th e re m a in in g p o in ts in y o u r l< tte r a re c o n c e rn e d . I c a n see no b a sis
   fo r d isa g re e in g w ith th e view e x p re sse d tty Lord J u s tic e S tu a rt-S m ith a b o u t th e
   p re p a ra tio n of ev id en ce by th e S o u th Y orkshire police a n d w ould c e rta in
   e n d o rs e th e view th a t th ere is no >asis for rev isitin g th e q u e stio n of
   d isc ip lin a ry p ro ce e d in g s o r considering p ro se c u tio n . I am c o n te n t too w ith
   w h a t y o u p ro p o se to sa y ab o u t ac.tioi. to elim in ate                                                         |
   A c/noi/2
                                                                                         •-,r ' !    (V    J i l
                                                                                                    ' ' &
                                                                                              G3A13D3*!
                                                                                                                   i.u n j
                                                                                          Kin. i a i   R01

              1 2 :1 6
                                                                                             NO.141      002

/:•


      In'enUon fo tockllTute'a b t w X p X fom cera *?'?                         Slgnalled y°ur
      retirement to avoid disciplinary proceedings W                      advantage of medical




      ^ p o rtu n V to co ^ en t           ^      H " * ”           ent *" <"* — for toe

      X   S T      A     'S L   * *   ‘etlCr,n dran a*d asks that« be *"■»** a s a re s p o n se




                                                      ,-£X"




                                                 m




 At)/1102/2
Amanda Campbell




cc.   Clare Stocks
      Dru Sharpling




HILLSBOROUGH

      The Home Office have asked us for a line this afternoon for the Home Secretary’s
      statement on Wednesday on whether we would take over any private prosecution
      mounted by the families.

2.    The suggested question and answer for the Home Secretary is as follows:

      Q:     Would the DPP take over any private prosecution in Hillsborough?

      A:     That is a matter for the Director and the Crown Prosecution Service. It would
             be inappropriate for me to speculate.

      If pressed:

      If there is a private prosecution CPS would consider whether to intervene. Options
      available to CPS would be to take over the case and continue with it or to take it over
      and discontinue it. If the CPS decided not to intervene then the prosecution would
      remain with the private prosecutor. This is, of course, speculation at this stage.

3,    Dru Sharpling is content with this formulation. Could I have clearance to provide
      them with this form of words.




 S Ringguth
ACCP
Central Casework
16 February 1998
Ext 1236
                                                                               £>H,
                                          RMCftbt

                                                            A N N E ’ S G A T E L O N D O N S W 1 H 9 AT


                                    R E C E IV E D
The Rt H on John Morris QC                                                0 9 FEB 1998
Attorney General -
A ttorney General’s Chambers
9 Buckingham Gate
London SW1
                                 C.P.S. HEADQUARTERS
                                    PRIVATE OFFICE
                                        RECEIVED:

                                    ~9 FEB 1888

                               COPIES TO:                                                                  dkf '




                                   HILLSBOROUGH

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith has now submitted to me his report on whether there is any new
evidence relating to the Hillsborough disaster. I understand that your office was provided
w ith a copy of the report as soon as we received it. We need now to agree our response to
his conclusions.

A copy of the judge’s terms of reference, which we agreed, is attached. Essentially he had
tw o tasks.

       (i)    to advise me whether any evidence not previously available is of such
              significance as to justify a further public inquiry; and

       (ii)   to identify for you, the Director of Public Prosecutions and the chief
              constable, as disciplinary authority, any evidence that might be relevant to
              your statutory responsibilities that has not previously been considered.

Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s conclusions are clear. He considers that there is no basis for
establishing a further inquiry or re-opening the Taylor Inquiry. N or is there any basis for
a renewed application to quash the verdict of the inquest. N or does he consider there is
any material which might require re-consideration of previous decisions in relation to
criminal or disciplinary proceedings. His report is very full and detailed. Having
considered it carefully, I am entirely satisfied that his central conclusions are right.

When I established the scrutiny on 30 June last year, I gave a commitment that the judge’s
report would be published, together with as much of the evidence which he considered as
possible. Much of the key evidence is contained within Appendices to his report. Most of
the remaining material which he has considered is already in the public domain, such as
transcripts of public proceedings. There is some material, however, which Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith refers to but which has not so far been made public. This includes
 particularly advice considered by the DPP in 1990 and 1997 about whether the evidence
 available would support criminal proceedings. I would be grateful for your views on
 whether that advice can be placed in the Library at the House.

When the report i& published, I intend to confirm that I accept the conclusions and the
reasoning behind those conclusions and that there will be no further public inquiry. It is
important that, as far as possible, publication of this report should draw a line under
speculation about further investigations or proceedings. I realise that both your and the
D irector’s responsibilities require you to keep open the possibility that, should anything
new emerge, you would consider it. But it is essential that I should give as firm an
indication as possible about your views at this stage. If you agree, I consider that I should
say on publication of the report that you and the Director have considered its conclusions,
and on the basis of the material which it contains, the Director consider that there is no
basis which would justify fresh criminal investigations, and that you consider that any
application to the High Court for a new inquest would not have any realistic prospect of
succeeding. I would be grateful for your views.

There are two particular issues in the report on which I would be grateful for your views.
The first concerns the process by which statements of police officers submitted to the
inquiry were amended. The report considers this process in detail, setting out exactly how
and why it occurred and confirming that it had no material effect on the outcome of the
proceedings. There are bound to be questions, however, about whether anything in this
process might amount to misconduct of a criminal or disciplinary nature. Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith considers that it would not. It would in theory be possible to instigate a
further police investigation to confirm this conclusively, but I think the outcome would be
a foregone conclusion, and I do not consider that such an investigation should be
instigated. I would be grateful for your confirmation view on this point.

The second issue concerns the technical evidence put forward by South Yorkshire police
about the state of the ground. H e suggests that the condition of the terraces and the over­
estimation of crowd capacity was worse than Taylor suggested. If that information had
been available at the time, it is possible that Taylor would have attributed a greater
proportion of the blame on the club and the local authority. However, it is clear that Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith does not think the issue would have had any material effect on the
balance of conclusions of the Taylor Inquiry.

One of the observations made by Lord Justice Stuart Smith is that it is unsatisfactory to have
an inquest where there has already been an inquiry, chaired by a judge, into a major disaster.
This issue was in fact considered by a Home Office Working Group on disasters and
inquests, whose report was published last March. This recommended that, where a major
disaster has occurred, and the Lord Chancellor is able to certify that a judicial enquiry into
the disaster will also constitute sufficient investigation into the deaths, the role of the coroner
should be limited by securing the adjournment of the inquest and not requiring its
resumption except in the most exceptional circumstances.

Although further comments on the report are awaited, in responding to Lord Justice Stuart
Smith's report I propose, subject to the views of Derry Irvine, to endorse the
recommendations in principle. In the absence of a suitable legislative opportunity, there are
no early prospects of implementing the recommendations (which require primary
legislation), but I think it will be important to flag up a willingness to remove one of the
causes of delay and difficulties for the families of disaster victims.

Publication of the-report will come as a severe disappointment to the Family Support
Group, but, however painful for them it will be, I think we must try to draw a line here. I
will want to emphasise that that does not mean that those responsible have escaped blame -
the Taylor inquiry was clear about that. I will want to emphasise also that we are putting
right the shortcomings in the police disciplinary system which in part enabled the officers
in charge to avoid disciplinary action. I will want nearer the time to clear with you the
text of my statement, but I would be grateful for your urgent agreement in principle to
what I propose.

My aim is to lay the report before Parliament and to make an oral statement in the week
beginning 16 February. Ann Taylor’s office have suggested 18 February. The report is
very long (over 120,000 words) and detailed, and it will be impossible for MPs to read in a
short time. But it will inevitably provoke strong feelings and requests for further debate.
If A nn agrees, I would like to head off those protests by indicating that we would be
prepared to make tim e available for the House to debate the report.

I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister, the Lord Chancellor, the President of the
Council, the D irector of Public Prosecutions, and to Sir Richard Wilson.




                                     JACK STRAW
                  F rom T he R ight H ono u r able T he L ord I rvine    of   L airg

                                                                                              C    l -7     (

                                                                           Ho u se     of   Lo rds,
                                                                                 London       s w i a opw

    s£ chanc*£




                                                                                        h tr £±s\               „
RESTRICTED
                                                 C       M

The Right Honourable Jack Straw MP
Home Secretary
Home Office
50 Queen Anne’s Gate                                                   g b .V ° ‘
London
SW1H9AT                                                         /i    February 1998




                                         HILLSBOROUGH


      Thank you for my copy o f your letter to John Morris of 9 February. I have not, of course,
seen Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report: the following remarks are based on the comprehensive
summary in your letter.

        The questions in respect of the publication of the DPP’s advice in 1990 and 1997, and the
lack of justification for fresh criminal investigations, are of course for John, but if he is content, I
would be too.

        More generally, I agree with your conclusions on Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s work.
Though it will undoubtedly be disappointing for the family support group, I support the proposition
that the Government response should make clear that there are no grounds for a further public
inquiry, nor for further investigations into the police conduct in respect of the amendment of
statements. I also agree with your comments about the later evidence on the state of the ground,
though that is not primarily a matter for me.

        The final point concerns the relationship between judicial enquiries into major disasters and
coroners’ inquests into the resultant deaths. The recommendations of the Home Office working
group are in my view entirely sound. Where it is possible to certify that a properly-constituted
judicial inquiry would examine all the necessary issues, it merely prolongs and exacerbates the
distress of bereaved relatives to have to contemplate the prospect of a coroner’s inquest as well. I
therefore agree with the proposal to accept the working group’s recommendations in principle,
recognising that the necessary primary legislation may have to wait for a suitable opportunity.




                                                     1
W      It follows that I am content with your proposals for handling the issues before Parliament
next week.

      I am copying this letter to the Prime Minister, the Attorney General, the President of the
Council, the Director of Public Prosecutions, and to Sir Richard Wilson.


                                             Yours
                                                    QtsW j




                                                2
                                                              7




RESTRICTED POLICY

1.
2.
      CCP
      Director

      John Ringguth
                                C.P.S, HEADQUARTERS
                                    PRIVATE OFFICE
                                       RECEIVED:

                                   11 FEB 1898
                                                              ishs-ssr
                                                              H   l *   Z )
cc.
      Lyn Salisbury          COPIES TO:




1.    ISSUE                                               i        itiL
1.1   Hillsborough                 L -                    £ | . a j

2.    ACTION REQUIRED


2.1   In order to prepare handling arrangements for the publication of Lord Justice Stuart-
      Smith’s report, George Croston was asked to review the report and advise the
      Director on the following points:-

              •       what the Home Secretary can properly say about the Director’s
                      decision (that the material presented to her prior to the scrutiny would
                      not justify fresh proceedings):

              •       whether there is any part of the report which would cause us concern
                      if it was published;

                 •    the extent to which the material which the judge has considered can or
                       should be put into the public domain;

                 •    whether there is anything in the report that may give rise to
                      suggestions that there ought to be further police enquiries regarding the
                      amending of police officers’ (or other persons’) statements;

                 •    whether the state of the terracing requires further enquiry;

                 •    the extent to which the report discloses new information not previously
                       considered that may reflect on the potential criminal liability of the
                       football club.
2.2   The Home Secretary’s letter of the 9 February 1998 addressed to the Attorney
      General (and copied to the Director) asks for his views on certain points concerning
      issues involving the Director. I have been requested to advise on these points as
      follows:

             •      whether advice considered by the Director in 1990 and 1997 as to the
                    evidence needed to support criminal proceedings, could be placed in
                    the Library at the House and therefore be in the public domain;

             •      whether or not the Director agrees that having considered the
                    conclusions of the report, and on the basis of the material it contains,
                    there is no basis that would justify fresh criminal proceedings;

             •       whether anything in the process by which police officers submitted
                     statements to the Taylor Inquiry might amount to misconduct of a
                     criminal or disciplinary nature, and thus require the instigation of a
                     police investigation;

             •       whether the new information concerning the condition of the terraces
                     and the overestimation of the crowd capacity would have affected the
                     conclusions of the Taylor Inquiry and by inference the Director’s
                     original decision not to prosecute any person;

3.    TIMING

3.1   A public announcement will be made by the Home Secretary on the 18 February
      1998.

3.2   This advice is required as soon as possible.

4.    BACKGROUND

4.1   Following the submission of the Central Casework review note to her, the Director
      wrote to the Attorney General on the 9 May 1997 advising that there was no new
      evidence and no grounds for re-opening the police enquiry. That review, dated the
      8 May 1997, should be read in conjunction with this briefing note as it gives more
      comprehensive details of the allegations and evidence that were examined.

4.2   On the 13 May 1997 the Attorney General endorsed the Director’s view.

4.3   After consultation with the Director and the Law Officers, the Home Secretary
      announced his independent scrutiny on the 30 June 1997.
# 4.4   CPS co-operated fully with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s enquiry. His enquiry has seen:

                •      the schedule of documents considered by the CPS in this case;

                •      the opinions of counsel;

                •      George Croston’s recent review note, leading to the Director’s decision
                       on the 9 May 1997.

  4.4   Chapter 1 of the report covers the background to the disaster in detail.

  5.    KEY CONSIDERATIONS

  5.1   The scrutiny terms of reference appertaining to the CPS were "To ascertain whether
        any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April
        1989 which was not available to the Director of Public Prosecutions ... for the
        purpose of discharging ...(her)... statutory responsibilities ... and to draw to (her)
        attention any evidence not previously considered by (her) which may be relevant to
        (her) ... duties".

  5.2   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was also to consider the existence of evidence in relation
        to police disciplinary matters.

  5.3   For the purposes of the scrutiny he received evidence both orally and in written form
         from relatives of the victims, members of the public, police officers and others (for
         a full list see Appendix 1 to the report). He examined the papers from Lord Taylor’s
         Inquiry and most of those from the Inquests. He looked at the body files and
         submissions from the counsel for the Hillsborough Family Support Group (HFSG)
         and members. He considered all the above evidence whether previously available or
         not. ‘Previously available’ was defined as being within the public domain or known
         to the legal advisers of the parties or families. He read the joint opinion of counsel
         ( of the 6 August 1990) who advised the DPP that the police investigation had not
         changed the findings of the Taylor Inquiry. The report does not mention that the CPS
         review note of 1997 was taken into consideration or indeed read.


  5.4   The report’s covering letter, which was addressed to the Home Secretary, says that
        the report was written with publication in mind following the Minister’s stated
        intention to publish the evidence considered during the scrutiny. Lord Justice Stuart-
        Smith gives categories of that evidence which he does not think should be disclosed.
        It includes:

                •      Reports from Drs Burris and West (relates solely to the death of one
                       particular person).
                •      Report of N.Bume (copyright problem involving privileged material
                       although his oral evidence is in the public domain).
                •      Details of consultations as listed at paragraph 6 of Appendix 1,
                       including the Coroner.
                •      Transcripts of private discussions with relatives of the deceased.
The report consisted of seven chapters and ten appendices. The key points from each
chapter will be considered in order.

Chapter 1: BACKGROUND: Paragraphs 25 and 26 of the repeat state that counsel
for the HFSG only invited a recommendation (as to criminal prosecution) in the case
of Duckenfield and Murray, who were the two main senior officers on the day. The
Judge opined that the fresh evidence would have to be of sufficient significance that
in considering it there would be a real possibility that the DPP might change her mind
and institute proceedings for manslaughter, or any other offence, against one or both
of the officers. At paragraph 56 it was said that any prosecution of an individual
police officer would have to establish his individual responsibility. It would not be
enough to prove the composite failure of the police operation.

Chapter 2: VIDEO EVIDENCE: The Judge found that there was considerable
confusion and misunderstanding about the video evidence of the disaster. All four
police video tapes (including the one that was supposedly missing) were made
available in their entirety to the Taylor Inquiry and to the Coroner. There was no
evidence for the suggestion that the theft of two video tapes from the club’s Control
Room was part of a police ‘cover-up’. Submissions to him by counsel for the HFSG
were:

        •     Police evidence that their failure to see overcrowding in the pens was
              due to a defective camera was deliberately false.
        •     Evidence from video tapes was deliberately suppressed and concealed
              by the police because it would have revealed the above falsity.
        •     The Coroner failed properly to pursue the question of the ‘missing
              footage’.
        •     PCs Bichard and Ryan, and PS Goddard deliberately gave false
              evidence about camera 5 not working properly.
        •     The evidence of Mr Houldsworth, the club CCTV technician, that the
              pens were overcrowded, was deliberately withheld from the jury.



He says that if the first two submissions are made out they might affect the verdict
of accidental death and the decision of the DPP not to prosecute for manslaughter.The
third submission is a grave allegation against the Coroner which could also affect the
verdict. On the fourth submission consideration would have to be given to prosecuting
the officers concerned. The fifth shows a further criticism of the police failure to
appreciate a dangerous situation. His brief findings on each point are shown below:

5.7.1         Submission 1 is quite untenable.

5.7.2         As submission 1 is misconceived, number 2 must fail also. There
              never was any disappearance or concealment of video footage from
              camera 5. The allegation is completely unfounded.

5.7.3          Submission 3 is unfounded as there was no missing footage.
       5.7.4          The evidence on submission 4 is wholly insufficient to warrant
                      consideration of criminal proceedings against any police officers.

       5.7.5          Mr Houldsworth’s evidence is rejected. His explanation as to why it
                      was only in 1996 that he realised his evidence was important is not
                      convincing. What he now says is inconsistent with what he said
                      before.The importance of his evidence has been exaggerated out of all
                      proportion.

5.8    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s final comments on the video evidence is that there is
       nothing in the submissions that calls for any further inquiry or consideration by the
       prosecuting or disciplinary authorities.

5.9    Chapter 3: MEDICAL EVIDENCE: The Judge said that the Coroner’s reasoning has
       been widely misunderstood and misinterpreted. In considering the question of how
       someone died it is not usually relevant to consider matters subsequent to the infliction
       of injuries which obviously result in death. There was no new intervening cause
       which might break the chain of causation between the crushing injuries and death.
       The Coroner did not say that all those who died did so before 3.15. The cut-off time
       was necessarily imposed to keep the Inquiry within reasonable bounds. It is difficult
       to see the relevance of further evidence that a person was alive at 3.15pm but died
       subsequently.

5.10   The scrutiny considered the evidence of Dr Walker among others. It was suggested
       by counsel that the medical conclusions and assumptions made by the Coroner as to
       the cut-off time were false, and that on an application for judicial review it would be
       open to the Divisional Court to hold that the (inquest) verdicts had been procured by
       fraud, suppression of evidence or insufficiency of inquiry. Further that the non­
       presentation of Dr Walker’s evidence (like that of Mr Houldsworth) could amount to
       fraudulent concealment.

5.11   Lord Justice Stuart-Smith found all the submissions on the medical evidence to be
       unfounded. The relevant part of his reasoning was that the evidence of Dr Walker and
       others added nothing to that given at the Inquest. The suggestion that the evidence
       now put before him was deliberately suppressed and concealed and those concerned
       acted in bad faith, was in his opinion wholly irresponsible.

5.12   Chapter 4: ALLEGED IMPROPER INTERFERENCE WITH WITNESSES: These
       allegations were not made to the CPS in the HFSG letter of 4 March 1997 or at any
       other time, except by way of a general remark that "one of the most striking aspects
       of this history is the way in which the evidence presented to the Inquest was evidence
       that tended to exculpate the South Yorkshire Authorities and the police from blame.
       Very serious questions arise as to the process by which evidence was selected by the
       West Midlands Police who assisted the Coroner". The allegations were either of
       pressure being brought by police officers to bear on witnesses in order to prevent
       certain evidence being put before the jury, or of the way in which South Yorkshire
       Police obtained evidence about the disaster from their own officers (specifically the
       amendments made to their witness statements).
^ ^> .1 3   The Divisional Court did not find it necessary to investigate the allegation concerning
            the police putting improper pressure on civilian witnesses. The scrutiny did look into
            this matter in great detail. The first conclusion was that the suggestion that police
            officers brought pressure to bear on witnesses as part of a biased and incomplete
            investigation was clearly untenable. Secondly, that for the most part the suggestions
            made by the solicitors (acting for the police) for amendments were not open to
            criticism. In a few cases it would have been preferable if a deletion had not been
            made. At worst it was an error of judgement, it was not unprofessional conduct. Any
            amendments made by the police themselves were unexceptionable. The Judge is quite
            satisfied that the exclusion of comments (in the statements) could not possibly have
            affected the DPP. The allegation of irregularity and malpractice is not substantiated.

    5.14    Chapter 5: OTHER MATTERS OF CONCERN: Families of some of the victims
            raised concerns about alleged inconsistency in police evidence, failure to disclose
            documents, and police bias. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was not able to resolve all the
            concerns about conflicts in evidence. However he would be surprised if the criticisms
            about families being unable to obtain copies of relevant documents were true. He saw
            no reason to differ from Lord Taylor’s conclusion as to the impartiality of the West
            Midlands investigation.

    5.15    Chapter 6: MISCELLANEOUS: The state of the ground: New evidence was heard
            from Mr N.Bume, a structural engineer who advised on the safety and structural
            aspects of the Hillsborough ground in 1990. It had not been available at the time of
            the Taylor Inquiry and he was not called to give evidence at the Inquest. In October
             1990 Mr Bume gave evidence before a High Court judge in the contribution
            proceedings (when the apportionment of liability was decided as between the police,
            the Club and others). However these proceedings were settled before his evidence was
            complete or could be tested in cross-examination. His report criticised, among other
            things, the inadequate number of turnstiles, the lack of a control system for
            monitoring numbers in each pen, the overestimation of overall capacity on the
            Leppings Lane Terraces, inadequate emergency signing, and the inadequate standard
            of crush barriers. There were said to be many breaches of the advice and
            recommendations contained in the Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds. The scrutiny
            found that all but two of the criticisms were fully considered by the Taylor Inquiry.
            These were the height of the crush barriers which were too low, and the overall
            capacity of the terrace which was overestimated. The conclusion was that these
            matters did not give grounds for re-opening the Judicial Inquiry or any other
            proceedings. The Judge considered that had Lord Taylor known about them he might
            have criticised the Club, their consultant engineers, and those responsible for the
            licensing of the ground in more stringent terms than he did. He did not consider that
            the central conclusion of the Inquiry would have been changed, in that the primary
            cause of the disaster was a failure of police control. However, if the responsibility
            of the other parties was somewhat greater than had earlier been appreciated, that
            might have a bearing on any reconsideration of criminal proceedings against officers.
#
    5.16   Chapter 7: SUMMARY: Lord Justice Stuart-Smith does not consider that there is any
           material that should be put before the DPP or Police Complaints Authority which
           might cause them to reconsider the decisions they have already taken. There is no
           occasion for any further investigation into the circumstances in which alterations were
           made to some of the self written statements of South Yorkshire officers.

    5.17   The conclusions from the scrutiny report mirror the relevant comments from my
           review.Indeed the Judge’s observations on the allegations and submissions put to him
           on behalf of the HFSG are often more stinging than mine.

    6.     RECOMMENDATIONS

    6.1    The recommendations on the points requiring action in paragraph 2.1 above are:

           6.1.1 The Director’s decision: The Home Secretary stated to Parliament on the 30
                 June 1997 that the Director of Public Prosecutions takes the view that the
                 material so far presented to her would not justify fresh criminal proceedings.
                 My review of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s scrutiny report is that he comes to
                 the conclusion that, having heard fresh evidence, there is nothing that should
                 be put before the Director to cause a reconsideration of previous decisions.

                  Therefore I recommend that the Director can quite properly say that the report
                  does not change her stated view.

           6.1.2 Publication of the report: I have read the report a number of times and am
                 unable to find any point of evidence or conclusion which is adverse, unfairly
                 or otherwise, to the CPS. While there is a quote from counsels’ joint opinion
                 of 1990, and therefore strictly speaking privileged, the way in which the quote
                 and comment are used is supportive of our decision making process in the
                 case.

                  I recommend that no objection be taken.

           6.1.3 Material for the public domain: Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s covering letter to
                 the Home Secretary said that the Minister’s stated intention was to publish the
                 evidence which was considered during the scrutiny. That letter makes certain
                 recommendations to the Minister about specific categories of evidence and
                 which do not involve the CPS. By inference it could be said that other
                 material, for example, the 1990 joint opinion of two leading counsel, should
                 be put into the public domain by being deposited in the House Libraries. This
                 opinion was read by the Judge who commented favourably on it. He did not
                 say that he considered in any way whatsoever the 1997 report to the Director
                 from myself. Neither of the two reports could be classed as evidence, fresh
                 or otherwise. They are legally privileged or subject to Public Interest
                 Immunity and not normally subject to disclosure unless previously in the
                 public domain or where that privilege or immunity is waived. Neither have
                 been disclosed publicly. The basic rule is that reasons for prosecuting
                 decisions are given in only the most general terms. The view is normally
                 taken that the public discussion of a decision not to prosecute could amount
       a trial of a suspect, in this case certain police officers and others, without the
       safeguards which criminal proceedings are designed to provide. The Judge’s
       comments on our decision in 1990 should be sufficient for the interests of
       justice to be served. Similarly, the above reasons should also apply to the
       1997 review.

       I recommend that it is not in the interests of justice for the disclosure of the
       two advices.

6.1.4 Further police inquiries re amended statements: The report conclusions are
      that there was no improper pressure put on witnesses and that a small part of
      the amendment procedure involved at worst an error of judgement on the part
      of solicitors. As we have not seen the evidence available to the scrutiny we
      have no reason to consider going behind the conclusions made.

       I recommend that there should be no further action on this point.

6.1.5 Further inquiries re the terracing: Paragraph 5.1.4 above covers Lord Justice
      Stuart-Smith’s opinion that the new and valid evidence concerning the crush
      barriers and terrace capacity would not have affected the central conclusion
      of the Inquiry. He might have made stronger comments about the Club and
      others. This new evidence was extremely relevant to civil liability claims and
      was before the High Court for those proceedings. It must be right that when
      the scrutiny report is published a more fair apportionment of blame can be
      acknowledged. My assessment of the comment that the appreciation of a
      greater responsibility of other parties might have a bearing on any
      reconsideration of criminal proceedings against officers is that if there had
      been a decision to prosecute it would have been affected by the new and
      mitigating evidence.

       I recommend that no further action is required as to any more inquiries.

6.1.6 Potential criminal liability of the Club: I can find nothing in the report which
      can be seen as a suggestion that the new evidence goes towards criminal rather
      than merely civil liability. The Judge considers that there are no grounds for
      reopening the Judicial Inquiry or any other proceedings.

       I recommend that no action should be taken by us on the new evidence now
       seen.

The recommendations on the points requiring action in paragraph 2.2 above are in
accordance with what I have already said:

6.2.1 Disclosure of our advices into the public domain should be resisted, not least
      on the ground of ‘candour’.

6.2.2 There is no basis for the instigation of criminal proceedings against police or
      others or for any further investigation into allegations of purported criminal
      liability.
® 7.     CONCLUSION
  7.1    There have been        detailed and comprehensive investigations of the grave
         circumstances that lead up to the disastrous consequences in the Hillsborough
         Stadium. It should now be considered that UK judicial procedures have been fully
         explored and satisfactorily exhausted for the purposes of the CPS. I have no doubt,
         based on my dealings with the HFSG, that the matter will not end here.

   7.2   There are a number of matters contained in the Home Secretary s letter of the 9
         February 1998 which do not fall within the CPS remit and I have therefore expressed
         no view. They concern any applications to the High Court for a new inquest and the
         role of a Coroner following an inquiry into a major disaster.

   7.3   Our concerns about placing the 1997 review note and the 1990 joint opinion in the
         library of the House have been expressed orally to Stephen Wooler, who will brief
         the Attorney General accordingly. It is understood that the Attorney General and the
         Home Secretary will be discussing Hillsborough in the margins of another meeting
         today. Thereafter, Stephen Wooler will draft a reply from the Attorney General to
          send to the Home Secretary, which we will consider before despatch.



                                                                           11 February 1998
   George Croston
                                                                                          c       (-Z   I

    RESTRICTED - POLICY

    George Croston
    PTL                                                         QPSCE^TRM  - w■
                                                                         CCP
                                                                 if - 3 FEB1998
    cc.   Dru Sharpling CCP
                                                                i   R E C E IV E D


    HILLSBOROUGH

    1.    You should get the report in the DX tomorrow with a copy of my note to Dru
          Sharpling and the Director dated 2 February 1998.

    2.    I have since spoken to Paul Pugh at the Home Office and the timing of the
           announcement is likely to be 16 February 1998. This means that we need to have
           briefed the Director, and agreed lines with the Home Office by the end of next week.

    3.    In addition to the points which I should be grateful if you could address set out in
           yesterday’s minute at 5.3, Paul Pugh suggests we need to be clear, in case there are
           questions, about whether anything said in the report may give rise to suggestions

                  •      that there ought to be further police enquiries regarding the amending
                         of police officers’ statements. I don’t see that that would get us
                         anywhere. But has this not been covered before? Your views on this
                         are required.

                  •      that the state of the terracing requires further enquiry. Is there new
                         information provided in this report which has not been considered
                         before which reflects on the potential criminal liability of the club?
                         Could you consider this please as well.

    4.    When we receive the Home Secretary’s letter either I or Dru will pass it to you so
          that urgent advice can be given to the Director on all these issues. I am not in the
          office on Thursday and Friday this week.

    5.    It might be helpful if you kept yourself in readiness to come down on 16 February
           in case the Home Secretary requires personal briefing.

    6.    When you have read this, if there is anything you don’t understand, please have a
          word.




^ —4 S Ringguth
   ACCP
    Central Casework
    3 February 1998
    Ext 1236
RESTRICTED - POLICY


Amanda Campbell




cc.   Dru Sharpling
      Lyn Salisbury
      George Croston




HILLSBOROUGH

1.    I attach a letter from Paul Pugh of the Home Office advising us that Lord Justice
       Stuart-Smith’s report is due to be submitted in the week of the 19 January.

2.    It appears there is nothing to suggest that the basis on which the decisions about
       criminal proceedings were taken was inappropriate and that there are no new grounds
       for criminal investigation.

3.    There will need to be liaison with the Press Office and the Home Office and with the
       I rCgal Secretariat on press lines to take when we have seen the actual report. I shall
       be grateful if M r Croston and Mrs Salisbury could liaise on this.




J S Ringguth
ACCP
Central Casework
8 January 1998
Ext: 1236
                 Police Policy Directorate                                   Home Office
                                                                             50 Queen Anne’s Gate,
                 Paul P u g h                                                London SW1H 9AT
                                                                             Telephone: 0171-273 3141
                 Head of Operational Policing Policy Unit (OPPU)             Fax:       0171-273 2703




 RESTRICTED - POLICY

 Stephen Wooler Esq
 Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers
 Attorney General’s Chambers
 9 Buckingham Gate
 London SW1E 6JP                                            7 January 1998




 HILLSBOROUGH


 This is to give you advance warning that we expect Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to
 submit his report on Hillsborough during the week beginning 19 January, or soon
 after.

We understand that his report will be a very substantial document - over 60,000
words plus substantial annexes - covering in considerable detail all the allegations
about ‘new’ evidence which have been put to him during the course of his scrutiny.

 In relation to the coroner’s proceedings, we understand that he will conclude that
they were properly conducted, and that the submissions which he has received
about medical evidence do not call into question the decision of the coroner in
relation to the 3.15pm cut off point. He will also conclude that he has not seen any
evidence which might suggest that an application under section 13 of the Coroners
Act would stand any chance of success. He will, however, be making some general
comment about the difficulties of carrying out an inquest after a major incident which
has already been subject to an inquiry. He intends to endorse the recommendation
made by the Home Office Working Group on disasters and inquests that the role of
the coroner in such circumstances should be very limited.

In relation to criminal proceedings, we expect him to conclude that he has seen
nothing to suggest that the previous basis on which the DPP took decisions about
criminal proceedings was inappropriate and nothing to suggest any new grounds for
criminal investigation.

The one area in his report which may raise questions about possible further action or
investigation is likely to be the process by which South Yorkshire Police officers’
statements were submitted to the Taylor Inquiry. Over 400 officers’ statements were *


f:\oppu\hou\misc\pp0505pd.doc
‘:
Z'4   'V


       vetted by the force’s solicitors before submission to the inquiry, and in a significant
       number of cases sections of the original statements were deleted before they were
       submitted to the inquiry. We understand that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith considers
       that in most cases the deletions were not inappropriate as they concerned matters of
       DereonS opinion; but in some cases his view is that factua material was
       inappropriately removed. W e do not yet know to what extent he will make adverse
       comment about those within the force who were responsible forth.sproce88 and
       therefore the extent to which any question of disciplinary matters might arise.

       I exDect that the Home Secretary will wish to publish the report and make an oral
       S ^ n f r e a ^ n a b l y soon after he receives it, and that he will want to agree the
       terms of his response with the Attorney. I will ensure that you receive a copy of the
       report as soon as we get it. We will then need to discuss its handling.

           I am copying this letter to John Ringguth at CPS headquarters and to Robert Clifford
           in the Coroners Unit here.




                                               PAUL PUGH




             f:\oppu\hou\miscYp0505pddoc
           THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRUTINY                                  C ( - Z I
           Room 1106
           50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
           Direct Line 0171 273 2512 Fax 2007




Miss D Sharpling                                             Your reference:
Crown Prosecution Service
Central Casework                                             Our reference:
50 Ludgate Hill
LONDON EC4M 7EX                                              Date:             27 August 1997




   Vi Ar     |l/lf „
                                                               e
 You may wish to note that the address and telephone numbers for Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
 scrutiny of the evidence relating to the Hillsborough Football Stadium disaster have changed.
 The new address and numbers are shown above.




C F BONE
Secretary to the Scrutiny
                                                                                                                          C     l - 2 1 *

ttss D. H. Sharpling
i e f Crown Prosecutor                                                                                          CPS
                                                                                                                CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                                50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                                London EC4M 7EX


                                                                                                           0171-273 8000
                                                                                                 Switchboard:
r                                                                                                    DXNo: 300850 Ludgate EC4
    Mrs. Joan McBrien,
                                                                            Facsimile:   0171-


                                                                          Direct Line; 0171-       273 1342

                                                                        Our Reference:
                                                                                                   rb97/ds/McBrien.hil
L                                                       J              Your Reference:




                                                                                                   15 August 1997


    Dear Mrs McBrien,

    RE:     HILLSBOROUGH

    I have been asked by Miss Dru Sharpling to give a substantive response to your letter of the
    30th July 1997.

    I note that you have written to the Home Secretary with your comments on the Hillsborough
    Disaster that took the lives of so many people, both young and old, including your son.

    As you are already aware, an independent scrutiny is being set up with a Senior Judge, Lord
    Justice Stuart-Smith presiding. He is to consider any new evidence which may have come
    to light and was not available to the enquiry conducted by the late Lord Taylor or to the
    Director of Public Prosecutions and Attorney General or to South Yorkshire Police.
    Following his report and any recommendations that he may make, the Crown Prosecution
    Service will review the case again as necessary and consider whether or not there is sufficient
    evidence to support a criminal prosecution of any person involved in the management of the
    Hillsborough Ground on the 15th April 1989.

    For my part, I will ensure that your letter to us, as with other letters received from grieving
    relatives and concerned members of the public, will be brought to the attention of Lord
    Justice Stuart-Smith.

    When the results of the scrutiny are known and we have considered any new material put
    before the Crown Prosecution Service, I shall write to you again.




                          Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests of justice
In the meantime, if there is any matter which is not clear to you, please write to me at the
above address.




Yours sincerely,




Robin Booth
Assistant Chief Crown Prosecutor
                           Id 4 ^

                                                 h




    P o e '   w    p   »   «   { e J ^   A   ^



C   U    2 - 1 -
George Croston
Central Casework York

D X 65204 YORK 6




    RR: HILLSBOROUGH

    Please see the attached letter from Mrs Joan McBrien, an acknowledgment has been sent.

    Please can you arrange for a substantive reply to be drafted and sent to Robin Booth for
    signature by 21 August 1997.




    DRU SHARPLING
r   CHIEF CROWN PROSECUTOR
    CENTRAL CASEWORK
    5 AUGUST 1997
    EXT 1225
     D- H. Sharpling
                                                                                                              m
                                                                                                              CPS
Chief Crown Prosecutor
                                                                                                                 CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                                50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                                London EC4M 7EX


                                                                                                Switchboard: 0171-273 8000
                                                                                                    dx No: 300850 Ludgate EC4
 r                                                      1
      Mrs Joan McBrien                                                                              273 8450
                                                                             Facsimile: 0171•

                                                                           D irect L ine;   0171*   2 7 3   1. 3 ^ 4 3



                                                                         Cher Reference:            rb97/ds/McBrien.hil

                                                        J                Your Reference;
  L

                                                                                                     5 August 1997




       Pear Mrs McBrien,

       p p   -   HlLLSBORQUg H


       Thank you for your letter of 30 July 1997 received in this office today.

       A substantive reply will be sent to you as soon as possible.



       Yours sincerely




  QP. D R U SHARPLING
        CHIEF CROWN PROSECUTOR
        CENTRAL CASEWORK




                             Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests o f justice.
#
                                                                         f L{M       Cl I   . 2 1




                                                                                               3 o fc#^ ^ J t ^ .       / ‘i <i 7
    C P S            C esJb-^dL          £a-*&.t*ro-tJ<              >
                                                                                                    $ W l i l 5 T . r .7 :

                                                                                                         ' rVi cr
                                                                                                                " - i!
    '$jo*Jjer^ £C if. M                   *7                                                                   ^V.-


                                                                                                                           •-.. *jL.>       !

                          /^ <?_, I       {—
                                           / !X£. ^^UO-f—
                                                        O-v^-g-^v


                                                             i '--




                             3 o      •£*-,    (fv -r 't.            i Hi        •


                                                                                                                                        1
     ^            - t ^   a i^ t k                         1^ ^ 7                                                       -« W

     Z a*T n JU ,r^            ^                          °i          ^                                   ^          /V ^ l^

     ■-/»         "t^xX   (4*&^0-JL-           **"K      "t^kfl          '-So C3^                   ^? I / t
                                                                                                              6w -C _

      C^Gyx^<t-J-                                           -JLlM <~r'               <3     /Q £^ J-            - ^ v-n-* ^ / ----


            //'
                             JL auu ^ i-             /a /- u - X t! > - ^ -                                                   ^ 2-,-^

                                                                                 O C ^-                          ^ e t t r u .' O y ,

            O t-x , cJt^/'-^'<-&~''' S          ',
                    ^ jl_       JU rC d j ^ c j L ,                                  CL^iv^ l ^ J L       p -r^ o c -W ^ ^ g
   QL^S(Z^eJ02-C                               ^~4~                          XXxjl                                   Ls'ldx o l^ .

 ^ K sl     ~<^j < cAj 2^^                  chsl-o                                                    '7~Ks&J— U r-^^
  Uj~t—ery^j^

          ^ L ^ A -Z ^ X L -     X U    rv.. | Q - £ U ^    /                        y z_ ^L ^J 2 _ _ J _                            4j"**-0


V ^ v C_£_j2^o£-g-^L-                                 C^-tS^tyj

            lS -£L        &-JbL$L.       ^W vcrw —' r'f~U^>-j'~ ot>. k _<_./~                                               U,-^-r~e_

  1^su?--A^        " /o        ~-^-CXX iJ'^ii-                  /<i^f-ZK^£__4, <U_vuv              'tsfcs.-<z£h cb p t-^         ,

c^ ^ c r v ^ ^ L . iu ^ - o           Kjz*s-<r~r                eb?-<x^.                                       aj£&&-~s~ Tl^a^~

~^-c-fi~£: cl-$-                        ,       k2^~       -JLjz>*~JL-         l&six^rs,.

                     ^                                     cx^J^ U.’-v-i^JL^                      ~Af^ju^e_         4 - e e ,^

                           /0                  a w fc ^ t                fS 'C k .       a                    (iS7                   ^

 tK x. C W - ^ c ^ -             /^ D O ti^ e .                   J^ -X              le-Ga*^                                         4 _^

           p -c rd c ^ L ,      -T U ^ -4 - o L ^ y ,           (3 L o    'v ^ -     J^_C*^J_                         a c t-     QZ^

                                   c<^ ( £? £ r § f .

          0 ^ * — o k jZ ^                                               'ii^jszjf-          t^ c e         p-cr-£^l cLe_

  b M -J U jU -4o                 J                   L                        "O ^ .          < ^ i.^ c ^ h c r          -^ o

                                                  JL^U<u^ TK^zjf-

                                            A i^ ^ -               o J L ix ^             _ ^ W .s            t4,    -^-<J?-£

                                   <-& h*-*L C u^                                         oa          ^      q ^ d lZ n                  c..^

r^ e ^ r^ ,         c^L                                C ^3(-JL^.J-~                      o^L         -L*-+n^!S'trJZ&0                   ”



                                       <>vCfc^ '^cLjg.___                77^X.___
                         cA -sZ ^kJl't-            cs-U tZ^           ~t1^s>-J~                Y^-r^r^s3-Q^2^K                                 C<=X-£_
                  ^                        t                           —o Xf                                     ^       S~ O ^      OO O


 '-^r&-**—
         &.              C^HP—f^SL^                                  w-'w S-Oc>^L-                   ’T"2-v_*              —g-isisi^ fjj

                              't/'x g          c_a-r                  ^'^JLi?^,                i^'"x?~r-%^             Oj(^C                        CJ^f-

  •2 , 5~«^, |o , /v\,                                                                    ^ L     ji^               (?       ^^           ^

                                                       v ^ h x jr -                               ^JS*-PC-1<J~            < ^ -^ o

                                                                            L<j        TU ji_         <1                          c»-^_

^ - tx ^ c - A ^ e ^ r    t     ~ T I^ j l .      & ’/f~J   c    -,.*£>—             ~~J^W~'^.,»'v_^__          C*zj     c^ jK?     C -V "<5 2 -—



                                         T i-^          /<L^.o^c - <»t^-^- *

                Vo^-^L-          iHo->-0 *v_»2^~                CZ^-^cT-^ _                   ’7_K_jC_      g—1.,                   ^         •/^•J

                                                                                      G erv^w t- .              J          Lir&uJLaC-



 *-£U^-C<Aj2^yj^„                                                                                          ^~^J2jZ^_JL ,                /-/<_

 h^e             cX JL cJ^              /3 J - jl+.j -*’^ J l                   oZt~                                                            < x^ J_

—4^x- -A r-£ A                  7K «_           p^srC^, Cc,                 ^Tl^zdL-                                U -t-r-t^J^L_             4a<_     <=i-_
          ^ ^ d rg X                                            e r^ a -^ s> t_ X

~~fc<>      C^~QjZ*3~\fyy—                                  _        v3                 C'i~j(.-t^                       —
                                                                                                                         €x,’—j dLj/2si~^C~4^



  -tX fl.                                                       (|



   ^   t \ J2    /^<p-wi2-Cl,                   0-^_     "Ct--_e.          v 2 ^ J ^ j2 jf>                            -^C-y—
                                                                            -



                   ^                       'Tls-^czj^ y i v ^ >                                            ek ^ e ^ ,

   y (U # f ‘ ^ 6^            '                             cw ^L                           c^Co Tu^-^J^                      P zj

   C P s                                                    -t^ e           p ^ ;c ^                  - /«           «^v^c

            i f*—                                     u , w ^ i - c ^ A Wv                             q^        jL       / d^ .

                                  &    k ^ . 6^         V                   ®jf- C ^ * w C V ^ o 2^                       C>^
 ‘^'~Jf ^                                   w-,_c4. Cv.^,1

            K /V        W!^e>,^p_     /r\z^^r      4 ^ J ~ Z J h # - 4- J             -f^    S-              r



             ^ A ~ -                      < u :g W -3 » _ y - e ^ - r - ,                   o^L            c ^ L              u~,.

-f^ -^ ^ f             "A "                       ^      p ^ -e o -c ^ ,

  ^ -^ -< 3 7 ^ ^             .-it^f- X fvx       '^-WvU2- ,                                          S j2- ^ w _g;^ _

                                                          U     ^   ^   L   ^   i K     j         ^    -   C     u    w   -    ^


<X^ J '-     yt^ J L -                <£-Vof- '^ ^ - v .-           c^ < :^JhJL .J^                   L^j            J^ n^ ~ -

                              ^        « j2 ^ .                 U ^o               CL        C v ^ U -^ X

                                        7k*^W -                             _ ^ a ..                       ^ ^ J t-
‘4 - ^ ^ , ^           gM_j>^JL,         o^— A x ^ .

                                                  ^ i^ J - O                (^ar^jLJ^                 JL e^ JU ^

 -J U /< ^         ^     ,- a ^                             ^           - f c t^                                                   ^




                                                              ^o-*~w~=             &^i~c^u~eJZ^j

                                                                                             M '-’-                            -
                                                                                                               CPS
Dame Barbara Mills DBE QC
Director of Public Prosecutions
                                                                                                               Headquarters
                                                                                                               50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                               London EC4M TEX


r                                                                                               Direct Line;   0171-273 8098
    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith                                                                   Switchboard:   0171-273 8000
                                                                                                  facsimile:   0171-329 8366
    Hillsborough Scrutiny                                                                               No:
                                                                                                     DX No:    300850 Ludgate EC4
    Home Office
    Rm 528                                                 CPS   CENTRAL casew ork
    50 Queen Anne’s Gate                                             CCP
    London SW1H 9AT
                                                                 3 I J U L 1997
L
                                                          J RECEIVED
                                                                                                          30 July 1997       £. 7




          t-JV©                              j
    HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

    Thank you for your letter of 18 July 1997. We will obviously co-operate fully in whatever
    way we can with your scrutiny.

    The CPS material in this case is held at CPS Central Casework, United House, Piccadilly,
    York. M r George Croston is the lawyer involved.

    From the CPS perspective, there have been two distinct phases in this case. First, the CPS
    considered the report of the West Midlands Police and the report of Lord Justice Taylor in
    1989/90. Advice was taken from leading counsel, culminating in an announcement on 30
    August 1990 that there was insufficient evidence to justify criminal proceedings against
    anyone. Staff at Central Casework, York are in the process of compiling a schedule of
    material. We will let you have a copy of the schedule by 4 August 1997.

    Second, we considered further material sent by the Hillsborough Family Support Group in
    March 1997 and in addition, Mr Croston saw some material when he visited South Yorkshire
    Police earlier this year. The CPS view is that the material presented in March 1997 would
    not justify fresh criminal proceedings, a point which was made public by the Home Secretary
    in his announcement on 26 June 1997. A schedule of this material is also being prepared and
    we will let you have a copy by 4 August 1997.

    I hope that these schedules will assist you in your task.

    You mention access to the documents held by CPS. There is a substantial quantity of
    material held by York in relation to both the 1990 and 1997 decisions. You and/or your staff
    would be very welcome to inspect the material at York. Alternatively, if you prefer to
    inspect the material at CPS Headquarters in Ludgate Hill, I will ensure that the necessary
    arrangements are made.




                              Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests of justice
-2 -


I note that you maybe interviewing some witnesses. We would welcome the opportunity to
discuss the CPS decision making process and to assist you in identifying with precision the
material which we have inspected. Mr Croston would be the relevant member of staff to
help, and he can be contacted on

I hope that this reply is helpful to you.




DAME BARBARA MILLS QC
  D IRECTO R’S PERSO N A L CORRESPONDENCE


 Date received:            JL f ■ ”7 •     *~~J                                    B /F DATE AND
                                                                                      COMMENTS
 Post book reference no:            3 n $ T

                                                                               *                             ■
 From:     L -O (L -0       7   T        [ <U :   S > T U ^ /\£ J

                                              (TH


                                                                                                  2 5 ,5 ^
 K ey su b ject/title:    [~^i / L— (— <> £ O £_ O           A-/

                   <>~XA O f ( A M            Oi S A Z T c C               *       ■



Private O ffice;                    Acknowledgement     YES/IgD
                                                                                          2   ^    (   ^




A C T I O N               B Y


COPIED T O :             f o r CA     S k ^ p U        ^ '


 r^ K           to provide the Director with a draft reply by


                to reply direct and copy reply to the Private Office


                to advise the Director


                to deal                                        CPS CENTRAL CASEWORK
                                                                       CCP
                                                                    22 JUL 1997
                for information
                                                                    RECEIVED

NB:     All correspondence should be dealt with within 14 days o f receip t and d raft
        replies fo r th e D irector’s signature should be accompanied by a disk.
§PMU     aI   fU£    fa
j               V v & jU
 C 4 tte iN * L C A S P X &
u p ie   h   * i £ & £ o <***

 ‘“ “" ’" s J W
         *■                                                                                                              v/
                                                                                                               3 //? -

                                                                        X      f        i   n          UJJ2-
                                                                                       O vJ               I
                         THE HILLSBOROUGH SCRU                       OJlM . -      CX-S^C^




         «
                         Room 528
                                                                     P f\A,                               'j S k .-

                         50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
                        Direct Line 0171273 4046         Fax 4028
                                                                    C              ®               *
         Mrs Barbara Mills QC
         Director of Public Prosecutions
         Crown Prosecution Service
         50 Ludgate Hill                                                            o fr        <sC~i'         \
                                                                            ----    . X.            .1111V 1W /
         LONDON EC4M 7EX



                             A   v n   6   c   /N -v "




              HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER


              I have been appointed by the Home Secretary to conduct a scrutiny of possible fresh evidence
              relating to the Hillsborough Stadium disaster. I am writing to ask for your assistance (there
              has already been a preliminary discussion between Mr Croston at the Crown Prosecution
              Service in York and my Secretary Mr Bone).

        It might be helpful if I explain that the objective of my scrutiny is to establish whether there
        is any significant new evidence which was not previously available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry,
        to the Inquests, or to the prosecuting or police disciplinary authorities. If there is significant
        evidence, it will be my aim to see if it would have affected the outcome of any of the
  0 , s proceedings. I hope to report my findings to the Home Secretary by the end of the year. I
(       attach my terms of reference.

         In the course of my work I expect that I will need to have access to the documents about the
         incident and the various proceedings arising out of it which are held by your office. I should
         be obliged if you arrange for the Secretariat to my scrutiny to be informed in writing by 4
         August o f the nature of these documents and how we may most conveniently obtain access to
         them.

         I have written to the Hillsborough Family Support Group and to various other people who
         have come forward asking for some basic summary information about the new evidence
         which is said to exist. This information will help me during the preliminary stages of my


         As my scrutiny of the evidence proceeds I may wish to interview some witnesses directly. I
         am also willing to consider interviewing individual witnesses at their request. These
         interviews will be private.

         The Secretariat to my scrutiny will be happy to discuss the arrangements if you wish. Please
note that the telephone and room numbers shown above are temporary - we will notify you of
our permanent address and telephone as soon as we have them.
                                              «




                                   Aa                      1



LORD JUSTICE STUART-SMITH
                                                                                                              m
                                                                                                              CPS
Dame Barbara Mills DBE QC
Director of Public Prosecutions
                                                                                                              Headquarters
                                                                                                              50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                              London EC4M 7EX

r                                                        1                                               0171-273 8098
                                                                                               Direct Urn:
    Lord Justice Stuart-Smith                                                                            0171-273 8000
                                                                                               Switchboard:
                                                                                                         0171-329 8366
                                                                                                 Facsimile:
    The Hillsborough Scrutiny                                                                      dxno: 300850 Ludgate EC4
    Room 528
    50 Queen Anne’s Gate
    London SW1H 9AT

L                                                        J




                                                                                                         21 July 1997




    JLi2j 2kr i— <o ( cL U2.                                      t
    HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

    Dame Barbara Mills has asked me to thank you for your letter dated 18 July 1997,
    concerning the above matter.

    When your letter has been considered further, a substantive reply will be provided, and in
    any event, before 4 August 1997. Unfortunately, the terms of reference were not attached
    to your letter. Would you be kind enough to send us a copy.

               S    2 i " v u U jSXh




    JANE GILL (Miss)
    Senior Personal Secretary to the
    Director of Public Prosecutions




                             Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests of justice
