From:              George Croston
To:                CPSHQL.DPP.DIRECTOR
Subject:           Hillsborough: Briefing for Home Office


A slightly amended briefing note is attached.

It has been approved by the CCP for Central Casework.

The PQ file has been returned to you via DX.


George Croston

CC:                CPSHQL.DPP.GILLJ, CPSHQL.DPP.W ILKINST
>




                            BRIEFING FOR THE HOME OFFICE

                                       HILLSBOROUGH



    1.    ISSUE

    1.1   Maria Eagle MP (Liverpool, Garston) has tabled a Parliamentary Question for an oral
          answer on Monday 26 October 1998 by the Home Secretary.

    1.2   The question is: To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department, if all
          material held by South Yorkshire Police in respect of the Hillsborough disaster which
          he ordered to be placed in the Library has now been deposited.

    2.    ACTION

    2.1   Matthew Pyne of the Operational Policing Policy Unit at the Home Office has
          requested a briefing on the current position in the Hillsborough private prosecution
          for use in answering supplementary questions that may arise.

    3.    TIMING

    3.1   Briefing note to go to the CCP of Central Casework prior to submission to the Private
          Office by 20 October at the latest.

    4.    BACKGROUND

    4.1   Solicitors for the Hillsborough Family Support Group (HFSG) have taken out a
           private prosecution against the two most senior police officers on duty in the police
           control room at the Hillsborough Stadium on the day of the disaster in 1989. The
           case which is presently at Leeds Magistrates’ Court has been adjourned to 30 October
           1998 at the request of the private prosecutor and the defendants. A provisional date
           for an oral committal has been set down for mid December.

    4.2   Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, now medically retired, was the overall police
           commander at the FA Cup semi-final game between Liverpool and Nottingham
           Forest. Superintendent Murray, also retired, was the senior officer in charge of
           overseeing events in the ground.

    4.3    Both officers face two charges of ‘manslaughter’ being the unlawful killing of John
           Alfred Anderson and James Gary Aspinall, who were two of the fans who died in the
           centre pens of the Leppings Lane terraces at the ground. They also face one
           alternative charge against each of ‘wilfully neglecting to perform a public duty’
           (otherwise known as ‘misconduct in a public office’) based on the same circumstances
           as the main allegations. Mr Duckenfield alone is charged with ‘perverting the course
           of justice’ in that he lied about the circumstances in which gate C at the ground was
           opened.
The sequence of reviews and hearings since the day of the disaster is well known.
Following the publication of the report of the scrutiny conducted by Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith, and the Home Secretary’s statement to the House on 18 February 1998,
an indication was received on 26 June 1998 that the HFSG were to take out a private
prosecution against police officers.


KEY CONSIDERATIONS

Solicitors for the defendants have formally requested the Director to take over the
private prosecution under the provisions of section 6(2) of the Prosecution of Offences
Act 1985 in order to discontinue the case.

The HFSG have made representations to the Director that they should be allowed to
continue with the prosecution and have requested voluntary disclosure of all papers
in our possession.

CPS Central Casework is considering the papers in our possession, as well as those
provided to us by the parties to the prosecution, in order to come to the appropriate
decision. Present CPS policy is that we would only take over a case in order to
discontinue it if there was "clearly no case to answer", as a private prosecution
commenced in these circumstances would be unfounded, and would, therefore , be
an abuse of the right to bring a prosecution.

The previous CPS decisions, that there was insufficient evidence to provide a realistic
prospect of conviction on any criminal charges against any police officer or any other
person, are not affected by this review.

Voluntary disclosure of relevant documents in CPS possession has been deferred until
the Director has considered the completed report and the review decision has been
made. The right to bring a private prosecution does not confer on a private
prosecutor or a defendant a right to obtain documents from the CPS. Once there has
been a committal, the Crown Court may grant a private prosecutor a witness
summons to secure production of relevant material in order to comply with the
obligation of disclosure to the defence. All parties have been notified that if the
Director declines to take over the prosecution then we will give voluntary disclosure
even handedly to all parties. If the prosecution is taken over and discontinued then
of course disclosure is no longer required.

The review is still continuing and the Director has asked that it be placed before her
by 23 October 1998.

The South Yorkshire Police have formally requested advice from the CPS on the
matter of voluntary disclosure. On 15 July 1998 the Chief Constable was advised of
our present policy and that he might wish to consider applying it in the present
circumstances and also deferring voluntary disclosure to the parties. CPS advice did
not cover the material which the Home Secretary had ordered to be placed in the
House Library as a result of the scrutiny as that was not relevant to disclosure in the
private prosecution. On 18 September 1998 telephone advice was given to the
      solicitors acting for the Chief Constable to the effect that our previous advice on
      disclosure should not be interpreted to include a refusal to send any required material
      to the House Library. They were advised that they should comply with the Home
      Secretary’s order and to contact the secretary to the scrutiny for details of what
      documents were involved.

5.7   The case is of course‘sub judice’.

6.    RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1    That this briefing be passed to the Home Office.

7.    CONCLUSION

7.1   In correspondence with the police, the CPS have never advised on the operation of
       the Hillsborough archives for which they hold responsibility, only on voluntary
       disclosure in relation to the private prosecution.



George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
CPS Central Casework

Date: 16 October 1998
From:               George Croston
To:                 CPSHQL.CCU.SHARPLID
Date:               16 October 1998 12:53pm
Subject:             Hillsborough: Briefing for the Home Office

Attached is a draft briefing which is to be cleared by yourself prior to submission to the Private Office by 20
October at the latest.

C Enzor has seen and approved it and has suggested that I copy it to the Private Office for information only until
your approval is granted.

I have the PQ file which will be sent back in the DX. Please let me know if you require faxed details from the PQ
file.


George

CC:                 CPSHQL.CCU.DAW KINSL, CPSHQL.CCU.LENNONC, CPSHQL.DP.
