Dru Sharpling
CCP - Central Casework


cc      Robin Booth


                                                                     My Ref:
                                                                     Your Ref:




HILLSBOROUGH
1.   I have been considering the point about whether Adomako should be applied
     in this case and the extent to which the proper tests were applied by counsel in
     the 1990 advice when they went on to consider what was the appropriate test
     for involuntary manslaughter

2.   In his review, George briefly set out the applicable law in chapter 4. I have
      read and re-read Adomako this morning. The cases of Andrews and Bateman
      in 1925 and 1937 respectively indicated that gross negligence was then
      sufficient to found a conviction for manslaughter. The word ‘gross’ was not
      used on its own but was given as an example of the type of negligence under
      consideration.

3.   All would have been well had it not been for the case of Seymour in 1983
     where, in a driving case, the judge directed the jury in terms of recklessness,
     as defined in Lawrence. The House of Lords agreed that this was the correct
     approach.

4.   Despite this, Lord Mackay, in Adomako, said that Andrews was ‘the most
     authoritative statement of the present law’ and further that it was a ‘decision
     which [had] not been departed from’. I find this a little hard to reconcile, but
     the conclusion I am driven to is that Adomako clarified the law in that Lord
     Mackay specifically described Bateman and Andrews as ‘satisfactory as
     providing a proper basis for describing the crime of involuntary
     manslaughter’.

5.   I argue that Adomako did not change the law but clarified it.

6.   Thus, in my view, the appropriate test to be applied is the Adomako test, as set
      out by George in paragraph 4.2 of his review.

7.   The next question is whether counsel applied the correct test in 1990.
      Interestingly, one of the counsel who advised CPS in 1990 appeared for the
      appellant in Adomakol
8.    Counsel’s advice was principally directed to ‘reckless’ manslaughter, ie.
      where a person causes the death of another intending to do an act which
      creates an obvious and serious risk of causing personal injury (a) not giving
      thought to the possibility of such risk or (b) having recognised there was some
      risk involved, nonetheless going on to take it. Clearly this is not good law
      now.

9.    Counsel went on to say (paragraph 59 of the joint opinion) ‘it may also be
      manslaughter if the person causing the death intends to do an act, or omits to
      do an act where there is a duty to do so, being grossly negligent whether death
      or serious personal injury results’. In my view this is an adequate enunciation
      of the principles now set out in Adomako.

10.   Counsel went on to say that the law was uncertain, and made reference to
      Seymour and also Kong Cheuk Kwan. Counsel particularly noted that in the
      1986 case of Goodfellow, it was said of Kong Cheuk Kwan that the question
      was whether the defendant was ‘guilty of recklessness (or gross negligence)’.
      Counsel then went on to say that they considered that the gross negligence test
      was sufficient to establish the offence of manslaughter.

11.   Unfortunately, the matter does not stop there. In the 1990 advice, counsel
      referred to the case of R v West London Coroner’s Court, ex p Gray. The
      Divisional Court held that a Coroner should direct the jury in the following
      terms where the death is alleged to have been caused by neglect by the police:

      11.1 That they had to be satisfied of four ingredients, namely (a) that the
           police were under a duty to have regard to the health and welfare of the
           deceased, (b) that in the circumstances there was a failure to do what
           should have been done for the health and welfare of the deceased, (c)
           that the failure amounted to a substantial cause of death, and (d) that the
           failure amounted to recklessness.

      11.2 That the test of ‘recklessness’ was whether a police officer, having
           regard to his duty, was indifferent to an obvious and serious risk to the
           health and welfare of the deceased or, recognising that the risk to be
           present, deliberately chose to run it by doing nothing about it

      11.3 That a failure to appreciate that there was such a risk was not itself
           sufficient to amount to recklessness and

      11.4 That the jury could only return a verdict of unlawful killing if they could
           attribute the unlawful conduct to a single police officer.

12.   It is clear from the 1990 advice, that counsel felt that these points had a direct
      bearing on their advice (para 65).

13.   E xp Gray was cited in Adomako. Lord Mackay in approving of the use of the
      word ‘reckless’ in its ordinary sense in cases of involuntary manslaughter, said
      that ex p Gray was an example of a case where the word reckless had been
     used with complete accuracy. On the face of it, this is difficult to reconcile as
     the reference in paragraph 11.3 to recklessness appears to be something
     bordering on a Cunningham definition (note the reference to failure to
     appreciate that there was a risk not being sufficient to amount to recklessness).

14. I found the use of the word ‘indifferent’ difficult to reconcile here. I note,
     however, that failure to appreciate that there was a risk was specifically ruled
     out by the court as a sufficient state of mind for recklessness in this context.
     Accordingly, this only leaves a narrow scope for ‘indifference’ which I think
     must mean that the officer, bearing in mind his duty, must have deliberately
     shut his mind to the presence of the risk.

15. In my view, ex p Gray cannot stand against Adomako and it should not be
     regarded as good law. How then does this leave counsel’s advice, bearing in
     mind that ex p Gray was in the forefront of their minds?

16. At paragraph 81 of the 1990 opinion, counsel were considering the position of
    the police as an organisation in relation to a possible charge of corporate
    manslaughter. The say ‘...there seems to us to be no evidence that in making
    what were undoubtedly errors of judgment and practice, the police
    organisation, or any individual within it, acted recklessly or in a grossly
    negligent manner’. This is highly significant because, even if counsel applied
    the recklessness test in ex p Gray, they also clearly considered gross
    negligence as a separate head. It must have been separate as gross negligence
    does not feature in ex p Gray.

17. So far as Mr Duckenfield is concerned, the position is more difficult. The
    weight of the opinion in paragraphs 83 to 89 is towards recklessness. At
    paragraph 88, counsel opine that the omissions to act did not create a risk
    which was obvious at the time.

18. Paragraph 89 says, and I quote in full: ‘We conclude, therefore, that there is
     insufficient evidence on which to found a charge of recklessness against Mr
     Duckenfield. Nor is there evidence that he was grossly negligent in failing to
     act as mentioned above. We bear in mind particularly the judgment of the
     Divisional Court in the West London Coroner’s Court case, the requirements
     of which are not in our view satisfied’.

19. Given that gross negligence and recklessness as defined in ex p Gray are
    substantially different, I am of the view that the reference in paragraph 89 to
    ex p Gray must be read as referring back to recklessness only and not to gross
    negligence. I recognise that this is a rather technical interpretation of
    paragraph 89 but I suggest it is nevertheless correct. After all, counsel quite
    properly directed themselves in the main to the current case law as understood
    by most people at the time (ie. recklessness was the test) and only added gross
    negligence out of a desire for completeness, bearing in mind their own views
    on the state of the law. It is a tribute to them that they were so accurate.
20.   If that is right, and I suggest that logically it must be, then counsel’s opinion
      can be said to have considered gross negligence manslaughter in the terms set
      out in Adomako.



Chris Enzor
Central Casework York Branch
DX 65204 York 6

Fax
 December 1998
Jh M     '97     It.: 31 HO F2 DIVISION 0171 273 2703


               Policc Policy Directorate                                     ilomc Office
                                                                             Si) Q uc -.t . Ar.nc'-s G ate .
               O perational P o licin y Policy U nit (OPPU)
                                                                             L o n d o n SvY ! H 9AT
                                                                             T e l e p h o n e : 0171 27 3
                                                                             Fax-                0171->7 j


Richard Wells Esq Q.P.M.
Chief Constable
South Yorkshire Police
Snig Hill
Sheffield
S3 8LY                                                                 20 December          1996



       f*.              L

HILLSBOROUGH

As  you   will  be  aware,  following   the  Granada  programme,
Hillsborough, a number of representations were made to the Home
Secretary calling on him to reopen the public inquiry into the
disaster. Whilst the Home Secretary emphasised that he would not
take a decision to reopen the inquiry lightly and would need to
be convinced that it would be in the public interest to do so,
he, nonetheless, made a commitment in the House of Commons
carefu lly to consider the issues raised.

In coming to his decision the Home Secretary is particul arly
anxious to establish whe ther any new evidence has emerged. I
would therefore be grateful for your views on this m a t t e r in
relation to the ten points raised by the programme wh i c h X
attach. It would also be helpful if we could have clarificat ion
on the point about whet her the film from the video camera trained
on the central enclosure was available to the Taylor inquiry. The
programme makers have specifically alleged that the Taylor
inquiry was told that the camera was not working, when this was
not the case; I would be grateful for your comments on this
particular point. I unders tand that the film is available and it
would be helpful if we could receive a copy and of any transcript
of the film which the Taylor inquiry may have received.

Whilst the Home Secretary does not have the power to reopen the
inquest - that is a matter for the High Court on the advice of
the Attorney General - the relatives have expressed continuing
anger that the Coroner imposed a 3.15pm cut off point after which
he would not take any evidence. Whether this was the correct
course might have a bearing on the Home Secretary's decision. T
would also be grateful     therefore to receive any relevant
information you might have on this matter. I understand that the
issues will be investigated by the Complaints and Discipline
Department who have already indicated to us that they could
provide a full report by the end of January.




                                                               PAUL PUGH '
                                                              Head of Unit


K-\CRlM£\LETTfiR\SMD.OOJt
                                                   THE LEGAL SECRETARIAT TO THE LAW OF

                                                               ATTORNEY GENERAL'S CHAMBERS

                                                                         9 BUCKINGHAM GATE

                                                                           LONDON SW1E 6JP
General enquiries 0 1 7 1 -8 2 8 7155
Direct line         0 1 7 1 -8 2 8



        Peter Pearson Esq
        Central Casework Division
        CPS Headquarters                                C A SEW O R K
                                                        S L A J S im *
        United House
        Piccadilly                                        2 4 JAN 1997
        YORK YOl 1PQ

         23 January 1997                                    YORK




                                        Sl J W "

        HILLSBOROUGH

        We spoke yesterday afternoon about the Parliamentary correspondence the
        CPS has received, based on the letter circulated by the Hillsborough Family
        Support Group to all Members of Parliament. We agreed that this would need
        careful and co-ordinated handling.

        The Home Office and LSLO have each received extensive correspondence from
        families affected by the Hillsborough disaster which have hitherto focused
        either on demands for a fresh public inquiry or the reopening of the inquest,
        of both. Our line has been to draw on what the Home Secretary said in the
        House of Commons on 17 December 1996when responding to an adjournment
        debate. He made the point that any decisions which have to be taken m ust be
        on the basis of consideration of all the relevant facts and underlying evidence,
        rather than simply on the basis of the television programme itself. He also
        said that in particular the Home Office would consider whether there is any
        new evidence, and if so, whether that evidence is of such significance that had
        it been put before Lord Taylor or before the coroner, either the outcome of the
        Taylor Inquiry or the verdict of the jury would have been different.

        I enclose a specimen of a typical letter which we have written. We do not, at
        present, consider that anything in the programme materially affects the
        applications which the Attorney General has already considered under Section
        13 of the Crimes Act 1988, but have in place arrangements so that we are
        informed of any new evidence which can then be considered.




        S W /2 2 0 1 /4
 The correspondence from HFSG opens a new angle on this by calling on the
 DPP to request a further criminal investigation. Since we spoke, I have been
 in touch with Paul Pugh in the Police Polity Directorate, who informs me that
 the South Yorkshire Police have undertaken to report to the Home Secretary
 by the end of January on the issues raised by the programme. That will, in
 particular, include clarification about the point whether the film from the video
 camera trained on the central enclosure was available to the Taylor Inquiry.
 I enclose, for each of reference, a copy of Paul Pugh’s letter of 20 December
 1996 to the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire.

 You may feel that it would also be appropriate for the CPS to adopt a similar
 stance indicating that it will consider whether any further action may be
 appropriate on its part once the results of the enquiries by the Home Office are
 to hand. That would not, of course, preclude the CPS from asking for further
 or wider enquiries at that stage. As to co-ordination, Paul Pugh thought there
would be no difficulty in making the results of the South Yorkshire enquiries
 available to the CPS and LSLO. We felt that, assuming the report is received
in early Februaiy, we should look to a meeting between ourselves, the Home
Office and CPS in mid-February. Whilst each Department must form its own
judgment in relation to the discharge of its own duties, it is equally important
that there is a coherent and co-ordinated response.

I shall be revising our model letter to take account of the additional points
made in the HFSG circular and will fax that to you as soon as possible.


    N)            CZj^   r




S J WOOLER




S W /2 2 0 1 /4
David Kyle                                                                                               m
Chief Crown Prosecutor                                                                                   CPS
                                                                                                          CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                          United House
                                                                                                          Piccadilly
                                                                                                          York YOl 1PQ

                                                                                            S w itc h b o a rd 01904-450070
 r                                                      i                                         DX No: 65204 York 6
     S. J. Wooler Esq.,
                                                                            Facsimile: 01904-
     Legal Secretariat
     to the Law Officers,
     Attorney General’s Chambers                                          Direct Line: 01904-

     9 Buckingham Gate
                                                                        Our Reference:
     LONDON SW1E 6JP                                                                             PR3/PRPP
L                                                       J              Your Reference:




                                                                                                24th January 1997



     / L



  RE:        HILLSBOROUGH


  Thank you for your letter of the 23rd January 1997 and enclosures which we received by fax
  yesterday and through the post this morning. Your observations and the specimen letter will
  be most useful to us.

  We are preparing a briefing for the Director and once she has replied to David Alton MP,
  I will let you have a copy of her letter for your information. We shall then also write to the
  various private correspondents in similar terms.

 Subject of course to any instructions I receive from the Director, I agree, as we discussed
 earlier that it would be better for us at the moment to await the results of the enquiries
 instigated by the Home Office. I can confirm that it would be of great assistance to us if we
 could meet with the Home Office and yourselves once this information is available.

  I look forward to receiving your revised model letter in due course.




           <L.

 PETER R. P. PEARSON
 MMS/53.97




                         Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests of justice
               S o u th Y o rk sh ire

               POLICE                                               R ic h a rd W ells qpm, MA(Oxon).caigt.
               JUSTICE       with    COURAGE                       Chief Constable


Mr David Kyle                                                                            24 January 1997
Chief Crown Prosecutor
CPS Central Casework
United House                                                                         EWORK
Piccadilly
York YOl 1PQ
                                                                              2 3 JAN 1897
                                                                                     to * 1     'III
                                                                                     YORK
How are you!

I have recently had a request from Paul Jennings in Central Casework at York relating to the
Hillsborough Inquiry.

The enquiry centres on letters received from representatives of bereaved families in Merseyside,
addressed to the Director in London, asking her to re-open the inquests in this case.

The trigger for the letters was evidently Granada's recent drama documentary "Hillsborough" and
the Director has, for some reason, forwarded the letters to your Region.

Your Central Casework Unit has written to our Constable Ken Greenway asking him to forward a
video tape of the programme and then for us to give a briefing to your office about what, if anything,
the programme might have added in the way of material facts not placed before the courts
previously. I am unsure about the locus of your office in this matter but want to be as helpful as I
possibly can. As a token of this approach, we have already sent a copy of the videoed drama
documentary so that your Central Casework Unit can review it.

However, before taking the matter any further with your staff, I would like to up-date you on the
fact that we have done a very comprehensive briefing for the Home Office on exactly the same
subject. We have invested a tremendous amount of time and effort in answering 10 questions
forwarded through Labour MPs in Merseyside ar.d Sheffield by the Home Office to us, designed to
flush-out the precise point of whether or not there is any new material.

I am loath to repeat the exercise for your office when the logical link would be between the
Director's Office and the Home Office, centrally.

The current state of affairs is that we have reviewed the broadcast with a fine tooth comb and have
answered each of the 10 questions in the fullest way possible, rather than taking a minimalist
approach of simply referring the enquirers to lines and paragraphs in, for example, the Taylor Inquiry
transcript, or that of the Coroner's Inquest, or the Judicial Review upon it. It is our firm view that
there is absolutely no material new in the broadcast which has not been placed before the Taylor
Inquiry, the Inquest, or the Judicial Review, and that will be my advice to the Home Secretary.



               Police Headquarters
               Snig Hill
               Sheffield S3 8LY
               Tel: 0114 276 8522 Fax: 0114 252 3243
What I now propose to do is to conclude our preparation of the response to the 10 questions by the
end of next week (31 January) and send them to the Home Office. I propose also to include in that
bundle a copy of your letter and this reply, so that the Home Office may make contact with the
Director and seek her views on the best way forward.

I am also copying this letter to Donald Adams, our Chief Crown Prosecutor, for his interest.




Richard Wells
        Police Policy Directorate                                           Home 0f
                                                                            50 Queen Anne’s Gate,
        P a ill P im h                                                      London SW1H 9AT
                                                                            Telephone: 0171-273 3141
        Head o f Operational Policing Policy U n it (OPPU)                  Fax:       0171-273 2703




                                                             >lldOA


P Pearson Esq
Central Casework Division
CPS Headquarters
United House
Piccadilly
York YOl 1PQ                                                          10 February 1997




HILLSBOROUGH

Stephen Wooler in the Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers has spoken to me about
your interest in the recent representations concerning the Hillsborough disaster.

As you know, I requested from the South Yorkshire Police a full report on the matters
which were raised in the television programme before Christmas. I have now
received that report, and I am enclosing copies of all the material which the Chief
Constable has sent to me. Stephen Wooler asked me to send you a copy directly.

I have suggested to Stephen Wooler that we should aim to meet to discuss the next
steps in handling this material at the beginning of March. I assume that you will wish
to attend that discussion. If you agree, I will ask my secretary to arrange a provisional
date.


                                 J




                                        PAULPUGH
Draft letter from Director to:

David Alton MP.



                  The Hillsborough Stadium Disaster

Thank you for your letter of 14th January, 1997, enclosing a
letter you have received from Mr. Philip Hammond, secretary to the
Hillsborough Family Support Group.

I shall deal specifically with the point at          (i) which is
addressed to m e . I am not aware of a complaint being received by
the Crown Prosecution Service from the Support Group, although
a number of individuals have recently written. However, I have
treated the letter you enclosed as a formal complaint.

I understand that following the recent television p r o g r a m m e ;
"Hillsborough" the Home Office have raised a number of questions
with the Chief Constable. When they have the answers to these
questions, I intend to consider them so that I can then decide
what further action, if any, I should take.

You will appreciate that the programme itself is not evidence;
the question is whether it made any assertions not previously
considered and if so, what evidence there is to support those
assertions.

I appreciate the programme must have raised a number of anxieties
for the families involved and caused them no little distress in
re-living this tragedy. I have the utmost sympathy for their
suffering and I can assure you that if as a result of the Home
Office questions I receive information which needs further
investigation, I shall not hesitate to ask for that to be done
J.Ringguth
ACCP
Central Casework




Re: Hillsborough

Further to our recent telephone conversation.

I attach for your use a complete set of the papers (minus videos)
that have been forwarded b y Paul Pugh from the Home Office.

These have been acknowledged and steps are being taken to arrange
the meetin g that he refers to in the final paragraph of his
letter.

These papers will be brought to George Croston's attention,
though this might not be until shortly before your video link
conference, and to Peter's upon his return to the office.

Please do not hesitate to contact me if I can assist further.



P.Jennings
Central Casework
York

11 February 1997
                                                                                      515
Chief Crown Prosecutor                                                                CPS
                                                                                      CPS Central Casework
                                                                                      United House
                                                                                      Piccadilly
                                                                                      York Y011PQ

                                                                       Switchboard-   01904-450070
 r                                    i                                     DXNo:     65204 York 6
     For the attention of Paul Pugh
     Head of Operational Policing Policy Unit                     01904-
     Home Office
     50 Queen Anne's Gate                    Direct j w           01m-
     London SW1H 9AT
                                                Our Reference:

L                                     J         Your Reference:



                                                           11 February 1997


     Dear Sir,

                              Re: HILLSBOROUGH

     In Peter Pearson's absence I acknowledge receipt of your letter
     dated 10 February 1997 together with enclosures.

     We share your view that a mee ting would be beneficial                             and am
     content for this to be organised through your office.

     Notwithstanding the possible problem of finding a free day I
     think our only immediate caveat wo uld be the actual timing of the
     meeting so as to enable us to undertake the journey down from
     York.

     Peter's secretary can be contacted on                                       once       your
     secretary has any potential dates in miridT


     Yours faithfully




     P.Jennings
07-Mar-97 09:33P CPS CENTRAL CASEWORKCCP                        0171       273 8050
        ■   ■ ■■*




                                                                     Centra/ Casework
                                                                     5 0 L u d g a ie tiiii
                                          FACSIMILE                  London LC4M /EX
     Attention o f I    fpCyS^1^
                                                                     Switchboard: 0171-273 8000
     Address              S     C                                    Facsimile: 0171-273 *050
                                                                     D X No: 300850 I.udgaie EC4
     Fax No


     From           Dru Sharpling
                    Chief Crown Prosecutor
                    Central Casework


     Date                                        Time


      1his fax transmission consists of this page plus   n         others

     If transmission is not properly received please call 0171- 273 1225



     m essa g e
07-Mar-97               09:33P         CPS       CENTRAL         CASEWORKCCP                       0171    273   8050                      P .02

 # ► . .         *                                       /                           i   '•

                                                                                                    J U      U , i-         ;■ •
                                                                                                                                       ■   ■'   .   .   r
                                                                                                  I\                        It         l 1 L' ■ i


           DIRECTOR’S PERSONAL CORRESPONDENCE

           Date received;            S~f    J}   ^       ~]
                                                                                                              E/F DATE AND
                                                                                                                COMMENTS
           Post book reference no:               p


           FVom:         P\                          f       i <3 A        O. ^
                         ^ O La. (.. t       f"0 /
                         KUA                        ola<i t- - f a ^ ; l y
                                            (-    ^ rc^p
       Key subject/title:


       TK c      Ml LL S ' ^ o ^ ; u S H                                                                         CPS CENTRALCASEWORK
       0 ( S a <; r ( / £ : i V. ^ - &ai                                                                                 CCP

     ftiv ate Office:                            Acknowledgement:           YES/rJ3                                   05 MAR 1997

                                                                                                                      RECEIVED


    A C T I O N                      B Y


    COPIED TO:                   f         \ Us., ex. f p                    11K.                 .A -^ v A J L x Q. ^ A ~
                                                                  v                                * Hr \s\ qAj l c    (c
                          CO   provide the Director wim a draft reply by
      i       i

                          to reply direct and copy reply to the Privare Office


                         to advise the Director                                           laz.je-j?                              HJf


                         to deal
     I       i
                                                                      •X                          C^- i-e-<_0/ vc2<_ C.o'Pj^
                         for inform ation
                                                                                  6^(£5^j2. a <4- , -s
                                                                      f^JUcC^ \ t             -



  NB:             AH c o r r e s p o n d s should be dealt with within 14 da.ys o f receipt and drall
                  replies for the Director’s signature should b« accompanicd by a disk
                                                  South Yorkshire

                                                 POLICE
                                                 JUSTICE                              with                  COURAGE


                        DISCIPLINE AND COMPLAINTS DEPARTMENT

                                                             50 W IN D S O R ROAD
                                                                 SH EFFIELD
                                                                    S8 8UB

                                                    TELEPHONE: (0 1 1 4 )2 5 0 0 7 0 0
                                                       FAX: (0 1 1 4 )2 5 2 3 8 5 5



TO: ................................ ....................................................................................................




FO R TH E A TTE N TIO N OF:                              ^




CO M M ENTS: .                          A t . $^£<#.9/93                   X*$.WkA#£....

          H & JL . v & f J % :              : 5 7 ............. &.Y.        .                                                         .. ( z r i p & r . .        .

  P t G g g & iU J A y o n 04 ty J L S 2 ; ».Cft.7. .                                  W. f-.Sf.. 6 * .! t t y f r f , . . f t , . & S S } f? .              ......




 FROM:                     .'f^Sgsv



 NO OF PAGES (IN C LU D IN G TH IS PAGE):                                             (tO.O .-....................

 IN TH E EVENT OF A POOR COPY. CONTACT: (0114) 2523861
VV \       cr 3 b
A6l



0> Z 2 M   4 t5 c l.E t)   f e '
                           (r m
                           !l~
                                                                                                                      CPS
                                                                                                                     Central Casework
                                                                                                                        United House
  Facsimile                                                                                                                 Piccadilly
                                                                                                                       York YOl 1PQ
                                                                                                               . a

                                                                                                             Direct Line\
                                                                                                            Switchboard: 01904-450070
                                                                                                              Facsimile:
                                                                                                                DX No. 65204 York 6
Attention of:        R x u X Pu^vM
Address:           fouc£ R>u.o                                  Oid&^oe/fn^
Fax No:             0(71 273 '2-TOl
From:               C eazS c              R            c fo sn a ^ j

CPS Division:              C & sW u                 0 £ c u jO C X                        -/£> 7

Date:      wlzhi               Time:               t72o
This fax transmission consists of this page plus                           others

Please acknowledge receipt:


I f transmission is not properly received please call 01904-456671




   I'V y A ^ v l'    f r ttf U c A p h         ^          Sl\CAAX*Cp c f                       tetiubxb              C D 3^7

    k>                             *


     1 k to t             "O aM                    ^              f ^                                                      ^
                                                              o jc ^ h ih y                   b*~ ?     T g /2             / o f '

        Tf t / i    ct^v       sh u n x                         PS             K ’n - t o c v t ) Ov?i c a v /u b
        H aJt             (f a                                                                                                    co^ ^ W   .


        T h & tfc ft-     K *                                                            \b        M tu )
        rtcut Irox hooA aXJo^ecA fc                                                                loners SLLjfj&weol &M
     u tt          obit       fe                                 Lt                                              tMdvt<& pdf7
    H e c ^ 'c & D        u        H a^         c c * U f& 1             A K /H

                                Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests o f justice
                                                                         CPS
                                                                        Central Casework
                                                                           United House
  Facsimile      ,    1                                                         Piccadilly
                                                                          York YOl 1PQ

                                                                D irect Line\
                                                               Switchboard: 01904-450070
                                                                 Facsimile:

Attention of:         c Cf                                         DX No. 65204 York 6




Address:

Fax No:

From:                             "T "   ^   ^
                                              d

CPS Division:

Date:                     Time:

This fax transmission consists of this page plus ^ others

Please acknowledge receipt:


I f transmission is not properly received please call 01904-
'   *




        D .Sharpling
        CCP
        Central Casework


        Hillsborough

        I have examined the correspondence held here and in particular
        what response was provided to the Hillsborough Family Support
        Group with regard to the large volume of material that was sent
        to the Private Office, arriving on the 4 March 1997.

        Quite simply no response has yet been provided by us (Central
        Casework) but the standard holding response was sent b y the
        Private Office (copy a t t a c h e d ) . In terms of what then followed
        in this matter it would appear that we still cannot at this stage
        go beyond that reply.

        This material was only fully considered on the 10 March 1997
        during the joint meeting between Home Office, LSLO and CPS. At
        that meeting the CPS were instructed to undertake a full review
        of all the case material.

        A meeting by George Croston with the Police was held on 12 March
        1997.

        On Friday 14 March 1997 we were pressed by the Home Office to
        give our view on what our decision was.

        Present position   :-

        Peter will brief you tomorrow on the full review that has taken
        place and has copies of all relevant material. The letter from
        the LSLO dated 14 March 1997 (copy attached) would also seem to
        have a bearing on how the disclosure of any decision should be
        made.

        Please let me know if I can assist further.


        P .Jennings
        6589
        24 March 1997
                                                      THE LEGAL SECRETARIAT TO THE LAW OFFICERS
»
                                                                    ATTORNEY GENERAL'S CHAMBERS

                                                                               9 BUCKINGHAM GATE

                                                                                 LONDON SW1E 6JP
    General enquiries 0 1 7 1 -8 2 8 7155
    Direct line



            Ms Dru Sharpling
            Chief Crown Prosecutor, Central Casework                           VA/<
            Crown Prosecution Service
            Headquarters
            50 Ludgate Hill
            LONDON EC4M7EX

             14 March 1997




            HILLSBOROUGH

            I attended a meeting at the Home Office earlier this week at which Peter
            Pearson was present. All aspects of the Hillsborough issue were discussed.

            I have since reported to the Attorney General. His present position is that
            none of the material put forward following the ITV drama documentary touches
            on the issues based in the applications which he has already considered under
            Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988. He has received no further such
            applications but, should he do so, they would be carefully considered in the
            usual way.

            It was clear from what Peter Pearson said that the CPS consider it unlikely that
            their consideration of the further material will lead to the conclusion that there
            should be any further criminal investigation along the lines suggested by the
            Hillsborough Families Support Group. The purpose of this letter is to point up
            the interest of the Attorney General in that issue also and ask that he be
            informed once the CPS has reached a considered view so that he has an
            opportunity to comment before any announcement is made.




                                                                   17 MR m i

            S J WOOLER


            S W / 1403/3
                                                                                        CPS
                                                                                      Central Casework
                                                                                         United House
        Facsimile                                                                             Piccadilly
                                                                                        York YOl IPQ
                                                                                . «

                                                                              Direct Line;\            |

                                                                             Switchboard: 01904-450070
                                                                               Facsimile;                  I

                                                                                 DX No. 65204 York 6
    Attention of:

    Address:        C a k A ^ lW         L & J C 4 .P u * G

    Fax No:


    Frora            ^ d a b S i C O
    CPS Division:           t o

    Date:                        Time:    i 2 3 S

    This fax transmission consists of this page plus      others

    Please acknowledge receipt:


  I f transmission is not properly received please call 01904-456671


. Arfetacfcicl CtfXy la k J fr* c e Rjppcs. P\eoyg cbhxA sh h h e j*
 &             tnliTgftr h ^ re U a o
.                      u x jp N a fc c s .      C\ t^ u fx jL - .—


  •            L> K   >T a y lc / Ujui^CfeHt re,11 L l'iS c k & tu ii)
    * SfatKMtJ' M   * I'VyjgJ- (XKh JCJb (fu c k , ferOXL uuh«(
     HOidACtt IiAcAmcXCu^ pO u w M iy T oiler l^putto
      dacM *& & ro t oOCi.y,UcK to |i<               ouh cuxZkM e.
        k /               (a ^     C itw jc A    .
    ♦    C p u * t f v ic U s                     K    sK n u x j f    C S V ) t * j m > j a c i(

                         LMdi.tCt-
                                                              H i (f
                                           * t h J & ta c t    W -j                                            l\u K .
                S o u th Yorkshire
                POLICE
                JUSTICE       with    COURAGE




Mr G R Croston                                         Your Ref:
Crown Prosecution Service
Central Casework                                       Our Ref:      D&C/JML/KG HD
PR3
United House                                           Date:        21 April 1997
YORK
Y 01 1PQ




Dear Sir

I refer to your facsimile of 18 April 1997 which included a letter from Doctor Popper dated 16 April
1997.

I enclose for your attention copies of the statements of Ex-Superintendent Murray and
Ex-Inspector White, which have previously been sent by fax, together with a copy of the video
showing exhibit C539 being shown to the jury on 15 March 1991. Also enclosed is the transcript
of Police Sergeant Killock, W est Midlands Police, introducing the material into evidence.

Yours faithfully




              \v i~ ^

i             lerintendent
               & Complaints

Encs




    ^ \f*      Discipline and Complaints Department
                                                               The person dealing with this correspondence is:
     .— I      Windsor Road                                    PC Greenway
    <1, , #    Sheffield S8 BUB
               Tel: 0114 250 0700 Fax: 0114 252 3855           0114 282 1047
            S o u th Yorkshire

            POLICE
            JUSTICE       with    COURAGE




Mr G R Croston                                     Your Ref:
Crown Prosecution Service
Central Casework                                   Our Ref:    D&C/JML/KG HD 101
PR3, United House
YORK                                               Date:       23 April 1997
Y 01 1PQ




Dear Sir

Further to your visit on 13 March 1997 and my letter dated 21 April 1997 I write to confirm that
the copy video supplied to you during your visit, and bearing the reference C539, is a true copy
of the video tape (coroner's reference C539, edited copy of TB/2) which was shown to the
Inquest on 15 March 1991 and introduced into evidence by Police Sergeant Killock, W est
Midlands Police. This is currently held at this office.

I am also able to confirm the existence of an exhibit list to record details of exhibits, for use or
reference during the Inquiry, and enclose Page 182 of a printout from the exhibits' database.
This refers to exhibits 20065 and 20066 which relate to TB/1 and TB/2 respectively. A full copy
of the exhibit list is available if required.

As requested, please find enclosed pages 740 to 747 inclusive from Part I I I of the document
section of W est Midlands' report to the Director of Public Prosecutions into the Hillsborough
Stadium Disaster, together with the statements of Police Constables Ryan and Bichard.

Yours faithfully


                                                           CASEW ORK
J M /'
Chief Superintendent                                          24   km   )m i
 discipline & Complaints

Encs
                                                            VYORK
                                                              R rn i


           Discipline and Complaints Department
                                                           The person dealing with this correspondence is:
           Windsor Road
                                                           PC Greenway
           Sheffield S8 8UB
           Tel: 0114 250 0700 Fax: 0114 252 3855           0114 282 1047
            S o u t h Yorkshire
            POLICE
            JUSTICE       with   COURAGE




Mr G R Croston                                    Your Ref:
Crown Prosecution Service
Central Casework                                  Our Ref:     D&C/JML/KG HD 101
PR3, United House
YORK                                              Date:        23 April 1997*
Y011PQ




Dear Sir

Further to your visit on 13 March 1997 and my letter dated 21 April 1997 I write to confirm that
the copy video supplied to you during your visit, and bearing the reference C539, is a true copy
of the video tape (coroner's reference C539, edited copy of TB/2) which was shown to the
Inquest on 15 March 1991 and introduced into evidence by Police Sergeant Killock, W est
Midlands Police. This is currently held at this office.

I am also able to confirm the existence of an exhibit list to record details of exhibits, for use or
reference during the Inquiry, and enclose Page 182 of a printout from the exhibits' database.
This refers to exhibits 20065 and 20066 which relate to TB/1 and TB/2 respectively. A full copy
of the exhibit list is available if required.

As requested, please find enclosed pages 740 to 747 inclusive from Part I I I of the document
section of W est Midlands' report to the Director of Public Prosecutions into the Hillsborough
Stadium Disaster, together with the statements of Police Constables Ryan and Bichard.

Yours faithfully




J M /e w ft
Cfofef Superintendent
pfecipline & Complaints

Encs                                                          YORK




           Discipline and Complaints Department
                                                          The person dealing with this correspondence is:
           Windsor Road
                                                          PC Greenway
           Sheffield S8 8UB
                                                          0114 282 1047
                                                                                                           Headquarters
                                                                                                           United House
  Facsimile                                                                                                    Piccadilly
                                                                                                          York Y01 1PQ

                                                                                                Direct Line: (j
                                                                                               Switchboard: 01904-450070


                                                                                                    DXNo. 65204 York 6
Attention of: Mr. J. Ringguth

Address: CPS HQ

Fax No: 0171-273-8450

From: Peter R. P. Pearson

CPS Division: Central Casework: PR3

Date: 22 April 1997    Time: 15

This fax transmission consists of this page plus 2 others

Please acknowledge receipt:


I f transmission is not properly received please ca ll____



Penny, please pass this Urgently to John.

Many thanks.




                            Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests o f justice
John Ringguth
ACCP (PAGI)
CPS Central Casework
DX 300850
LUDGATE EC4



RE:     HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY

1       I understand from George Croston that you have asked him through Penny that he
        complete his latest review by tomorrow.

2      George is working flat out in any event to complete his further review as quickly as
       possible. He is aware the Director requires the further information before she can
       make a decision.

3      However as things stand it is unlikely that he will have finished and be in a position
       to submit a briefing note by tomorrow.

4      As the Director stated in the video conference, she wishes to ensure that if, or more
        likely when, someone comes to look at the file in the future, it would be obvious that
       no stone was left unturned and the reasoning behind any decision will be clearly set
        out.

5      As part of this process, Mr. Croston has asked for certain additional information from
       the police. Not all of what he requires has yet been supplied.

6      Furthermore, we have been receiving a steady amount of correspondence from the
        Hillsborough Family Support Group, making certain requests and raising certain
        points. Where they have made assertions, they have been asked to back this up.

7      We have today received a further note from the HFSG drawing attention to certain
       passages in the transcripts of the Inquest Evidence which they claim support their
       contention concerning the quality of the videos shown to the Inquest and to the
       availability of certain video evidence generally.

8       In accordance with the Director’s requirements, we shall have to check this out.

9       Also as part of this process, Mr. Croston has requested the police to supply a full list
        of all the material made available to the Taylor Enquiry. That list is still awaited.


MMS/250.97
10      Certain assertions have been made to Mr. Croston by the Coroner concerning the
        availability of the enquiry material to the Inquest, namely that it was all made
        available and was kept in an adjacent room for reference if required. Mr. Croston
        awaits written confirmation of this.

11      Again having regard to the Director’s concern, we must have confirmation in writing
        of any such assertions made.

12      In this context, it should also be borne in mind that the Coroner has informed
         Mr.Croston that there is a full set of video tapes of the Inquest.

13      It has now been ascertained that the Police have a set of these video tapes. They are
         making copies of the relevant parts and will be supplying these to us in due course.

14      Having regard to the above outstanding enquiries and the Director’s primary concern
        that the decision when made is upon all material which might possibly be relevant and
        that the CPS should be able to demonstrate beyond all doubt on the face of the
        documents that every avenue which may in any way have a bearing upon the concerns
        of the HFSG has been explored to the very end, it is most unlikely that we shall be
        in a position to give the definitive answer which the Director requires by tomorrow.

15      I do not need to state that this matter is being given the utmost priority and that we
         are desirous of bringing it to a conclusion at the earliest opportunity. However,
         bearing in mind how long this matter has in one form or another dragged on (by
         which I mean the continuing concerns of HFSG and others generally) I agree
         entirely with the Director’s sentiments that it is better that we should take a little
         longer to reach a decision in order to ensure that everything has been done by us
         which possibly could be done.




P.R.P. PEARSON
Branch Crown Prosecutor
Central Casework: Prosecutions Branch 3
22 April 1997
Tel:
Fax:
DX: 65204 - York 6




MMS/250.97
                                                   <
                                                   ^ & Jr        t& k >          " 2 3 ( <- h h y ,

                                                                                      6IS
                                                                                      CPS
                                                                                     Central Casework
                                                                                        United House
    Facsimile                                                                               Piccadilly
                                                                                       York Y01 1PQ
                                                                             .   «

                                                                           Direct Line:\
                                                                          SwUchboard: 01904-450070
                                                                            Facsimile: I
                                                                              DX No. 65204 York 6
Attention of:       < t c & fik < w v 7
Address:        S                       ftutc , t > I C                DfiPr,                   u m JUM
Fax No:

From:             C ,.J L .C fy S x o - 4

CPS Division:       f* 3
Date:    2 3   la ( 1 7    Time:   it to
This fax transmission consists of this page plus2L others

Please^actajfl^4et!^receipt:


I f transmission is not properly received please call 01904-45§(>?f*



k       C ^taxk, a& acU icL U                               c f ItfiCi le t# / a c i

 THtt, a rt a s j finvtll*, W) c j p a u c f                                            fG/i                 Z
    I SUaU (tnctrct ttlulfrj- OjJUU (f OtitXbib lA h                                                     .
                                «*t A MdLfcfe- it/ you..
                       No. A. <VvJ On fo e la ^ pA (f tc> OO-,
                    fe fW tlfSC , £ tU fo tfa .

    T V (k -
22-04-97 08:51     FROM:SOLICITORS BUS UNIT
!   J'                                                                                               PAGE




                            Hillsborough Family Support Group

                                           f




         Mr.G.Cioston                      '                          21 Rosemont Road
         Principal Crown Prosecutor                                   Aigburtrv
         CPS Central Casework                                         L iv e rp o o l
         Piccadilly                                                   L17 6BX
         York
         VO 1PQ                                                       21st April 1997

         Ref PR3/GC

         Dear Nr Croston,
                          Further to recent correspondence I would H X e to
         draw your attention to the Inquest transcript of 13th March P.'ilD
         ( copy enclosed ) where the coroner states that the jury had on 2
         occasions asked about the video evidence of the terraces.
         You will note the coroner remarks that there was * actually next
         to nothing on the videos because/ of course, not everything was
         recorded
         He goes on to state that the footage from 15.03. would be shown
         but it was of very poor quality. 7n his opinion it would not help
         the jury very much. As you are aware, footage from 15.02 was
         shown to the j u r y on 15th March ( pBO £ ) this being the date
         when the coroner stated that the footage prior to this time had
         gone missing.
         Further to your suggestion that I obtain copies of tapes * TB1 "
         and " TB2 n from South Yorkshire Police, families have Asked na
         tu make a formal request for the same through your office.
         Finally, I should he grateful if you would forward copies of the
         list of exhibits from the Taylor Inquiry and t»B» Inquest as
         previously discussed.


         Yours Sincerely
                                                                                                        <
         f j r \#i (f/ldsvz                                                                             I
         Ann Maria Adlington
         Solictor                                                                                       j




    aiAIUMAN                            VlCltCHAMM AN/«tf,'»»£TA By                JKKA.VtJKK*
    T.TIiil.____                        P. Huimwd                                  Mn. J. TrtjiiDr
22-04-97 08:51    FROM:SOLICITORS BUS UNIT                       TO:                  PAGE:02




                                                                                      53
                                                                        D. G. PUCKENFIELD


                 Q. They did not know, and could not know, the             state of the
                    Leppings Lane terraces?    They were on the            wrong side of
                    it. - A. Mr- King I have nothing to add.

          j}I             HR. KING:          Thank you.

                          THE   CORONER:        Mr. Catchpole?

                          MR.   CATCHPOLE:        Ihave no questions.

                         THE CORONER:   Mrs. McBrien, you will be a little
                    bit longer than that, I take it?

                          MRS. MCBRIEN:          Yes.

                          THE CORONER:         Miss Addleman?

                          MISS ADDLEMAN:          No questions, sir.

                          THE CORONER:         Mr. Russell?

                          MR. RUSSELL:         I have no questions.
         D
                          THE CORONER:   I do not think it is worth starting
                   before lunch but there is just one thing which the jury
                   have mentioned to me.     In fact they have mentioned it
                   twice, and that is what about the video evidence of the
                   terraces.     I have had the videos looked at and there is
                   actually next to nothing on the videos because, of
                   course, not everything was recorded.     That does not mean
                   to say they weren't possibly scenes, but there is, I
                   understand, a little tiny bit which is actually on the
                   compilation which you have seen.     There is another
                   little bit which starts at 15.03 and goes on for a few
                   minu t es .

                        What we have done is that we have clipped it, if
                   that is the right word, and we will show it to you, but
                   it is very poor quality and I do not think it is going to
                   help us very much.   As far as I can tell there isn't
                   much recorded.   Does that help?

                        Right, two o'clock,  Mr. Duckenfield you will
                   remember you are still on oath.

                                        (Luncheon adjournment)
                                                                                                                    CPS

                                                                                                                     Central Casework
                                                                                                                        United House
  Facsimile                                                                                                                  Piccadilly
                                                                                                                       York YOl 1PQ

                                                                                                             Direct Line:
                                                                                                            Switchboard: 01904-450070
                                                                                                              Facsimile:
                                                                                                                DX No. 65204 York 6
Attention of:

Address:          CPS          C & fl& n . C A J a o c f c «

Fax No:           0     (( 7     2 7 3

From:             £ .R . c J b -n ti^ )

CPS Division:           PE. 3
Date:      7 (9 1 9 7           Time:          15W 5

This fax transmission consists of this page plus Jjjj^others

Please^ckaewteoge' receipt:


I f transmission is not properly received please call 01904-45



                                                                  K p a rlw j                       N .


                                                                                                          G sU O cJR c*

 to     C w *         ci       p in a A e                p # o s e c u > t > <k                     .
                                z ) ©kcKroc; Kore

                                  to                                                                 lo bcuuxJtA .




                                 Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests o f justice
                                                               c u t 'I 1**
                                                                                                         m
                                                                                                         CPS

                                                                                                          Central Casework
                                                                                                             United House
  Facsimile                                                                                                       Piccadilly
                                                                                                            York YOl 1PQ

                                                                                                  Direct Line: i
                                                                                                 Switchboard: 01904-450070
                                                                                                   Facsimile:|
                                                                                                     DX No. 65204 York 6
Attention of:

Address:

Fax No:         o m           2 7 3          £ * * 5 ^

From:                <2,- f t .       C R jM O .

CPS Division:                c tn

Date:      7 M * 7           Time:               aos
This fax transmission consists of this page plus ^                      others

Please acknowledge' receipt:


I f transmission is not properly received please call 01904-45




 C ^ a p c /)            &        i                  C s d , » ,« > {                .




                              Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests o f justice
                                                                                                        m
                                                                                                        CPS

                                                                                                         Central Casework
                                                                                                            United House
  Facsimile                                                                                                      Piccadilly
                                                                                                           York YOl 1PQ

                                                                                                 Direct Line:
                                                                                                Switchboard: 01904-450070
                                                                                                  Facsimile: I
                                                                                                    DXNo. 65204 York 6
Attention of:

Address:        c P 'i    c e c j 0 > h . c * > & jo e + <

Fax No:            Oi7\ 175 Su.sx>
From:              C,         C jfc » ? 0 * J

CPS Division:

Date:                       Time:

This fax transmission consists of this page plus                       others

Please acknowledge receipt:


I f transmission is not properly received please call 01904-45




  I v iA . ttp c A r          iX   X   m         16% h              Ic n ,          h                         .
  AflpfootvcA-, flat- CULbickeok CL*                                                                        L*urt
  to be. tptpajec^ ft;

   tb      jjc m         < v tM




                             Crown Prosecution Service * Working in the interests o f justice
                   S o u th Y orkshire
                   POLICE
                   JUSTICE        with   COURAGE




Mr G R Croston                                                Your Ref:
Crown Prosecution Service
Central Casework                                             Our Ref:        D&C/JML/KG/LO HD 101
PR3, United House
YORK                                                         Date:           8 May 1997
Y011PQ




Dear Sir

I refer to your facsimile dated 23 April 1997 and enclose copies of correspondence, actions,
messages and press cuttings as requested.

The material requested by Ann Adlington is currently being processed and will be forwarded to her
shortly.

If I can be of any further assistance please do not hesitate to contact me.

Yours faithfully




JK       5
Cla    _ perintendent
Discipline & Complaints


Encs



                                                                                          (R 9(5


                                                                          iAC sX-fU O -JhA K


               Discipline and Complaints Department
               Windsor Road                            The person dealing with this correspondence is:
               Sheffield S8 8UB                        Police Constable Greenway
               Tel: 0114 250 0700 Fax: 0114 252 3855
                                                       (0114) 282 1047
07/05   '97   09:27    ©0171    273 8450                                                                  @001
06/05   '97    15:59    ®[                            CPS 4 ch i'loor                                     ig002




                                       HILLSBOROUGH REVIEW



                 BACKGROUND

                 1.1   On         December 1996, Granada TV screened a drama-documentary
                       programme concerning the Hillsborough Stadium disaster. It lias since been
                       said by the Hillsborough Family Support Group (HFSG) in a letter of the 4th
                       March 1997 that the pre-production research for the programme and its
                       subsequent airing lias brought to light fresh evidence and/new witnesses
                       proving that suppression of evidence, perjury and conspiracy to pervert the
                       course of justice featured in the legal process that followed the disaster. In
                       addition letters have been received from the families of some of the deceased
                       requesting re-examination of the circumstances of the tragic events. As a
                       result of the above, internal correspondence has been generated between the
                       South Yorkshire Police, the Home Office, the Legal Secretariat to the Law
                       Officers (LSLO) and the CPS. A letter from Stephen Wooller of the LSLO
                       to Peter Pearson at Central Casework, York stated that there was nothing in
                       rhe television programme that materially affects the applications (for consent
                       to apply to a High Court Judge for an order directing the hold of a fresh
                       inquest) which the Attorney General had already considered. In each of those
                       cases it was concluded that there was not a realistic prospect of the high Court
                       granting such an order. In addition the television program,me itself was not
                       evidence.

                 1.2   On the 4th March 1997, Ms Anne Adlington, a solicitor representing the
                       HFSG wrote to the Director enclosing a bundle of documents and counsel’s
                       opinion. A fax was then received from Trevor Hicks, the chainnan of the
                       HSFG, with his copy letter making allegations of the suppression of evidence
                       etc. as noted above. It was supported by a draft statement. Both this
                       statement and counsel’s opinion made representations as to what should
                       happen now on the basis of the ‘new e v i d e n c e ’. A request was made for a
                       meeting with a senior CPS lawyer. The correspondence was acknowledged
                       by the Director’s office stating that a substantive reply would be provided
                       when the contents of the reports had been considered.

                 1.3   The LSLO had considered it to be important that while each of the various
                       Government Departments must form their own judgement in relation to the
                       discharge of their own duties, it was equally important that there was a co­
                       herent and co-ordinated response to the representations made. Accordingly
                       on the 10th March 1997 a meeting was held at the Home Office with
                       representatives of their Police Policy Directorate (PPD), of the LSLO and of
                       CPS Central Casework. It was decided that each of the three groups should

        MMS/I46.97
                                                       1
u H fe Barbara Mills DBE QC
                                                                                                               CPS
Director of Public Prosecutions
                                                                                                               Headquarters
                                                                                                               50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                               London EC4M 7EX


r                                                                                              Direct Line:    0171-273 8098
                                                                                               Switchboard:     0171-273 8000
    RESTRICTED - INVESTIGATION                                                                   Facsimile     0171-329 8366
                                                                                                   d xn< k     300850 Ludgate EC4

    The Rt Hon John Morris QC MP                                                                                                   Ui-
    Attorney General                                                                                             ^ ^ - C r O S tO r ^
    9 Buckingham Gate
    London SW1E 6JP
L                                                        J
                                                                                                              9 May 1997




    HILLSBOROUGH

    The facts o f the Hillsborough disaster are very well known. In case, however, you would
    wish to refresh your memory about the details, I attach at Annex 1 the background note
    which was prepared for the Attorney General in 1990. As you will see, the Crown
    Prosecution Service decided that there was insufficient evidence to provide a realistic
    prospect o f conviction against any person on any charge.

    Thereafter, the inquest was held between 19..11.90 and 28.3.91. At the conclusion of the
    inquest, the jury returned a verdict of accidental death. This verdict was challenged in the
    Divisional Court in 1993. The court upheld the Coroner’s direction to the jury and said that
    there was no good reason for ordering a new inquest. In addition there has been the Taylor
    Enquiry into the disaster with its detailed findings, and as a result o f those findings, the
    police have paid compensation.

    Over the years, the Hillsborough Family Support Group (HFSG) have continued to press for
    more and more inquiries into the causes of the disaster. Their campaign was given a major
    impetus when in December 1996, Granada TV screened a drama documentary programme
    about the disaster. The HFSG claimed that research for the programme and its airing has
    brought to light fresh evidence and/or new witnesses which prove that evidence was
    suppressed, and peijury was committed, and a conspiracy to pervert the course of justice has
    taken place. The HFSG has been in correspondence with the CPS, the Law Officers’
    Department and the Home Office. They seek to have a fresh investigation by the police
    which they maintain would lead to criminal proceedings, a reopening o f the inquest, and a
    public inquiry. For this reason, the CPS, LSLO and the Home Office have kept in close
    contact because of their varied responsibilities in connection with the requests from HFSG.
    The CPS’s responsibility focuses on whether there is new material which, if properly
    investigated, might lead to a realistic prospect of conviction.

    I summarise the "new evidence" and the CPS’s conclusion. The new evidence is suggested
    to be:-

                                                                                                              cont’d     /


                             Crown Prosecution Service * Working in the interests of justice
0   fVlctkr
9 -s-s 7


doaXt
       i       a video tape of footage from the score board camera, known as camera 5, of
               the Leppings Lane Terrace areas where the deaths occurred.

       ii      a statement and an affidavit from Mr Houldsworth, the engineer for the design
               and maintenance of the club and police CCTV systems at Hillsborough and;

       iii     a statement from Doctor Walker who was involved in the attempted
               resuscitation of some of the injured people who had been taken to Northern
               General Hospital.

The Video Evidence and Mr Houldsworth’s Evidence

The HFSG believe that relevant videos were stolen, and that therefore the jury did not see
the relevant tapes. They also claim that the police were not telling the truth when they said
that the cameras were not working satisfactorily, and that they could see much more than
they claimed, and in consequence were negligent in taking no action about the desperate
situation on the Leppings Lane Terraces.

Two video tapes were stolen in mysterious circumstances, but these were the Club video
tapes and not the police video tapes. The police video tapes have always been made
available to the Taylor Enquiry, the legal teams, and to the inquest. Although the two tapes
were not themselves shown to the jury, a compilation tape was shown. Viewing confirms
that the relevant material was shown on the compilation tape to the inquest jury.
Interestingly, it has now come to light that the Coroner himself had a video tape recording
made o f the entire main inquest proceedings. From this it can be determined which video
tape was actually shown to the jury.

The allegation relating to the clarity of the monitored pictures depends on clashes of evidence
between the police and Mr Houldsworth. Mr Houldsworth’s evidence from 1989 is not so
precise as his evidence now given in an affidavit in 1996. Mr Houldsworth himself, of
course, was not present to see the actual police monitor at the time. In one important
respect, his evidence is undoubtedly wrong because he maintains that a time lapse mode on
a monitor will not contain a time and date imprint. It is clear from the recordings which
exist which were in time lapse mode that there is a date and time imprint on them.

Even if Mr Houldsworth’s evidence and comments are justifiable, his criticisms come
nowhere near the standard of proof required for criminal liability.

Doctor’s Walker’s Statement

At the original inquest, the Coroner imposed a cut-off time for inquiring into the evidence
of 3.15 pm. The reason for this was that the evidence showed a pattern of rapid
unconsciousness leading to death. Since the crushing occurred at about 3.00 pm, the
Coroner selected a cut-off point approximately a quarter of an hour later. The evidence of
Doctor Walker suggests that he treated a boy at hospital who was still alive after 3.15 pm.
The suggestion by HFSG is that this evidence was deliberately suppressed. A detailed
analysis of Doctor Walker’s evidence tends to suggest that if he is speaking about a young
man called Philip Hammond, he is completely at variance with every other medical person

                                                                                   cont’d     /
who treated Philip Hammond, all of whom concluded that he was dead on arrival at hospital.
If he is speaking about any other young man who was brought to hospital, there is no
evidence again that anyone with serious crush injuries could have survived. Irrecoverable
brain damage will ensue within four to six minutes o f the crushing.

Conclusions

The conclusions, with which I entirely agree, are that there is no new evidence as alleged
by the HFSG and their legal representatives, and therefore no grounds for reopening the
police investigation into the Hillsborough diaster.

Handling

It would seem to me that the first decision to be made is precisely the decision which I have
set out above. Assuming that there is no fresh evidence to justify a police inquiry, decisions
still have to be made as to whether there is sufficiency of evidence to justify reopening of
die inquest. This is, of course, a matter for the Law Officers, but in view of our analysis
o f the so called "new evidence", it may be that the Law Officers will conclude that there is
no justification for reopening the inquest Hie third decision, as to whether there should be
a further public inquiry, is obviously a matter for the Home Office. In view of the fact that
the three departments have kept closely in touch, it is important that this cooperation
continues, and that coordinated responses are given. There is no doubt that the HFSG feel
deeply that there should be some form of further investigation. If it is decided that no
department will be taking any further steps, in my opinion, a meeting should be held with
the HFSG to explain why it is that the departments are not reopening the issue. It may be
that a joint meeting between the three departments with the HFSG would be appropriate. I
doubt whether any such meeting would satisfy them entirely, but it would give an opportunity
to explain the reasons for the decision. It may well be that they will dispute these reasons,
as they have in the past disputed decisions which have been taken, but I favour a face to face
meeting with the group which represents people who have suffered such tragic loss and who
still grieve for their friends and relatives, particularly when they believe that they have not
been told the full truth.

In addition to the original briefing to the Attorney about the facts of the Hillsborough
disaster, I am attaching the CPS Review of the points recently made by HFSG at Annex 2
together with the relevant appendices. It is a lengthy document, which is why I have tried
to give an introductory brief analysis of the points made by the HFSG and our responses to
them. I would welcome an indication as to how you wish to take this difficult matter
forward.




DAME BARBARA MILLS QC
1‘3 -MAY.' 9 7 (TU£) 16:14                        ATTORNEY GENERAL
                                                                               TEL: l
                                                                                                       M Q ?'         P. 002


                                                                     THE LEGA1. SECRETARIAT TO THE LAW OFFICERS

                                                                                  ATTORNEY GENERAL'S CHAMBERS

                                                                                              9 BUCKINGHAM GATE

 G «n*fat e n q u irie s 0 1 7 1 -0 2 6 7 1 5 5
                                                                                                    LONDON SW1E 6JP
 O iroct tm a             0 1 7 1 -6 2 8


          Dame Barbara Mills QC
          Director of Public Prosecutions                                           /O Qi'/SCt/.S.S.
          Crown Prosecution Service
          Headquarters                                                        C.P.S. HEADQUARTERS
                                                                                 PRIVATE OFFICE
          50 Ludgate Hill                                                            RECEIVED:
          LONDON EC4M7EX                                                     ' X 13 MAY 1997

          13 May 1997
                                                                           COPIES TO;




                                                                                                           & ■ v/r:
                                           %
         HILLSBOROUGH

         The Attorney General has asked me to thank you for your letter of 9 May 1997
         which, together with its enclosures, outlined and explained your view that you
         should now advise the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire that the further
         information provided by the Hillsborough Families Support Group does not
         justify reopening the police investigation into the Hillsborough disaster.

         The Attorney General is content to endorse that view. He has, however, asked
         me to pass on some points relating to the proposed handling.

        The first point relates to the relationship between your decision and questions
        relating to the inquest. The position in relation to the latter is that there is no
        outstanding decision so far as the Attorney General is concerned. Applications
        under Section 13 of the Coroners Act 198S have been considered in the past
        and refused. There was also, as you are aware, an unsuccessful application
        for judicial review of the coroners decision. There has been no formal
        application under Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 since the ITV
        documentary drama "Hillsborough” was broadcast. The previous Attorney
        General undertook in correspondence with interested members of Parliament
        that there would be liaison with the Home Office to ascertain whether any of
        the material generated in response to the inquiries which the Home Secretary
        had initiated would in any way have influenced his earlier decisions. That was
        done and the then Attorney General concluded in March that there was no
        such material. My letter of 14 March 1997 to Dm Sharpling refers. The
        Attorney General was able to reach a conclusion more quickly than the Home
        Office or the CPS because the issues which fall properly to be considered in
        relation to the inquest are much narrower.

        SW7 1 3 0 5 /4
^ (o 0 °
 DPP
< 30   .9 7


 (M c jL ^ iC v ^
3-M AY.' 97(TUE) 1 6 :1 5   ATTORNEY GENERAL
                                                         TEL
                                                                                        P. 003




      The question of announcements and handling therefore needs to take account
      only of the position of the CPS and the Home Office. Your decision has rightly
      been taken independently of Home Office consideration of the request for a
      further public inquiry but the communicating of that decision will need to take
      account of the position which has been reached. My understanding is that the
      Home Secretary received a submission from his officials in his last weekend
      box and (as of yesterday) had not responded. Advice from officials within the
      Home Office remains unchanged but it may be that the new Home Secretary
      is more sympathetic than his predecessor. In the event that he were minded
      to announce a public inquiry, it might be sensible to let that go first and for
      you then to say that you did not consider there to be any grounds for a further
      criminal investigation at this stage but the position could, if appropriate, be
      considered further in the light of any further evidence emerging as the result
      of the inquiry. On the other hand, if it appears that the Home Secretary is
      unlikely to make a decision in the near future, or that the decision is to be
      against the holding of a public inquiry, then it would be right for you to
      proceed with an announcement which ought, to the circumstances, to be quite
      low key.

     Finally, you raised the possibility of a joint meeting between the HFSG. Home
     Office, CPS and this office. Whilst the Attorney General has every sympathy
     for those who lost relatives in the disaster, the point has now been reached
     where careful explanations have been given over the years and, certainly so far
     as the inquest Is concerned, there has been full ventilation of the issue before
     the Divisional Court. Given that there is no prospect of any good coming out
     of such a meeting, let alone the HFSG now accepting explanations which they
     had previously rejected, the Attorney General would not welcome the
     involvement of his office in a meeting which might serve only as a gratuitous
     invitation to reopen the question of a further application to the High Court
     under Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988. He accepts, of course, that the
     Home Office and the CPS m ust be free to handle the issu e as they think fit.

     If I can be of further assistance, please do not hesitate to contact me.

         o




     SJWOOLER J
09/05    '97   12:50      ©                             PRIVATE OFFICE                                       ilOOl




                                                    DRAFT


        RESTRICTED - INVESTIGATION
        The Rt Hon John Morris QC MP
        Attorney General
        9 Buckingham Gate
        London SW1E 6JP



        HILLSBOROUGH

        The facts of the Hillsborough disaster are very well known. In case, however, you would
        wish to refresh your memory about the details, I attach at Annex 1 the background note
        which was prepared for the Attorney General in 1990.             As you will see, the Crown
        Prosecution Service decided that there was insufficient evidence to provide a realistic
        prospect of conviction against any person on any charge.


        Thereafter, the inquest was held o n .................. At the conclusion of the inquest, the jury
        returned a verdict of accidental death. This verdict was challenged in the Divisional Court
        in 1993. The court upheld the Coroner’s direction to the jury and said that there was no
        good reason for ordering a new inquest. In addition there has been the Taylor Enquiry into
        the disaster with its detailed findings, and as a result of those findings, the police have paid
        compensation.


        Over the years, the Hillsborough Family Support Group (HFSG) have continued to press for
        more and more inquiries into the causes of the disaster. Their campaign was given a major
        impetus when in December 1996, Granada TV screened a drama documentary programme
        about the disaster. The HFSG claimed that research for the programme and its airing has
        brought to light fresh evidence and/or new witnesses which prove that evidence was
        suppressed, and perjury was committed, and a conspiracy to pervert the course of justice has
        taken place.    The HFSG has been in correspondence with the CPS, the Law Officers’
        Department and the Home Office. They seek to have a fresh investigation by the police
        which they maintain would lead to criminal proceedings, a reopening of the inquest, and a
        public: inquiry. For this reason, the CPS, LSLO and the Home Office have kept in close
        contact because of their varied responsibilities in connection with the requests from HFSG.
09/05    '97   12:50       £[                          PRIVATE OFFICE                                    i]0 0 2




        The CPS’s responsibility focuses on whether there is new material which, if properly
        investigated, might lead to a realistic prospect of conviction.


        I summarise the "new evidence" and the CPS’s conclusion. The new evidence is suggested
        to be; -


                   i     a video tape of footage from the score board camera, known as camera 5, of
                         the Leppings Lane Terrace areas where the deaths occurred.


                   ii    a statement and an affidavit from Mr Houldsworth, the engineer for the design
                         and maintenance of the club and police CCTV systems at Hillsborough and;


                   iii   a statement from Doctor Walker who was involved in the attempted
                         resuscitation of some of the injured people who had been taken to Northern
                         General Hospital.


        The Video Evidence and M r Houldsworth’s Evidence


        The HFSG believe that relevant videos were stolen, and that therefore the jury did not see
        the relevant tapes. They also claim that the police were not telling the truth when they said
        that the cameras were not working satisfactorily, and that they could see much more than
        they claimed, and in consequence were negligent in taking no action about the desperate
        situation on the Leppings Lane Terraces.


        Two video tapes were stolen in mysterious circumstances, but these were the Club video
        tapes and not the police video tapes.      The police video tapes have always been made
        available to the Taylor Enquiry, the legal teams, and to the inquest. Although the two tapes
        were not themselves shown to the jury, a compilation tape was shown. Viewing confirms
        that the relevant material was shown on the compilation tape to the inquest jury.
        Interestingly, it has now come to light that the Coroner himself had a video tape recording
        made of the entire main inquest proceedings. From this it can be seen which video tape was
        actually shown to the jury.
09/05    '97   12:51     E[                            PRIVATE OFFICE                                     @003




        The allegation relating to the clarity of the monitored pictures depends on clashes of evidence
        between the police and Mr Houldsworth. Mr Houldsworth’s evidence from 1989 is not so
        precise as his evidence now given in an affidavit in 1996. Mr Houldsworth himself, of
        course, was not present to see the actual police monitor at the time.       In one important
        respect, his evidence is undoubtedly wrong because he maintains that a time lapse mode on
        a monitor will not contain a time and date imprint. It is clear from the recordings which
        exist which were in time lapse mode that there is a date and time imprint on them.


        Even if Mr Houldsworth’s evidence and comments are justifiable, his criticisms come
        nowhere near the standard of proof required for criminal liability.


        Doctor’s Walker’s Statement


        At the original inquest, the Coroner imposed a cut-off time for inquiring into the evidence
        of 3.15 pm.      The reason for this was that the evidence showed a pattern of rapid
        unconsciousness leading to death.      Since the crushing occurred at about 3.00 pm, the
        Coroner selected a cut-off point approximately a quarter of an hour later. The evidence of
        Doctor Walker suggests that he treated a boy at hospital who was still alive after 3.15 pm.
        The suggestion by HFSG is that this evidence was deliberately suppressed.          A detailed
        analyisis of Doctor Walker’s evidence tends to suggest that if he is speaking about a young
        man called Philip Hammond, he is completely at variance with every other medical person
        who treated Philip Hammond, all of whom concluded that he was dead on arrival at hospital.
        If he is speaking about any other young man who was brought to hospital, there is no
        evidence again that anyone with serious crush injuries could have survived. Irrecoverable
        brain damage will ensue within four to six minutes of the crushing.




        Conclusions


        The conclusions, with which I entirely agree, are that there is no new evidence as alleged
        by the HFSG and their legal representatives, and therefore no grounds for reopening the
        police investigation into the Hillsborough diaster.
        09/05    '97    12:52     ©                            PRIVATE OFFICE                                     ®004




    '    •
        <»

                Handling


                It would seem to me that the first decision to be made is precisely the decision which I have
                set out above. Assuming that there is no fresh evidence to justify a police inquiry, decisions
                still have to be made as to whether there is sufficiency of evidence to justify reopening of
                the inquest. This is, of course, a matter for the Law Officers, but in view of our analysis
                of the; so called "new evidence", it may be that the Law Officers will conclude that there is
                no justification for reopening the inquest. The third decision, as to whether they should be
                a further public inquiry, is obviously a matter for the Home Office. In view of the fact that
                the tliree departments have kept closely in touch, it is important that this cooperation
                continues, and that coordinated responses are given. There is no doubt that the HFSG feel
                deeply that there should be some form of further investigation. If it is decided that no
                department will be taking any further steps, in my opinion, a meeting should be held with
                the HFSG to explain why it is that the departments are not reopening the issue. It may be
                that a joint meeting between the three departments with the HFSG would be appropriate. I
                doubt whether any such meeting would satisfy them entirely, but it would give an opportunity
                to explain the reasons for the decision. It may well be that they will dispute these reasons,
                as they have in the past disputed decisions which have been taken, but I favour a face to face
                meeting with the group which represents people who have suffered such tragic loss and who
                still grieve for their friends and relatives, particularly when they believe that they have not
                been told the full truth.


                In addition to the original briefing to the Attorney about the facts of the Hillsborough
                disaster, I am attaching the CPS Review of the points recently made by HFSG at Annex 2
                together with the relevant appendices. It is a lengthy document, which is why I have tried
                to give an introductory brief analysis of the points made by the HFSG and our responses to
                them.    I would welcome an indication as to how you wish to take this difficult matter
                forward.
►


                DAME BARBARA MILLS QC


                Encs.
                                                                       LONOON SW1E 6JP



Dame Barbara Mills QC
                    D m con                              ~f& Q '/ S C ^ S 3 CO        7R_J>~




                                       J


HILLSBOROUGH ^ .

The Attorney General has asked me to thank you for your letter of 9 May 1997
which, together with its enclosures, outlined and explained your view that you
should now advise the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire that the further
information provided by the Hillsborough Families Support Group does not
justify reopening the police Investigation into the Hillsborough disaster.

The Attorney General is content to endorse that view. He has, however, asked
me to pass on some points relating to the proposed handling.

The first point relates to the relationship between your decision and questions
relating to the inquest. The position in relation to the latter is that there is no
outstanding decision so faras the Attorney General is concerned. Applications
under Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 have been considered In the past
and refused. There was also, as you are aware, an unsuccessful application
for judicial review of the coroners decision. There has been no formal
application tinder Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 since the ITV
documentary drama •‘Hillsborough” was broadcast The previous Attorney
General undertook iii correspondence with interested members of Parliament
that there would be liaison with the Home Office to ascertain whether any of
the material generated in response to the inquiries which the Home Secretary
had initiated would in any way have influenced his earlier decisions. That was
done and the then Attorney General concluded in March that there was no
such material. My letter of 14 March 1997 to Dru Shaipling refers. The
Attorney General was able to reach a conclusion more quickly than the Home
Office or the CPS because the issues which fall properly to be considered in
relation to the inquest are much narrower.


SW/1305/4


                                                                  K51lp( 6 (i
                                                                                              %003
o - M A Y . ^ I T U E } 16:15   ATTORNEY GENERAL         TEL
                                                                                         P. 003




      The question of announcements and handling therefore needs to take account
       only of the position of the CPS and the Home Office. Your decision has rightly
       been taken independently of Home Office consideration of the request for a
      further public Inquiry but the communicating of that decision will need to take
       account of the position which has been reached. My understanding is that the
      Home Secretary received a submission from his officials in his last weekend
      box and (as of yesterday) had not responded. Advice from officials within the
      Home Office remains unchanged but it may be that the new Home Secretary
      is more sympathetic than his predecessor. In the event that h e were minded
      to announce a public inquiry, it might be sensible to let that go first and for
      you then to say that you did not consider there to be any grounds for a further
      criminal investigation at this stage but the position could, if appropriate, be
      considered further in the light of any further evidence emerging as the result
      of the inquiry. On the other hand, if it appears that the Home Secretary is
      unlikely to make a decision in the near future, or that the decision is to be
      against the holding of a public inquiry, then it would be right for you to
      proceed with an announcement which ought, in the circum stances, to be quite
      low key.

      Finally, you raised the possibility of a joint meeting between the HFSG. Home
      Office. CPS and this office. Whilst the Attorney General has every sympathy
      for those who lost relatives In the disaster, the point has now been reached
     where careful explanations have been given over the years and. certainly so far
     as the inquest is concerned, there has been full ventilation of the issu e before
     the Divisional Court. Given that there is no prospect of any good coming out
     of such a meeting, let alone the HFSG now accepting explanations which they
     had previously rejected, the Attorney General would not welcome the
     involvement of his office in a meeting which might serve only as a gratuitous
     invitation to reopen the question of a further application to the High Court
     under Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988. He accepts, of course, that the
     Home Office and the CPS must be free to handle the issue as they think fit.

     If I can be of further assistance, please do not hesitate to contact me.

         O




     S J WOOLER
*r
     t    ■9




#1
                                                                                           CPS
                                                                                         Central Casework
                                                                                            United House
               Facsimile                                                                         Piccadilly
                                                                                           York YOl 1PQ

                                                                               Direct Line:]__________________
                                                                              Switchboard: 01904-450070
                                                                                 Facsimile: \
                                                                                   DXNo. 65204 York 6
         Attention of:     C JD M fsJ       4U                       A te /

         Address:                         v o e u u o K

         Fax No:         <3V 7«          2 7 3       3 * 4 . **>

         From:           Q tS ifc .C c      0b>5H K *

         CPS Division:               m

         Date:      «C ^*r/< 57     Time:        1 5 5 ^

         This fax transmission consists of this page plus © others

         Please acknowteCTgeTeceipt:


         I f transmission is not properly received please call <
John Ringguth
ACCP
(Pay and Grading Implementation)
CPS Central Casework
DX 300850
LUDGATE EC4



RE:   HILLSBOROUGH


1     Attached is recent correspondence between the HFSG Solicitor and myself.
      Unfortunately whatever I do is not sufficiently helpful for their purposes.

2     As you can see from my letter of the 16th May I am unable to answer the request
      concerning the Director’s decision.




GEORGE R. CROSTON
Principal Crown Prosecutor
Central Casework: Prosecutions Branch 3
16 May 1997
Tel:
Fax:
DX: 65204 - York 6
    Miss D. H. Sharpling                                                                                             B iE a
    Chief Crown Prosecutor                                                                                           CPS
                                                                                                                     CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                                     United House
                                                                                                                     Piccadilly
                                                                                                                     York YOl 1PQ

                                                                                                      Switchboard:   01904-450070
r                                                                                                          DX No:    65204 York 6
    Anne Marie Adlington
                                                                                    Facsimile: 01904-
    Solicitor
    Hillsborugh Family Support Group
                                                                                  Direct Line:   01904-
    21 Rosemount Road
    LIVERPOOL L17 6BX
                                                                               Our Reference:
                                                                                                          PR3/GC
L                                                             J                Your Reference:




                                                                                                              29 April 1997




    Dear Ms Adlington


    Thank you for your letter of the 21st April 1997 and the part copy of the Inquest transcript.

    I am now able to provide to you the copy schedules that you requested. They are enclosed
    as follows


    1       West Midlands Police Master Index of Witnesses and Documents for the Hillsborough
            Enquiry. Please note page 9 of the Witness List and Documents 109 and 110.

    2       Hillsborough Enquiry Video Schedule Descriptionfor Documents 109 and 110.

    3       Hillsborough Enquiry Video Schedule.

    4       Hillsborough Enquiry Computer Data Base Record, Page 182;a full copy of this list
            may be obtained from the police if required.

    5       Coroner’s Exhibit List.


    I understand from the police that all the material that was provided for the Taylor Enquiry
    was also available to the Coroner, lawyers and Hillsborough Family Support Group even if
    not eventually exhibited to the Coroner’s hearings.


    MMS/267.97




                             Crown Prosecution Service   •   W orking in the interests o f justice
Please contact D.C. Greenaway at West Yorkshire Police Headquarters to obtain your copies
video tapes TB/1 and 2 as requested.


Yours sincerely,




GEORGE R. CROSTON
Principal Crown Prosecutor




MMS/267.97
07-05-97 18:35              FROM:SOLICITORS BUS UNIT                                          TO:                            PAGE:01




     *



                  SyppOt*                                                                                       $UPV&
                                    Hillsborough Family Support G roup



              Mr .G.R.Croston
              C.P.8 central Casework                                                                21 Rosemont Road
              United House                                                                          Aigburth
              Piccadilly                                                                            Liverpool
              York                                                                                  LI 7 6BX
              YOl 1PA

              Ref: PP3/G C                                                                          7th May 1997


              Dear Mr. Croston

              I thank you for your latter of 29th April enclosing copy
              schedules.
               I should be grateful if you would let me know when and by whom
               the material provided for the Taylor enquiry wae made available
               to the Hillsborough Family Support Group.

               I thank you for your assistance.



               Ann Marie Adlington
               Solicitor.




  C JH 1K M A N                                  V JC T C -C H A IkM A N /ST .C K K T A R y               TKlMiil-'RKR
  T. M e l.                                      P, Hammond                                               Mm. J. 'IViiynnr
Miss D. H. Sharpling
Chief Crown Prosecutor                                                                                           CPS
                                                                                                                 CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                                 United House
                                                                                                                 Piccadilly
                                                                                                                 York YOl 1PQ

                                                                                                                 01904-450070
r                                                          i
                                                                                                 Switchboard:
                                                                                                      DX No:     65204 York 6
    Ann Marie Adlington
                                                                                Facsimile: 01904-
    Solicitor
    Hillsborough Family Support Group
                                                                              Direct Line: 01904-
    21 Rosemount Road
    LIVERPOOL LI 7 6BX                                                      Our Reference:
                                                                                                     PR3/GC
L                                                         J                Your Reference:




                                                                                                                9 May 1997




    Dear Ms Adlington

 Thank you for your letter of the 7th May 1997.

 From the small amount of copy correspondence in my possession I have ascertained the
 following information:-

          1     All material was held at Nechells Green Police Station.

          2     The Hillsborough Disaster Sefton Helpline (Sefton Social Services) who were
                working with the bereaved families and survivors of the tragedy had access
                to all the video and photographic material on the 28th July 1989.

          3     Representatives of the Hillsborough Steering Committee also had access to the
                material on the 28th July 1989.

          4     The Hillsborough Steering Committee were in contact with 8 families who had
                expressed a particular wish to see videos at the Leppings Lane End and
                arrangements were put in place for appointments to be made with the police.

          5     Solicitors acting for Sheffield Wednesday Football Club viewed video footage
                (including TB2/A/Part 4) on the 25th May 1989.

          6     Mr. Trevor Hicks viewed video material at Nechells Green Police Station on
                the 7th July 1989 between 1700 and 2130.


 MMS/283.97




                         Crown Prosecution Service   •   W orking in the interests o f justice
         7     Mr. and Mrs. Hicks visited the police station on the 3rd August 1989 when
               they viewed further material and recorded times shown on video prints/photos.

If I can be of any further assistance, please do not hesitate to contact me.

Yours sincerely,



GEORGE R. CROSTON
Principal Crown Prosecutor




MMS/283.97
15-05-97 IS:39      FROM:SOLICITORS BUS UNIT                                          TO:                         PAGE:01


                                                                                                                     c
   !
                                                                                                 .O'*80* * * ,



               syppo^                                                                         %         - ,
                                                                                                      Si/pP0*
                                Hillsborough Family Support G roup

          George.R .Croaton
          Principal Crown Prosecutor
          C.P.8 Central casework
          United House
          Piccadilly
          York
          V02 IPO
          PR3/GC

                                                                                            15th May 1997

          Dear Mr. Croston

                          I acknowledge receipt of your letter of 9th May
          which, quite frankly, is not particularly helpful insofar as it
          fails to address the specific query raised in my letter of 7th
          May.

          Further, given that my requests for a meeting have been ignored,
          families are becoming quite impatient. 1 am therefore instructed
          to ask you to provide me with an indication as to when the
          Director of Public Prosecutions is likely to announce her
          decision in this matter.

          I thank you for your assistance.
          Yours sincerely

                   /yiflryL. / f dU r^ij   ,



         Ann Marie Adlington .
         Solicitor




    CHAIRMAN                                   v j c r c h a ir m a n   / kuckktaky            IR feA S U K K R
    r.Hicki                                    p.   HiimwttMl                                  Mrs. I . Tmynnr
>




    Anne Marie Adlington
    Solicitor
    Hillsborough Family Support Group
    21 Rosemount Road                                                          |
    LIVERPOOL L17 6BX
                                                                               PR3/GC




                                                                                   16 May 1997




    Dear Ms Adlington

    Thank you for your letter of the 15th May 1997.

    I am sorry that you find my last response to your queries to be not particularly helpful, but
    as I stated in my letter I have only a small amount of correspondence available to me. I have
    tried to address your specific enquiry as helpfully as I could and the information in my
    possession. I am informed that all the Taylor Enquiry material including video tapes of the
    Leppings Lane Terraces was available at Nechells Green Police Station and was at the very
    least made available to the Hillsborough Steering Committee, organisations working with
    bereaved families and survivors and to Mr. Hicks. The police were in charge of the security
    of the material though I do not have the names of any specific officers involved at the
    moment.

    If you are able to be more precise as to the information that you require I shall do my best
    to obtain it.

    I forwarded a copy of your letter to CPS Central Casework Headquarters for their
    consideration of your request as to the timing of any decision in this matter.

    Yours sincerely,



    GEORGE R. CROSTON
    Principal Crown Prosecutor
    MMS/301.97
                  S o u th Yorkshire                           CASEWORK
                  PO LICE
                  JUSTICE   with   COURAGE


                                                                      YORK


Crown Prosecution Service                                 Your Ref:
Central Casework
PR3, United House                                         Our Ref:       D&C/JML/KG/EMR HD 101
YORK
Y 0 1 1PQ                                                 Date:          14 May 1997




FOR THE ATTENTION OF MR G R CROSTON


Dear Mr Croston

I refer to your facsimile of 23 April 1997, together with copy of the letter dated 21 April 1997 from
Ms Adlington. I have noted her request for copies of video tapes TB1 and TB2 and a copy of the
exhibit list from the Lord Justice Taylor Inquiry.

The above material has been forwarded to Ms Adlington and I enclose a copy of our
correspondence to her.

Yours sincerely




JM
                                              CASE WO                            Kj3ky
Chi          srintendent                                                            &tL25I<
Dis ......   iCom plaints

Enc




                                                   The person dealing with this correspondence is:
                                                   Police Constable Greenway
                                                   0114 282 1047
                  S o u th Y orkshire
                  PO LICE
                  JUSTICE    with    COURAGE




Hillsborough Disaster Working Party                           Your Ref:      PR3/GC
Liverpool City Council
Municipal Buildings                                           Our Ref:       D&C/JML/KG/EMR HD 108
Dale Street
LIVERPOOL                                                     Date:          14 May 1997
L69 2DH
                                                               Recorded Delivery
                                                               No RC02100134



                                                      COPY

FOR THE ATTENTION OF MS A M ADLINGTON


Dear Ms Adlington

I refer to your letter of 21 April 1997 to Mr G Croston of the Crown Prosecution Service at York and
would advise you that this correspondence has been forwarded to me. I note your request for
copies of video tapes TB1 and TB2 and the exhibit lists from the Lord Justice Taylor Inquiry and the
inquests.

Please find enclose copies of the material which you have requested. I understand that Mr Croston
has already supplied you with a copy of the exhibits list relating to the inquests.

The video footage on tapes TB1 and TB2 is the property of South Yorkshire Police, with whom the
copyright rests and should not be reproduced without written authority.

If I can be of any further assistance then please do not hesitate to contact me.

Yours sincerely




J M Lowe
Chief Superintendent
Discipline & Complaints

Encs




              Discipline and Complaints Department
              Windsor Road                              The person dealing with this correspondence is:
              Sheffield S8 8UB                          Police Constable Greenway
              Tel: 0114 250 0700 Fax: 0114 252 3855
                                                        0114 282 1047
'07   14:14        © 0 1 7 1 273 S450                                     >>> UNITED HOUSE           @002/002




Amanda Iliing                          f j§ f    C W * ^
P n „ K Office                        ^           / f f r C X p j y - ,, ■ -         e ? J W      v ^

                                 (0       I kPu^                                            M oT *' ^



                                      h -n & £ g ! a & . ,                                   . “ ._•..                 ,
HILLSBOROUGH                                                                                  \
1.      Further to my handwritten note to the Director of today's date, I have clarified w t t l g . ._^ | . -
        George Croston the Queries I raised:

        •         7 .4     GeuL Kfc is satisfied that from the correspond or, re. he has seen w e could e        j ■
                          reach our decision now without awaiting Sight o f the statement-             ^
                                                                                                            r0^ “»(» ■
        •         8.18    U nless thp. Director is concerned about the m edical evid en ce, there is            -f)
                          no nftftri to hold things up by asking either D r Slater or P rofessor            f          ,i( f
                           U sher to comment on what Dr Walker has now said, as any com m ents              V
                           they may make do not affect the "decision" we have to make o n advice                         V
                           to the pul ice on a further police enquiry.

        The necessity c o i t i o n s to George C r o p 's note are being m adeand ,, M l pa<*
 2.
        including the a p e x e s w ill be sent down today tor onward Transmission to
        O fficers under cover o f a note from the Director.

                                *             io        u p 'sG w ill need to be considered With
        The handling issue SO far as any explanation to         w in neeu m u       .
 3.
        the I .aw Officers and the Hom e O ffice. There are other alternatives 10 an explanation
            by the Police Policy Directorate:

            •      we could be involved in any meeting at official level ourselves,

            •      alternatively we could offer a meeting with the IIFSG ourselves (or P«*»P*
                   jointly with the police) to explain openly the constitutional position     .
                    D irector in this matter aud the reasoning w hy it is net c o n s i d e r ! a tu n h
                    p olice enquity is justified. Clearly great care would need to be given to whdt
                    w as said.

 4.         A meeting    may,    of course,   be unnecessary   ,f the Home Office decide   to re-open the
            public enquiry into this matter
20/05   '97     14:13         ©0171      273 8450                                                           UNITED HOUSE   ©001/002




                        CROWN PROSECUTION SERVICE
                                   CENTRAL CASEWORK
                                                 j . - . - i - ' "*■   ■■■   -          .I" -
                                                      *50 LUDGATE HILL
                                                      LONDON EC4M 7EX
                                                       FAX: 0171 273 8450


                                              FACSIMILE TRANSMISSION


        For the attention of: .............                                  ....

        Address:..................... P^r-.                                  ............ .N ^.'T .U r..




        Fax No:

        From :....

        D ale:...... jt? . 1% /.^72...................... Time:............

        This FAX transmission consists of this page +                                   /                  others

        Message.

                                  .6 ?




        Original (s) to follow Yl j (
        Please acknowledge receipt Y/N

        If You do not receive all pages or cannot read
        all the text please contact the sender of:   0171 273 + ext f?>(£. .^(D irect Line)


    PORM/FAX
                                                                         C gr

Trevor Hicks Esq.




                                                                                      PR3/GC




                                                                                  2 June 1997

Dear Mr Hicks

Thank you for your letter of 19 May 1997 which clarifies the detail of the video viewings
that were arranged for you in 1989.

My letter of 9th May was meant to inform Ms Adlington of the seven relevant facts which
I had ascertained from the information before me.

I intended no inferences to be drawn and gave no opinion as to how those seven pieces of
information should be interpreted. Nothing was intended to be read into items 6 and 7
concerning yourself other than that you visited the police station and viewed video material
as was stated.

I am sorry that I have not been able to satisfy Ms Adlington’s requests for information to her
or your satisfaction, but I can only provide information based on material in my possession
and obtained from the police archives.

I have made no claims either for myself or the police as to the extent of the material that you
viewed in 1989. Nor have I attempted to use you as an excuse for any of my actions past
or present.

If you feel that I have misled you in any way in my previous correspondence to
Ms Adlington then I must apologise, that was certainly not my intention.

I hope to be able to write to you very soon with the outcome of our consideration of the
issues you have raised. I appreciate that this matter has taken some time, but I am sure you
will understand that it is necessary to give this the most careful attention and thorough
review. I am grateful to you for drawing your concerns about my previous letter to my
attention.

Yours sincerely


George Croston
Principal Crown Prosecutor
Prosecutions North Central Casework
                                                                                  EE
                                                                                  CPS

                                                                                 Central Casework
                                                                                    United House
  Facsimile                                                                              Piccadilly
                                                                                   York YOl 1PQ
                                                                             «

                                                                         Direct Une:\
                                                                        Switchboard: 01904-450070
                                                                          Facsimile: I
                                                                            DX No. 65204 York 6
Attention of:     X cU n

Address:    AceP                         CA/seuJ0fi4<
Fax No:         Ol7» 2.73            91 + 50
From:           Q . H .C f b S T O s J

CPS Division:

Date:                      Time:   %
                                   3 t\&

This fax transmission consists of this page plus ^3 others

Pleasejac^powteage receipt:


I f transmission is not properly received please call 01904-456671


AMo&ktoL U                                 \S lM j frill                         (TRocr
H icb > u io ^                 c k u s h c ^ c f r k 9 * ^ ) A*.
U*j pfopj)<>eL                           . V<5k a t t r a c t i ,           uc


P tte v P e o fV A                                 it* u > v fc w l-.
Trevor Hicks Esq.




                                                                                      PR3/GC



                                                                                21 May 1997

Dear Mr Hicks

Thank you for your letter of 19th May 1997 which clarifies the detail of the video viewings
that were arranged for you in 1989.

My letter of the 9th May was meant to inform Ms Adlington of the seven relevant facts that
I had gleaned from the small amount of correspondence in my possession.

I made no inference and gave no opinion as to how those seven pieces of information should
be interpreted. Nothing should be read into 6 and 7 concerning yourself other than that you
visited the police station and viewed video material as was stated.

I am sorry that I have not been able to satisfy Ms Adlington’s requests for information to her
or your satisfaction, but I can only give out information based on material in my possession
and obtained from the police archives.

I have made no claims either for myself or the police as to the extent of the material that you
viewed in 1989. Nor have I attempted to use you as an excuse for any of my actions past
or present.

If you feel that I have misled you in any way in my previous correspondence to
Ms Adlington then I must apologise, for such was certainly not my intent.

Yours sincerely




George Croston
Principal Crown Prosecutor
Prosecutions North
Central Casework
Trevor Hicks Esq.




                                                                                      PR3/GC



                                                                                 21 May 1997

Dear Mr Hicks

Thank you for your letter of 19th May 1997 which clarifies the detail of the video viewings
that were arranged for you in 1989.

My letter of the 9th May was meant to inform Ms Adlington of the seven relevant facts that
I had gleaned from the small amount of correspondence in my possession.

I made no inference and gave no opinion as to how those seven pieces of information should
be interpreted. Nothing should be read into 6 and 7 concerning yourself other than that you
visited the police station and viewed video material as was stated.

I am sorry that I have not been able to satisfy Ms Adlington’s requests for information to her
or your satisfaction, but I can only give out information based on material in my possession
and obtained from the police archives.

I have made no claims either for myself or the police as to the extent of the material that you
viewed in 1989. Nor have I attempted to use you as an excuse for any of my actions past
or present.

If you feel that I have misled you in any way in my previous correspondence to
Ms Adlington then I must apologise, for such was certainly not my intent.

Yours sincerely




George Croston
Principal Crown Prosecutor
Prosecutions North
Central Casework
U U tr         to
          i-fo k ,




 D & V M -/

 T W o v ic u ^ fc r                           [tU o ~ c f       i^ d          tlc ^    ( 5 9 7


 u k u c U c l a J i f it - , H h _        d ttf^ iX c f                 ^ d z o

 lAiUK^Si            fVot>t UJCTC CtSW\$<kH F tfg ix -i A 1 * 7 .

          [ c tttf c f          W. ^(U Ho^ t^Ex, Hqx(^ fg
  U r o t)      M )         A c 4 la ^ I w ^              IW         S C o^ t*   fC ^ fln C A ^ *

  Q \c h I^UxMr { UooL g ilfty x o x
  jVW Xi CMCU^Jh c f CjCXt^PCMCto^Ct th K*j
 p t o V A iW 'V        .
  | hp»oUL flo t/\fejtAjS-, CW^LtjCuJt                                     A>      cJxVicJA
  c t^   C o        k w -o      I 'V o J t    S to ^ *   tfe c ^ v   ^     u \fc r * -jy M o \

   sU o u tc C        *c*         J t T p C f c iA . K o H i A ^      & ypuJdi         lo t

   W o A       6 * Jo       *          b     frso c 7    t c K c j P 'V '. j         « /ypQ p

                rU^v rt<Mr yO-f
                            isOtkei fit. pJUci
   SteUbc> o^cA tA tuX t^ M dko K-ttic/vj^fluv t& h jk tM l
i / / l A   / \   ’ 4 /4   v '-J
#    I                ic m , t o                         I k zx #
    fc           so U jsfc ,         M d         A d ix ^ la M 'i                   K     u    f j        ^

    i^ f i^ h a - b W                  fe      I 'W     ^ s c U V j f e u J v o ^ s                               ( h x /-

    1 C C ~          c» J~ j     a r u r t        £ U ^ tr       iX /x » * l< l> t» t/K              k * -ifiH _ c > \

                               l \     U ^ y                           I£ > \ ^               ^ i) f a u A         ^

    fiw\ H~<- p jk c c                           clcMX*j £a                 .

     I kurC. hftpU -A 3 d ^ M J S eCtW) it/
     (y tW pJU£c ot- tb H**              Hrt/e^c*^.
     M dL b            y tM .            m   L u J& A        u           ^ < 5 ^ ,.                               U o u je .


         1       a i ^ M       ^ t &     c t b        (~h £ .      u     i m       t    i- ftu .      c m .


          £vctM .<-                  £/" o w ^ ^ ^-7 ckssXXca^ f&uf- cr
         p n ^ t - .




         I f ^)ctv feeX fW >b I k x cK
         «X        O v > > v C O * -,            Ua      M >> p f t X i c u ^ C U T t x f i a ^ 2 ^

         fe        M >      A d U ^ fc x                        r te ,         (       K c u ^ f- a           p    j ^   ^


          r if      S u c h          u   ZXa. C e lt z lA ^                        r to t h * y       c v^ e v f '-



         M c u j ? S iX o y d X ^                  ,
             ^       C JL

                           d k -
                                                                                   CPS
                                                                                 Central Casework
                                                                                    United House
  Facsimile                                                                              Piccadilly
                                                                                   York YOl 1PQ

                                                                      Direct Line: \__________________
                                                                     Switchboard: 01904-450070
                                                                        Facsimile: [
                                                                          DXNo. 65204 York 6
Attention of:

Address:        C C P % ( fliC t                     C C h JU & \

Fax No:         0(7> 27,3
From            Q ..R .. C f o S T O j

CPS Division:           P27
Date:       1 /6 (9 7     Time:

This fax transmission consists of this page plus    others

Please acknowledge receipt:


I f transmission is not properly received please call 01904-456671



  'Tt c tu .c x
  cncUaA.

                SfiUt CtpCe*. <f               pttLACM* Cdtt*iJpC»ob«CA.
    i.e .                 Ififc fcJ c *              O c /L C P I K f o         ( f         2     tf     6
Bv F a x & P o s t


19 May 1997                                CASEWORK

Mr G R Croston
Crown Prosecution Service
Principal Crown Prosecutor
CPS Central Casework                           YORK
United House
Piccadilly
YORK
Y01 1PQ




Dear Mr Croston

I am in receipt of copies of your letters of the 9th and 16th
May 1997 addressed to the HFSG's solicitor, Ann Adlington.

I am quite appalled and somewhat annoyed that you  should infer
that visits by myself and my ex wife, Jenni Hicks (items 6 and
7), should in any way represent access to the video material
we recently discovered at Yorkshire Television.

For the record I would advise:-

(a)   My visit to Nechells Police Station was in response to a
      request by West Midlands Police that I be the "guinea
      pig" in attempts to locate and track loved o n e s 7
      movements.

(b)   This was partly because at that time, I was Managing
      Director of a Company in Dudley, West Midlands, and also
      in my capacity as Chairman of the Hillsborough Family
      Support Group.

(c)   There was also a suggestion that some of the material
      that I would be shown would be distressing.  I was to
      give an opinion regarding Jenni's likely reaction to this
      material.

(d)   The later visit (your item 7) by Jenni and myself was to
      follow-up the material I had seen on the 7 July 1989.




                                                          *
For the avoidance of doubt X will state categorically that I
did not have free access to the video and photographic
evidence at Nechells Green Police Station.  Jenni and I were
shown a selection of photographs and small clips of video,
mainly BBC outside broadcast footage, and all of this exercise
was specifically directed towards the location of Sarah and
Victoria.  None of the material was selected by me, it was
placed before me by Inspector Layton and other officers
working on the Inquiry.

I was advised by the officers at Nechells Green that there was
more than eighty hours of video footage and literally
thousands of photographs.  You will appreciate that even in
five or six hours total visit time it would only have been
possible to view a small selection of the material.

If the police are now claiming I was shown the Camera 5 K
footage (which I dispute!), then surely this is a further
indication of the collusion that must have taken place to
mislead the inquest jury regarding the non-availability of
footage relating to the condition of the terraces prior to the
opening of Gate ' C ' .

Please do not attempt to use me as an excuse for not taking
these matters further - it really is shallow and does nof
credit to the CPS.

Yours sincerely




Trevor Hicks
  M is s D .   H. Sharpling
^ P ^ iie f Crown Prosecutor
                                                                                                                     CPS
                                                                                                                     CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                                     United House
                                                                                                                     Piccadilly
                                                                                                                     York YOl 1PQ

                                                                                                      Switchboard:   01904-450070
       r                                                       1                                           DXNo:     65204 York 6
           Trevor Hicks Esq.                                                         Facsimile: 01904-


                                                                                  Direct Line: 01904-


                                                                                Our Reference:
                                                                                                                       PR3/GC

                                                               J                Your Reference:


                                                                                                                21 May 1997

           Dear Mr Hicks

           Thank you for your letter of 19th May 1997 which clarifies the detail of the video viewings
           that were arranged for you in 1989.

           My letter of the 9th May was meant to inform Ms Adlington of the seven relevant facts that
           I had gleaned fromjjie small amount of correspondence in my possession.

           I made no inf£renc$and ga^e no opinic                 tose seven pieces of information should
           be interpretefl. Nothing^nould be rea                 [oncerning yourself other than that you
           visited the poiice-stafion and viewed! video'material is was stated.

           I am sorry that I have not been able to satisfy Ms Adlington’s requests for information to her
           or your satisfaction, but I can only give out information based on material in my possession
           and obtained from the police archives.

           I have made no claims either for myself or the police as to the extent of the material that you
           viewed in 1989. Nor have I attempted to use you as an excuse for any of my actions past
           or present.

           If you feel that I have misled you in any way in my previous correspondence to
           Ms Adlington then I must apologise, for such was certainly not my intent.

           Yours sincerely




           George Croston
           Principal Crown Prosecutor                                                                                     *.
           Prosecutions North
           Central Casework




                                 Crown Prosecution Service   •W orking in the interests o f justice
-Jiin-97 12: 30A CPS CENTRAL. CASEWORKCCP           0171                                                273 8OBO                               p .oi
 2 1 / 0 5 '-37 1 3=10 &   ]       CPS 4th Cl o o f                                                     F*. SMITH
                                                                                                                                        i£| IIU4/UU4



#Miss D. H. SharpUng
 C h ie f C r o ^ n P ro se c u to r
                                                                                                                          0 ’S Central Casework
                                                                                                                      • ' United Hoiui:
                                                                                                                      \s^9ccadilly
                                                                                                                            Yvrk Y O l 1PQ

                                                                                                          Sztiitchbooni-'   01904-450070
      r                                                                                                                      '5204 York 6,

          T rev o r H ick s E sq.


                                                                                                        Hfc/W
                                                                                                                               P R 3 /G C
                                                                             O ur Jtefcrpw :


                                                           J                }c /r * r   tfefereru:f.:


                                                                                                                       21 M ay 1997

          Dear Mr Hicks

          Thank you for your letter of 19th May 1997 which clarifies the detail of the video viewings
          that were arranged for you in 1989.                                                         ( u<l

          My lener of the 9th May was meant to inform Ms Adlington of the seven relevant l'acts/that*
          I-ftad gleaned from tiicjm all amount of correspondence in my possession.-           \
                                                                                                                                                  A ui.

          I wade no inferenc^and gajk no opiniaifas.U)howtbose seven pieces of information should
          he interpreter. Nothinj^stewM be resfu into*) ana 7 donceming yourself other than that you
          visited the poiics-rtafTon anc^viewedmdeo m aterials was stated.
                                         tr*<i
          I am soiTy that 1 have not been able to satisfy Ms Adlington’s requests for information to her
          or your satisfaction, but 1 can only give ottt information based on material in my possession
          and obtained from the police archives. ^ l*«wcU.

          f have made no claims either for myself or the police as to the extent of ihe material that you
          viewed in 1989. Nor have I attempted to use you as an excuse for any of my actions past
          or present.

          If you feel that I have misled you in any way in my previous correspondence to
          Ms Adlington then I must apologise., for M1jrh    c^rli?in>y   my in^n1

          Yours sincerely
                                       f        ^    o l£ { i     Is   u w (x               h                 >y     j< n rw             tfca


                                             djr Os*.r IxkisJLsk O?'*!. <fj~ fit

          George Croston          " .                                                                                             '
          Principal Crown Prosecutor    a^                                                               d%A ;/ w,
          Prosecutions North         it                         tin /VoV
          Central Casework                            ( ^                                       ^                                 ^
                                           CdWJVkA               K*j                    i       CLtiu                                        ■
1.    CCP

2.    Director




THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER

To see for information purposes at this stage the Home Secretary’s letter to the Attorney
General.

When I saw the proposed terms of reference for the further enquiry I was immediately
concerned about the constitutional position of a judge advising you and the Attorney how
your discretion should be exercised.

Stephen Wooler and I will work up a reply for the Attorney to send. I have explained to the
Home Office our concern is not with the underlying principle of the enquiry but the terms
of reference themselves. They are relaxed about us offering a version in more general terms
that does not offend constitutional proprieties. The proposed draft will be sent to you before
the Attorney General considers it.




J S RINGGUTH
ACCP
CPS Central Casework

5 June 1997

Ext. 1236
JUN.’ 9 7 j;H U ) 0 8 : 4 3   ATTORNEY GENERAL                  TEL:                                 P. 001
                     09:16      THE                       -* ATTORNEY GEN                   NO.286    001




                                                             UEEN ANNE'S CATE LONDON SW1H 9AT

                                                                                  - 5 JUN 1997


            The Rt Hon John Morris QC MP
            The Attorney General
            7 0 Whitehall                             , GP.S. HEADQUARtfiHS
                                                      %    PRIVATE OFRfiE
            London                                     My,    RECEIVE!}!
            SWT A 2AS
                                                       lr5JUN igs7

                                                      COPIES TOr.




                                                                              CPS CENTRAL
                                                                                      CCf
            THE HILLSBOROUGH STADIUM DISASTER                                     - 5 JUN i.37

           A s you know, I have been considering the representations w hich j S s f e & S I V h D
           made about the Hillsborough Stadium disaster on 15 April 1989. The disaster
           was of course fully investigated by the late Rt Hon Lord Justice Taylor, but
           concern has been raised about a number of features of the case and material
           considered by some to represent new evidence has been brought to our
           attention. These and related matters were raised in the Granada Television
           documentary drema "Hillsborough" last December.

            M y officials have thoroughly examined the alleged new evidence and the
            allegations made in the Granada television programme and have concluded that
           there are no grounds for establishing a new public enquiry. The material has
            also been considered by the Attorney General's Office and the DPP's Office.
           None of those who Have examined the material consider that there is evidence
           to justify e new public enquiry, e re-opening of the inquest, or the prosecution of
           individuals. But I am certain that continuing public concern will not be allayed
            with a reassurance from the Home Office that there is no new evidence. I
           therefore propose that there should be an independent examination of the
           alleged new evidence by a senior legal figure • e respected judge (serving or
           recently retired), or perhaps a senior Counsel. It will be important to ensure that
           whoever undertakes the task is sufficiently senior end respected to command
           public confidence. My personal preference would be for a judge. The proposed
           terms of reference are:
/    08:43
      0 9 :1 6
                 ATTORNEY GENERAL                       TEL:
                    THE HONE SECRETARY'S OFFICE -* ATTORNEY GEN                      NO.236
                                                                                              P.
                                                                                              170




*To carry out an independent examination and advise whether there is new
evidence relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989
which provides sufficient grounds for:

       i.        the Secretary of State for the Home Oepartmenf to establish a
                 further public inquiry;

       ii.       the Attorney-Generai to consider applying to the High Court under
                 Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1988 for another inquest;

       iii.      The Oirector of Public Prosecutions to consider bringing criminal
                 charges against any person;

      iv.        The relevant Chief Police Officer to consider taking disciplinary
                 action against any police officer.

Or whether there is Bny other action which should be taken in the public
interest."

There will need to be a public announcement of the establishment of the
independent examination. This will require careful handling. I am sure that the
announcement will have to be made in the House. But I shad want to make sure
that the ground is properly prepared before the announcement is made with
those outside Government with a close interest in the Hillsborough disaster
including the Hillsborough Family Support Group.

I should be grateful for the Lord Chancellor's advice on a suitable figure to lead
the Independent examination, and for your comments and those of copy
recipients on the proposed terms of reference by 12 June.

Copies of this letter go to the Prime Minister, the Deputy Prime Minister, the
Lord Chancellor, the President of the Council, the Minister Without Portfolio, the
Secretary of State for National Heritage, the Oirector of Public Prosecutions and
Sir Robin Butler.
    UJ JUii         iU ■iU III..I I         J i ' - ‘I I       U   il




/              HOME OFFICE
               Operational Policing Policy Unit
               50 Queen Anne's Gate, London, SW1H 9AT
               Direct Line 0171 273             Fax 0171 273 2703




      FAX
      T o:                <?n \ ^

      From :

      Date:    0 ^ \v \   p

      Recipient’s Fax Number:         9-1                  '

      Number of pages (including this one):



      Short Message


                                                                                irv\*


                                                                          f i,p - < U      (*-

                                                                         Oj l    L& a .                                  t r fa i-


                                                                         <Lk <^^WVv-t_kTVv.                                  6^Cvwv.

                                                                          CtfVW*X’*0/ . 'Ti'X. f^y~                               **
                                                                          U~                V^M.      -ScV*-t       ( r j£ ls ~   beM


                                                                        Qr~v^i ^^JUVwOLjVOLvvy . ( j 4 Ujjli.
                                                                        f. ! 3 J Q~ ci<cvcwA/)i twTt^r t$A
                                                                        <x                       IsfUjXfcjL. -kCi “*
                                                                        O A A £ j.v J            *■             ^                       ^
                                                                                          fc- L_r **                     6U* ifc**




                                                                                                                                   ■A
                                                                                                                     7
                              IF ANY PART OF THIS FAX IS UNCLEAR
                                  PLEASE TELEPHONE: 0171 273
IUN                It): 11   HU    L-‘i ■■




           Paul Pugh                                  cc:   M r M ichael
           H ead of O perational Policing                   M r O'Brien
           Policy Unit                                      Lord W illiams
           Room 529                                         Sir Richard Wilson
           Q u e e n A n n e’s G ate                        Mr Boys Smith
           S 2 7 3 3141                                     Mr Halliday
           2 3 M ay 1997                                    Ms W heldon
                                                            Miss Drew
                                                            Mr Fulton
                                                            Ms Loudon
                                                            Mr R Evans
                                                            M r Edmundson
                                                            M r Horlock
                                                            M r Granatt
                                                            M r W arner
                                                            Mr O wen



Home Secretary


HILLSBOROUGH


Issue


1.    To consider the possible scope of the judicial           exam ination of the recent
representations.


Timing

2.    W e are to discuss this on 4 June.          You asked   for advice on the term s of
reference as a basis for that discussion.


■C fiiisiderallQ D

3.       T h e re are seven key issues to consider:


           0)         the nature of the inquiry


           («>        its scope

           (iii)      its purpose

           (iv)       term s of reference


           (v)        tim etable



fi'oppu'houMongsub\pp0212pd.doc
JUN        '97     10=11 HO Fc DIVISION 0171 273 2703                                      P.3/5




           (vi)       who should do it?

           (vii)      handling.

4.      O n the nature of the inquiry, it will not fit any of the conventional patterns for
inquiries - such as Royal Commission, tribunal of inquiry, inquiry under the Police
Act, or non-statutory judicial inquiry. (Those different forms of inquiry are considered
in detail in my submission of today’s date about an inquiry into policing of minority
ethnic com m unities.)    This will be a judicial examination of the substance of
representations calling for a full public inquiry, inquest or prosecution - in effect to
determ ine w hether a full-blown inquiry is warranted.

5.     You have indicated that the scope of the judicial exam ination should not
extend to a re-opening of all the matters dealt with by Taylor.      N o-one has
questioned Taylor’s conclusions and recommendations about safety at sports
grounds and the policing of football matches. The scope should be limited to
consideration of the recent representations made by the Hillsborough fam ilies and
others. T h o se representations fall under four broad headings:

           (i)        the ten allegedly    ‘unresolved    questions’ raised     in the   G ranada
                       program m c;-

           (ii)       allegations about video evidence;

           (iii)      m edical evidence about the time of death of the victims;

           (iv)       other allegations by the families about police conduct.

6.      I suggest the focus should be the evidence which has been put forward to us,
together with any other relevant material which those concerned w ant to submit. It
should be mainly a review of the written material, although you w anted to allow the
opportunity for representations. If the examination is, to be m anageable, however,
w e will need to avoid hearings or legal representation: there are (at this stag e) no
parties or plaintiffs.

7.    T h e purpose of the examination will .have to be several-fold, because - as my
submission o f 8 M ay drew out - it is very difficult to separate matters potentially
relevant to an inquiry, or inquest, possible criminal proceedings or disciplinary
matters. In practice, the inquirer will have to form a view about w hether there are
grounds for;

           public inquiry:

           consenting to a new inquest;

           new criminal investigations;




f:^oppuVhou\longsub\pp021Tpd-doo



                                                                                                    A
03   JUN        '97     10=11 HO F2 DIVISION 0171 273 2703                                              P.4/5




                 instigating disciplinary procedures;

                or any combination of those options.

     That m eans that the inquirer must report not just to you as H om e Secretary,
     because only the first of those four issues is for you to determine. The inquirer must
     report also to the Attorney G eneral, the DPP, and - on the last point - to the relevant
     chief officer of police.

     8.         T h a t suggests terms of reference something like:

                “To carry out an independent examination of w hether there is new evidence
                relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 19 8 9 which
                provides sufficient grounds for:

                            (i)         the Attorney-General to apply to the High Court under section
                                        13 of the Coroners Act 1988 for another inquest;

                            (ii)        the Director of Public Prosecutions to consider bringing criminal
                                        charges against any person;

                            (iii)       the relevant Chief Police Officer to take disciplinary action
                                        against any police officer.

                O r which m eans that it would be in the public interest for the H om e Secretary
                to establish a public inquiry”

     9.     It is important that w e should put an end to speculation with the minimum of
     delay. A tim etable of no m ore than 2 or 3 months is important. T h a t will have a
     Bearing on who should do the job. You have already said that it is essential to
     appoint a judge. Anyone starting from scratch in considering these issues would
     have a huge am ount of background to assimilate - the Taylor inquiry alone produced
     over 1 20 files of written material. O ne possible candidate for the job with a head
     start would be M r Justice Collins, now a High Court judge, but Counsel to the Taylor
     inquiry in 1989. W e have not approached LCD to see if he would be available, but
     could do so if you wish. T h ere would be some risk that he might be perceived -
     although not, I think, by the Hillsborough families - as not totally impartial b ecause of
     his previous involvem ent with the inquiry,

     10.   T h e scope and tim etable will have implications for the                         costs      to   the
     departm ent. There is no provision for such costs at present.

     11.     On handling the next step will be to secure the agreem ent of the Attorney and
     the D P P . I have told their offices broadly what you have in mind and that you are
     likely to approach them formally soon. The Heritage Secretary should also be kept
     informed because of his responsibility for safety at sports grounds.         T h e Lord
     Chancellor will have to be approached to nominate a judge.




     f.\oppuVhou\lon£sub\pp0212pd.doc
.       O n c e you have colleagues’ agreem ent vve will put forw ard advice on handling
an an n o u n c e m e n t and how to inform the main players. W e see those as being the
Hillsborough fam ilies, the M erseyside MPs, and the South Yorkshire Police. Others,
ho w eve r, also have a close interest and arrangements will have to be m ade to warn
them in advance - particularly former chief superintendent Duckenfield who will be a
focus of m edia attention.




                                     PAUL PUGH




f:\oppu\hou\lonyj-ubvpp0212p<tdoe
09/04    '97   10:52      ©0171   273 8450
                                                                                UNITED HOUSE              @001




        FILE NOTE


        JR. advised Stephen Wooler and Paul Pugh (Home Office) of latest correspondence from
        HFSG and their solicitor commenting on the South Yorkshire Police Press Release. They
        were advised that we have written to HFSG and their solicitors indicating that a final decision
        by the Director will be delayed. JR appraised both of the Director’s view that her decision
        whether or not to invite a further police investigation should sequentially be the first to be
        made public. Stephen Wooler and Paul Pugh were relaxed about that. No announcement
        will come from the Home Office before the election (though if there was a change we would
        be advised).

    SJW would like to consult with the Attorney General on the timing of any letter to be sent
    to the HFSG reporting the outcome of the Director's considerations. He would like a sight
    of any briefing that goes to the Director.

    On the assumption that there is no need in the Director’s view for a further police enquiry,
    Stephen Wooler’s inclination would be to keep any letter low key (eg there is nothing that
    requires further steps to be taken by the police).




    J S Ringguth
    9 April 1997




                                                                                                                 A
llb d i               6 tto

VC-        Kv\ /V\Att.                                           Qtpftiiiij   COVM
                                                                                 At.
 tk u          M vU tx        W              u ^ b x M x . h r K> J tts /W
 C fy      f* C M     te le c L fjt   k       iK k A & .t '-

 Sk         ^>U ,           fU t            H 6c, cu e
cUciAic^ p \c/ Cb l^auw^ Ur tW tl<_ prov>.

I S U ^ h sL s k                                   D/U. S ^ O fiU y /Us'tty t y
           % A^ ■


VC- «5 L aw x C JX s e a c h ^ ) &
UImlL , c ^ J t c t 4*, A A •

Tic. (Vj o ; ^ F e ta .9 I W -                             H6<; s t ^ K cciv t
C^Qp^. •              pKc/ to >•£('03 felflft-v< •
 TI^p StC f£|- fU>-cuj- fto L t                              ("flJUi i^ L . H c^
   9 0     &    ft.                       i / v |( i U ) i j .




d C e ..
♦CASE                          HILLSBOROUGH TRAGEDY

AREA/HQ DIVISION               Prosecutions - Central Casework

LAWYER                         George Croston

COUNSEL

PERSONS CHARGED

DATE CASE FIRST
NOTIFIED TO CPS                16.12.96

COMMITTAL DATE

TRIAL DATE

APPEAL DATE

SUMMARY                        As a result of a Granada TV programme in December
                               1996, the Hillsborough Family Support Group (HFSG)
                               is pressing for the Home Office to institute a new
                               inquest/public inquiry, and for the CPS to re-open
                               consideration of alleged police misconduct.

PRESENT POSITION               A careful review of the current evidential position is
                               being undertaken as a matter of urgency in the light of
                               all recent correspondence from the HFSG, including a
                               further submission of 22.4.97. Thereafter the Director
                               will decide whether the police should be asked to make
                               further enquiries. The handling of an announcement by
                               the Director will need to be co-ordinated with the LSLO
                               and the Home Office in view of the separate decisions
                               which may need to be taken by the Law Officers on the
                               inquest and the Home Office on a public inquiry.


  M u. IX k   c   W Ls   (.& V 5vc% a-X > c-    (/     jyk        G ^ tn ^    C c t^ tu ta J i

   yQ\A(lliJ                                                      to   (1m.   A -C |     (A&1

   V\A^\                                         C’-''-.     to
• Floe koTE■                      Hiu^floeaucfc/                                    8fcl97
     0
          Tju*          te <J~£tKiQ^/A'( <4                                           Cf7iC>c.

           ^H D ob*.)
          Actiikj-. ^W d %crt *e
                         A ^ i 4rp>v3Uc^.


 li3o     T t k-.        OQ S.             ftAPk2            re         tenfcopl-.
           H i u j c u UAtJbWe t b                 M-P           ow ,   (uAWy v t
           C U M ji7 \S ^ y c f ' f t -    6> IC A < C C ^        & v    (»      le c tio    h u ^ v jO A ^    ■

           I t c o A ^ f'                            lU .   m m ca            ( i f \ i y c o t Q u & iC c ^       ■




            M i q k L /h « d < _ ( f o l k           m u /          U c (to d l Q x w n

           h o jC ^ p        r o t                                      r o b c U J L ^ LU j - ( D f ~

           kpt SCixtl l h n f k v M ) f < f a d U ^ f o u t * /
            (x^&Lc&y) fc ttoh jthiJ' TV CthfeyiiL, d id
           £ f ( k . C \R m cbt ckiL uH L foA jcf a / % •
 \^ W S   T lc (^ D fi.S ‘ P              f t      f t ^ o U ij )     C ^cJt-       i t a s J tU c M e U

           tfc h    b u jt   < \(M J 1-n        C £ if J U T "    > (~ <-.      b fQ c l^ o f f e w      ^

                                     ^     t f io T l'-          He     ^       sctCuf‘ i (li/-
                                                                                            4

                        fe d - c ff^ u rc lu g               Q 2^C &          c U    ^ c ld m    . (a

                         fclftC,                 tF ^                               cf {TtpCs) £u<JM (


•b f5 ^ I u j :                 6u/       C(L?ajl •
                        /^ u >             f u r m y h fiu-i                                r tM < £
                    L V T Z X st/X ^ &                                              6m d i ^ d -
  R .t e      K ort            -     H u u f i 9f e u Q        4          z tin to      1


Tic. to DC QLSS*^Jh.
 l- f c * < ^ c f b        IX ^ a J c    fv ifr c tk t \ a j M             jr
 u \ftL G >            ta p           u u U & b           n p u M               .

<W *X      o k U U ,           f c g k ti/)   -


           aJ* k !                       fv U c L        S f e iJ t u .         kxA

0CU ctVv tekU kh /UH t \ t T&^fcf
U a u i^          H a J e fc U -

 A t l p o rtly i / \ l                 N&A ^CCL acro.\\ H
lb . T . l-Hck\ u j* f liitft c l, mcU .
S fc th h U ’ t i              a4eu C         c F to b             uX u. k .
c b tU ta l            4   >^p.

C ^ V i i P '.                     t e i i c ^ o i        L J /a b l       /&       .

 c s fx d t      t t       c k x A ^ , h a J h s is . i

 p A ia K        p T t n c a U 'w /"              b '%     d c L lk u ji* tr                .

                                                           O       f t.
  jx
      ( H i t t o Q m t/vfi
  h    r    b J L u r ft* ^ ^

                               u A lk

  C&Aty t i tuM frC                                                 to
      p 0 \y    *



      r 'I d U c ^ V          Ic A a v          i f         c te o u fc ,.

   \a )     -   1^7         In u o        qJ   & u A       i t   fc c € tt-


tfU J n "           0   0   P j t i W          n » u * -

^ VO rot* C clU ^> - CM UMuJ&LA. 1
            k ^ /X            P


      BlClUC&M^ S ^ c U o c t w dt-
  C tC k & A                 c tfc c        - M       i   £>0 g £ i &

       <£      h c u *        \ \   a a   S /^ .
F iie K o rt                                      PK            Now 2£i<44 77.



T7c fc> CtiRajea S>l^fAeAtA
 K -U t O b f t e ^ e i •

 A s W        c k    U & 'i      c ik O A v f c *             c t lt                        H a J e ^ r tc c t

 v\ ^         V iotlerc^ fu h U c ttc o R X - < \x G x K
 cU^Ufhed &-\ imxiawvj tXc. fyfa c/ktaj£~
              TB/i 2 2 . l-k Cv                         u XUjlX^               fe ^ u rc            ck^
 M ^P      f ia t *           M B ju L u & i, f c u >               u ix ^          a       k ^ k j^ c /

 $ & l£ j c $ )                                                             j t t                   t3 < ^

 h iU r-k •'                                        ^           ^             d^icC ajC
 dteaMXqa cA tk (U l uxm .
                    If    CP) d o             <     /        c < j U j lu ^    i^ i/    1        g d a J - ,'

   &     ix      p t^ z tu J b L c ^          t                  l j u il     *-a.      • W it        i- f B ^ ,

   u X L       te tA i c u /t~ < x        p       ' u & it          P * '6 ^ 2 c « j l 4 } C \     fc * * d 4 & (

   W )   ( X c iv a A t,             fc x ftW           jl     U X L t l ^ l c x l^ a x c U ,

    tx   fU « _          fa      M     a t ,) .
                                                               *7
    U M p b t ^X                      AJUuJ           <U        *
                                                               1
    {/\ d i o                 HjLoJ Cf / b f ‘ sU.UA
    A A M c jd t c d                  &               •
    M ^^C O A                         ^




    ^                 a ju f ^ 4 >                            f f

     Sp( fe 4                                                               5/c^*

£   G     w   J       s       ^               £ - 0   '<            *                ^       ^        w f < ;




      t   f       j       v       C       X   X   .       r         r

                                  tJ iC tc c f & r                      .   y
                                                                                Mx       (       AM
                       P & S & ocy^
                                                                                                 M
     IX^cAvr                                                                ^
    TTflS) Pfcuo2> 57
•    Sco,ehzae!L co*u a    Pi     Pr l
                                      2
                                      !>       —   •0   2   .




                            Pi     P t3

                            P»4     Pr \
                                           2


     (=EU_>«tel CcJ>>     TGI CC^J^)(.5^vCuA».Cbjc^ j
  F il-c L     m       tc              1+ ^97
# _--------

  V (L        fe iV\A                                 .
                            d e la iX , t f h & irtn p k L 0\C fu4jt)
    'f i J b e N d v           ju /v j   w ^ u 4 ilv \^      f l i r t s                     fh

    QAhCxx S . SU* uAl\ cbfctA rtiA for                                              KkctouJ.
    ScCck Tfi/t c
                sov
                  . 2 ouJCu(aUe tb*
                                  T b
                                    u,(cr
                             T®   /2             C i5 3 9     R ) i) t a § €   -t     4^ 3® *.

      sV <ob       fe>      & - 2 S ‘i+ 2 .     A fU p      (o d L      I& ) ( f      tiu x r u f

      [gppfsq) I&jl T&nzte&y btbjW\ ,^ 5'0 <v»-1‘4-23.
         I Set, ic k ilu f if e             p e fx u m l* , £5Ixb, ) .

   G -539 : IS .0 2 . <+S TO » ? - l t . 0 2

R tfc        KOnt           IO /q /^ 7

 fiv e   s e \f     iX      rc jjC j            a h   a                    «        U ic ^ D c tf

  ( & * - < X > g t f v l i C U r t,)
    k rT B




-    W   it: i 2        m M C *-        0 ,5 3 9         ^ u M      l       v t f i i c ^ <P f 8 2          ■

     M k k s n ttk r a W > u

                Pi  1       * 1              ^                      J t       sk x * * s)
             ^ G ah^          U
                           o ic    o               ^


                   1 & 0 .O 3          O r flA J X D      s fy          £     $ /7      .



                        p 6 u t Cv                               h & v ic f ip h            rf   Y*pu4d~


             b ^ j C U )     ( f       V'&LD       <*S      t o             fat    ^bcttT)             N



                                                                                             <W *«i
                                                                                              /V ^ . A O u ^ iw
                                                                                                 a -       cU :   1<   3 /if & 7
  p & fr                 ecuoo                        -
^ b i l l 's         .

   A u& vw o*j) ey                                            *#5<k £         * i3 bi^

    * IW m :                        f£ »                        a   , Q u o t^ e o          P eg JW j


    ‘        V iA f ij                                                             t t 'C M r    C A ^»€® k.5 "         lrV * T .
         w lc * } P*n                                                      Kao — n o o                       i (£*. po\Ibylrf
             i o«H              ,    I       ffr k tu t             p ic C u * .            su & T c ^ f-                           &   , 0


             fk c C o J L           f e a iJ L K ,.


              U o ^ C u M *                               J t a - t < « tc U r Cfi c u ip n * A '< ~ 1 ^ ,                   tC ^
              r °* "     Ua          u u qC         0 6 0 ^ * -*           & .f e u u k         f u te tjt    .
         '                          fwfcj? *»#" p&ltUtCL di^fCH                                    T^ltcjh ft*, i\uA^f-
             jtA A j        ■            -    .'.     S ( i p j r u * \ c ^ o r c v S t i a t A . c J id U          ^

             • fv
                tto
                  jt u
                     jh. ktt cU&-)t&L iAit^. trt<
                                                *j<
                                                  /uJvxf-
                  f v i w x CoC M t                       -




N i '.         k o                              f» ?          C O M U ^ -5           * u .2 3 - 1 5 D 2


             " IVctfc ^Uzqi                                    <vurtvbiAr >***. b*, TH a U c ti
                                               to - p t-i

              -      P iA iX l c a w e <                       db>      u jtr c     u^«X «j          co   H   ha.   ^



         ^lu » .3 P ie ? gpt^»«^>                                       — 3

         CiVvXfTtA^ to 6J pn^/u^^ to CjO^AJO- uJOt
          .\ -SKi/^ao cF pC/^UN^ £ iit^K»in«tA.c/r **/, f^c, PfecxJ
         Vick? fyn'L iiaJoUutfH^ to c^OH.                     .
    ’                 o              W                  'i c r f u l u n      iV      a k                          ^

•        I W . laJe^ « * JU , <r its u . i^edC a^ ^                                                            ^
         d (X < X v lC t         •




                          t€ _       CD M M & . *>             K o ^ ^ # |" U cxM -          J*4 t ,

          ^     kcK        b eM          iX t*           11*30      ^uSV O               t ’W -   o U a A tj

                             Ca. h OVV1^                       lb Hokov Au/C, <*>
        G h     O iM . p i ^ U i .               id   ^ x <4     p rt^ o u _ r<    J*       {*m   j    b& bt    'S U O

          L O n U aJft cd r lA ^ u ^ h ) .

         C x o ^ ic d *                     D (K l S                       AAtfC>to(-J» f o tic L -
         A J k iW t, atMlnt-ic^tX                                                     c/U sxaf j',g #6
         ^tfLteJr l H-(L.                                                            ‘
        Gl»oC A? u yjU 'O tR ..

         < W    U t^        « ^ tO to A r                  (A      0 ?     - S l/H f c i,             fo h -c o i* *

          f lU -u ^ ju flv J r.          /fU ^ fijK ^            1 1 ^     s /-    c & a w J ld it



         S e « a ^ C J, m il                                     B . PW SM ^
          uu                                     S        W h                       ^             ^
                                                                                                                          3
       Q y .© U £ rt                cm ^ u x o                                          a tk iM te *             i£
                               U y ^ jx jij                            x^oLvJa              SQ2h             JU553 (' ?
                   Qj».\       liE.-l-v.Jo                       I'to^

                           i£ d £ * > 2 + 7 ^ * v v > U
i     r\ S'        ,       #                                            0*S$i*aA
U>© C Sk>L k u rt dCyfyAjxl kxM^lf CM a^t»C U ^ft S t-t

              'iflW .      fc f f a t, I c J *               I       , f     S M o ^ fu          u       i   , ^

              K b tU w ^ r              \J X X jo^       *


     Qi) Qr>              u j t u ^ tu w ^                             ttacL .aU - i ro(- fcihjL ^ XX
                        a ^ /€ tM -                          K tn l-


     ® >       C u > - e # (* -£ ?                                     u ^ j ( ^ U fr r x U A S .fy          ^

            ^ e L ^ c F             t t s   O ju M te r^                   S W 0 2 -,            u>uhSt

              *t C\iJ2 C W - f W                                 ^               W C.                              Ur~^Uju^
             S i    f io c f ' C      u J A ^                ^CTu^d^ 1               & x U . t« jc ^ ^Cc©          c< ocA in i
              k w              < fc+
              l-\£'- u x l 'tf-U x u e                       hcdLe sU^IMe,!- c t if f f e K u J lt
              1P f c j                        c      ^       f -


        Q : VM^ a - U u c O K ^ a v t C fe 0 U 4 ? O iL ^d y p t ?
               PkuA . i        t^ W u c ^ ttj                u       AsdAtOJU^jteL ^jj (f fxtlb4c$cn(~
    m _ P ^ _             (2. U < V                                       C *^    M U v 5 t£ K L A p

                   U y > r x v ,i      » iT       JT >               3 u ^ - < *        n e ^ O ty u f~ < ftL 2 it>

                C h ic < j c ^ i    {Z iJ   jj   J ^     u       ( f                      H ic & c o A       o t/) t^

                                              ^ f c .                O o e rQ Ju ^

                   C iS fU ~ 4 ~     U o O lt- j         <5?           A jt^ j    ( x b ^ /- -

           Q .'iO -      tyo   f e v u c e ^ o ^                                   AUcj    w 'M /'J
    ,       Q • U -c i    %jf o           W u it W ,                 c o x i- t g ^            ai/t,
0             e ^ ' u M j L ^ c p L \ . ( CX        i F ^ w t ^           ( lu U        u fa fh a jt^ J

    M3 Ki^cL-te>                         fz x /t cShyZfLazr-l 4j j                    re         P ^ - T tu /




               C    U -fZ v ^ L j        T C J o ^ y jd L        lx »    G K tA ^          fc s JD        o L x X iT j,

                                                                           Kb        W Q /i t~ •


              C •'©f' <?ufv & fetlA fc C a ft
                                     u )»        U JD U         p a A d X U j             J a h h .a /V | « 2 4

             • ceflzuA. (ac/5 o K iU cci.
                                                                           T t^ fe x c u ^                - iO L a ia n


    © Cs
       U c
         A.U
           pw<U/fc                                                                 <
                                                                                   *‘(a
                                                                                      d c.J1to
                                                                                             *.C
                                                                                               &
                           .                k 5 t 'c t c £ g ^ t t <        '


    \ ny w \ i XCU cjnm&rt^ ctfip k fa u '

        H C '- t( A a > u j c l **- p u / t ^                                        (K U ^ y i v b ?
            ( U iZ * - l o w *       t f ^ O x - if c t a s c        ^ O U jJ it                          fc J td

             O h ftA S oJ* </V                 «'*“ $*fi, pj i ^ p - m

P * ^ - 0 U c vT ‘f c U        H x x i ' f e c tc X * - , f c lA C -tv K b                            Q   ua J L l^        kX i


        ^          CKO           ^                               ^                                ^        |V   e   / '~

                   d cxu-TtC\<x /~                         c h a - /^           *' £ < $ 1 ^
                    fc jo ti& i /        £ j f        iM x U k f^ if-              fd ~        c S p ^ S i 'U P
                                                                                                                         S '
                                                                          H fetlDcf

            C^UI^eU a* im^Wa Is T~ li^, cr                                                        ittyM jr
Sf- h * * *                  iw*T?              ._ ic te c d a ^                   C dty d cU C iC U
 a        v rt* o fofiK u X (-                                        jX5

SI-                               cg^ v     %3<Ov , c c iv r w W“K, 2o
 M 'u iiO               -+        * H r u .f c r     £ , c ^ x p ta J tr            s < ^ k ft        .
 l^ cF - 2 o           c u e ,       cL cJ# j        jf c L C lc '                            c ^ _        c o ^ tc H tJ

         fU 4 £ e c c J v - s ^ l r t t ! .             /\ix          H jm J J m          c o M tc J c c t          Is

     ^                   '         1 ^ ftU ic           o u a c £ (.           ^ K c lv       Q       W      u ^ l u

      M                                                     op        h jv u tiU ,        V       lb

 U           i     J S ih h c f          5-        * N J <            9    0   ^          ,       0    ^

     «n          f^ u X          c o a -1 ? U       W

      7 v KoC,tav> ( I & <«uj4» aaK c/^ 11 ts
                        - •.            r^ C tU P L ^V ^"j^                                           ‘OCoKfQftK^          .
                             5      «c<- < W fe U u .j c trtx c K v ,
                         fc tu U -                          SAT h c M % . H a d e .
                                       4 L A jc rk J ^ qlc . u a . t~ to                                      c c jv
      Q    K     ^ n         K S h;      (tJ* 4 K           f t   q       u jc u k tu *               cu U u & U

     UtocXesK. t? v a . ^
     M2 '■ if lM t v \'t SCiy P ic tf- b$ (Jy fcSUj&L & p p < A ^ ('1W
     G & tb c ^ <=> o £ u              c c tr^ A ^      ■

         U i^      Ho^lspcki.iduet.'*     .. v        v
                 £f fkcccjUt Cks< <-^<+ fk bu lX u > u c^
                                                                                                                   (&


_ 14 XU)) UxO- • 830 - CcA/ fWh Si&cKX <wA
      a i jx A - i a c l% M J k e 4           -       f a u T " c L u * * .l~       s p e c tfifM X ij

       ac. hipty cOX iA h ackXKt^. l& j k i f t U
      j x f t s u iit ^     c 3 l< \. & U A ^              ts   9   tu > tJ L A S h        -

       D   k     $ U a £ U x -j                                                 j C O K JZ H            C J U t^ W c ^ ,*

                        ^ " tb         1      VQj^ f o f “ C & JL \u q J x a '



      H ')      ^U M ^Jo            Ov        ^ U c te ^ L


       Oc                           c*~fc pA+tt                             — P^£*/W5
      pfibtth*              It. o ' - e u s^ lV ^ rk v e x .
       ft-      H a d a « X £ cM M . ^                                          u    f U       i c ^      ^

       1 Ax»c(              Cf-                oU X c*i>rtA.<5 pdpcfl-)                            ''

                           I^ C K .        # iio        GOHl tX             uJ*e^          l i . r L lt


           C U s to X 5          r tc s '         1    ^
                        t ciif c U a ^ c                * ^0 ^ IW               co o r
  *        ^             t t^ > c / u                          . "
   b a i-o v ^ , o^tA ^ e^ aioiJi pizcA u u &                                                  - ^
     r j h Sitr! (IctArU cUcu <k> ?


                                       " u * . ekcJtyiiaA. ■
      K H -         ”     fic /c o C       n e o t-        S b fv fc a k n . c * . ( r e ^ x L L          "- -

               . . “ O t ccft-> A2/*0s. c4 a^ < > \ <*^Hui< 4^K
               pldurt G» k< .                     "(h UJCl.               QLtQjbLt^ ct picJurt
               h a t L4^             t f t pfl°l<h •
t'S CaOPVla scJ&i                                   ■ rotpJViU< tjc k u ^ ) f
                    k U -t    w h        ®      U s * ..— -        /lo t-    ouc/ x a m x    /^   a.



H : Ca . cUhlTUj \2t.                                                  -fUxl

P 5 C, .            jS U ^ jL ijW                   h tC v Q U     o f-     < t \ff- l i     Vtt       C /W A A   5
H           •        <=VJ( t o ^       <V5j-                      u . ^       .



R. ft '.                               S’    ^Xm JLK, h- uJu^                          ^MiJtlocci




        * =          U > .         *   8 s * .


H             ^ c u A A c ^ c A p C U ,/ : G u 4 t^                                      w             w •


 ft&            :      k o        < * *        y                   ,              u ^ t,

                       <TUtesl-k.)                        t                 cm. t/3          gu^i
                                        ,or                   c ^ t, w e dltoA , k a^ u .

M i:            M M          to                u 'd ^         ^                    ^    ^              ^ Jo

    M   -       lm                       p fc tc      ^                                fc ^ ia rv ,

    Htrt cU<\t.               w JiU t ^JC J^ coc
n- Q> '.             C^yXH^A iA u u ff. I&rzu^ . ■                                                 fc
A S**'              c u tty * * x u Z $         ■




 H -                   VfcvSt fcb cja o x. - a u U ^ ttt,
                *                                 ^     cS U m   /                  S1 *

     P c6       lo       i
 •
                                                                 rQf~ pnudu> dk*t afr
       CT f e f l & s a * .

     H '• Q ^ r t c t cl^                l^                      Uik^Xj .
                i/     p , ^       I /

     ^     S . Cc^            I

*STO        1^4        A S        d f e w . to d t b v a u ^ - v M .
      *>                 hax**.                         h c o , S Uix. c a r t .
           J e t c u s l U ow C    t - m . r tc a d U    ^ j     e 2 /< jt*   ,
                                                                                                                                           9
        ft.                         6                          J                       -


              IXUri,                                                 , p u h U c Odets'-^

              S 'c o c k a /e C         c x s ^ tA . C 3” ? )                                                           r tfh p J U U      ( ??
              P c c J iif t      • '( U t *      4    l t ( f c t ~ c * \, c J fa y * 0 * - \,tjC L x • i ^                    L y u '

               "2 * > i C K c t ^ V t a - f e / O                          i      t^ < u u J L u > i) £ p M i j U t i f ^ r f k A i f t
              U ltv        p * & « 7          . ft.       6        C p U t M x - C o h U » -x ■


                              tA U i          q M c Ja * ^            U         i^ c        rtU A c L 9 / i w > C c x A -           'M 'S -

                                                 u ^ U ^ ^ cT                                           o .   I ttM v a ^ { j L / u H t u .)

               A b w t U43& \ou-+ict-**4t<f’
                D ifc U fc tW              K cw A                   « -        u i ^ C k ^ e 'v i r f n o u X C f c O ^ c J c A . j W -

                   l\to                       jjf ii? " * -        l> ^ )        ~         t U l ^ i


    P 7 )      K <5V V w v.5 l M t f f t A * X j £                   ( ^ h s U              ^ i    d s iu n c a # * ,C L ,

              (^          U x5                                <rv ttA ticO y,.




               k
               \6Pfc*, ‘U - t f liiU+$qutk. urzu.                                                                                     /<
                                                                                                                                       /■«
                                                                                                                                         »>,
                k p C O u x (           f e /Q * v L £ » v - \,.
                   **£>£>•• Wfct-dLfc- KCAltd^                                       xCilkJ^tyCiItu^int tcQ

               A t c tf c u » _ t       1.iJ' 5 0 , J e tw »              poJH             c t i t ^ i f          cd C . K s .o ( ^ '
               pf*i li> a ^ ), C/i^ M\c>+£tt *fkkh <\ux*ic^[ SH&y$
               r\4U cU f*uJ- I p^bcxtS                                                                   (A. < ^ W -
               H m        t6 v |> c * < ^ t l ^ U t |         fek         < > v £ a £ tt/t              C     M        H tu o ^ fi

                ^ L,U>vt-
P              *T o       ^ £ J t t A o ^ x f p * * li4 a - t & u + J x ?                         3 L    *t       2 j i f i i4 c D le * ^ /^ -

                B L * ^ c C ^ J " c f c u A .o c t                    w 'v J *             c A /k f e c w            c t ^    p b X /L + ^ p

                                  (c-L tfii/Jot,!? ( £                    f e e t , CQ c-L /< y < J
pc& fr     'No    CA-L              d i    t*                 ( f o titr ty            p t-i -


            £L/                                     IvStfuA^ CHCMUfiU- < U L
          t© T W tet U a J ^ I                u ^ t     2    V v    p t t f d t c J L ih J a X s i

          O V ttcdtcU ^ Jt 1>VD              •


•*?        Pk5to SUuvs. WS0 <-                                     ^        ^       ' u,v^cJ
             S JM tfc/                           tfH o C -


 p           £o                                                    to      lA-«i _j   o^

            tfctaxdk.. &            CHfc«h>         -        fvxlLLj C u J fp L ^ X '* '
            v>> M jt) ^ i 3fcc<>j -
           O u j ^ 3U c**a          iA cte> C                          i* to i + u x v f^ fc s M .



 D 2 iU fc iW
     I v tb x       >kjS


         U fetftcttff-               cf             -
         ^ UJcHket <a Clr t» «^zsc*«-^t
         &*P fc>otvvt^ Vs f*v\ ^ * ^ 5 ^                                   *“ «• ^
                   ( K p C ^ litA     — ‘i C L o - m C ^ v     ^ O t£ J S * * \L tf p t i ^ v / ^ g ^ -


p^> D uA ^ iP i/cidiM f®k c \ hjc^ifirti                                              £»6 t
          ty]b4*j- 5> < X t£M ^ ct 9 ns*~j JfcfiT-.
          fotoO faeu          X - atfo eu w < > %
pi7 ’’Ntd'vOWi <9Caj€- <3 fcU**                     i h f H ^ k s ^ ajsuj- «vO *-1
            sp c ^ K c   o c tp v   .u iiy fr- U t jtx * ^             sj u a j u & i t ~ I d

                         fiwi* ^tcut                            ‘ re- cane** i f '
    C cR i m J

0     CtolCS? S*«- poW t Cm .xMqc\                               MLyLtAjf” feju X s
     > 0     :                          ^ t u   ^ L           O c       L -f   d   c u   f    p s g ^ o .

           'tf&Jk^L (fu \           ■




      C W ‘-C'fj uJC ^ "3o * Mx) ^Oioi~\                                 .
           C & y tid n to jA s y        h& C    <w          f < iji£    \& ^ 0 & llJ C \& 4 -a * . f * l c L %   .

       ft. 3      SEfl'"* SiN fi/tvo^cv Hc/v, fev- .o-^l jc J i
         to ^ - c /-U c A s t ^ P * ^ b i d o j t * .

       T o ft< x p f( e L c £ te s . 3 f i h           t c c u ^ U h c p           b u jth v ^ u ^ P L
       h M C t,

           f\t fti<Xlctf*jk$L tf', cUJbis cA CyCoJpuMzcT-
      a r r o r ita ^ V .                l/r c l®       5    ^ i{ a u e u / ?
       *E t|bc     • •                                         h u < t. (b         l\ftjo J L H y > k .

       Covt" jXLfcXi^ c«a ia-< i^ TO /) d & L i b&aj&hy a^aM >u,j-
             ’& > "      tU rZ o    -IU U S      .'.        u L y      /b t - ( X & b J i Z h J L


    P cS         iK iiiL^sr €u

      6 t uvico S*K                     ^ e u t P lO                            tC A o/uv 0\G^t_
p l^ c ( f ^ u .
      P iC t< x rC ,> < x      G > A t.     ^ iC a u fC ^       g \U s \i& c t ( ^ / y ) ^

       Soto, o\<-, a.",                    C h so ^ fc ^ c t ^                 h iK d k fa * J cih-y
       §«a_ ^ W^e Jtrce^>.
                                   ^ W t, f t                          c \/«    u M d i U tte r s

      (WArC/vtTc^                                                to ki2 lapilkMitye)
                                                                                                              »2
     LUCLU COWtA.-                                         uiAuJ £>C fXJvi 3
 •         b t< >     c o f - ' f e <3L m t t A ^ < x c l L            p ^ /- t


       I^ C u J v C tL        c d V A fo . w f e          LA—                               jc /o itV Q




         C a n v t^ Z -             T C U o U e tA 'c ^        tU a _ t    ( c t u l U i 7 l * *> f-

         M clU -* -.,                                    .'. j u d r       i^ A t r <X p ta jA .
p^o       Lte.a*us&_lf - suJ> jt^ dL cfci p k J c ltx ]
        Pntoxiu, KvfeL          ^ IfcHr i4- to teuu j^y -
        bekrt    . PcS? llc o t Ux L W Mj> (V7<r£> /tccf-
       Cj- 1^* Ooh~fcn*ci *l
               w k m      S         ~ M o t d ^ \ . \jJkS & * «-fr c c c <^ flu A ’ * J T ~ 6 S           .


        h .d ~ ?   ft> c o m j c ^         s        p * ^ c/ t o       ^   2       .




P 92_ K n (" K k c                   re a tti-u jo i Ov^Wc*-^ u^.fa^O S *-
            p£ t)fUuO  ccU  k laA^cv t/ fe
                                         ^ K
                                           .—  <tf"U  S & lojoU t
            i f l-u ^ fa r cf u*ZdSt~i„ [xct r U ^ lo t fifeJ-y
           < /\u x ^ t o x      .                                  ,




          U ju J lL - .   i s \ t u tn x y f — L-f O ^ ^ n C i - x c L         ( k O ^ L iU J r .

           VUSL 'o t't^ u r C                     *vfi<L 2CLA£Lju.&$9-uJ- fe h o t4 t
          c lo U a A          Icv cx           u x x jv l j^   X .5                h o u /a r -

          Qyui<*o tt^Mk H o / ^                   ^ ^ N ftd b lC (
' ^3     we               CCJV St^bkh —& AfiAto« <\
            fey <atdl^ SfrotC fct ( f p k J u ri ■
                                                                                                                       I*

    .    W3                 Pfctcti*? o -s coMeeju»                                                    ll.

#          ^ v ? L ) u j O t d < 3 f T £ v i lS l t> f e (        *b J t w y       .
        H 6 -.                        fei£, nt-JHAL It e d                         eln y                   9 0 0   b*
          l^ V ) U « ( lw > J . »A               poSi .

           t^B      v JU A -p        t'^G cX      N lC < £ ^ C£-h> i^ Q X J 0 (jU \        [h X a C ^ p & f U f i j t

         U j\\L c^lcs$ t *?/Uj~Ip           I s p b k c«-f- <9v iZcU /t& ol.
                       rtvt^lc y[M. CPs -zo m fcj» cfa o jj* ) puc k . w -il»
          P -^ c C x jL f e a t o r <             .      j   <5


    ?                           ^        ^ M* -/                      *7 o J k .   < > ^         o i& ti ts '. ?



        Atdfviku, UR\ <^. L_L /o^                                                               ,
        W *                               I jb        k J C tfe ^ .   ( e T c \fC rc A x ^ /L i^ \_ y ,


        Q , :      D 'f i i t a          rfw * . c t U _       u i f t a jL te p h      [u ^P L       U j£     p   (

           Sjctvt) K M r CivU*M p0Vi                                                    >A ) f<tpU ^
                         U ja r .u i,* -                 W i (rro tf* ^ fe               9 0           •

fio f feattg./ tActi' U&fpfaxXf C\. LL                                                  cLtcj
        cU c^u ts> j-*& u i u t f                                                  ca' ttn c u ^ .
         Ko re^s fcx, trt€A l£> te m c e ^ .

P 7.     PL      f t X tC aX iasL -

          |P     S f c X j x h tf U       A x ;         * & j, O i t j f o v s       u jX .    o U x*j u -

          «o                        cf     C c t^ -ic > d j^      .
P*? IXol                    >pdt *o> ZfodAt crov) cto\yircFc*j> scJ**
      •    & C b       U sd W u C c C fc r     L    t         tesezxi                             » 6 T to        o u t


” %              L .u ^              ^ L o ju b u Z iM d L U ieU -


  f t .          Q ju O T         &u     fe        lfc Q M 0 « > T -lM 3


                  U (X u h & RsJh

  CU              M flfc e               c u t s ,                 t       . iij;


          C bs*JLf\. T J tin ca^ feflPke, ju ^ t~                                                                & kx.
            C tip t^ y fo L       ^ U K ., f i u i f r e ^ I O J k ^ j o u U ^                      d fi£ V ib 'c -v .
             (■O C                            c d M ie i I             )



  &        c F         DQCuftlxeg                                 &        v \tiF    ~                   s fa M           M   jh




      A>         € v     ftt      la x         r ^ o f lA ^ u J C c * - * c ( ^ j f e i ^ c j X ,

           S tX tM

                 tto k \th p u J ~        •

                         sf-      U l±          Ly           l e t i t J -               M W S?,             0    ?   UJ

          S ^ i>        H « c t> t                 p s t - iu j -            &       f ^ t a i . a t f + i £ h u -fc u ,


          P lu X p           Hoo~iN>vp<                  '




                             fe      c x ^ U s iic $ £ s $ $ f tfU d t / c f o r

           So                            £<4                           p tf         14 J 3   -,                  p tti& J ' .

          £ te     S     t« o t                         si                                             t \ O A i J n f c JL f-

           W ^ fL kJ'
         A /V \0 l ^

         & .       S lA fQ R -                        :

           Q b y p ja k i* ) f a X W e         cL m    . fe     h o M n a Jr^.          p u A v^vxA j


               C t K ^ i^        - — b s u J s ttX g (f~ l ^ t                 -     M A |4 t * o t .
                cc»uX ^ , u w o cb tb U , hrtuX 6U»hnge

               W dQcdL&j U l»o ^*4. ^ 3 " (» k^opVecX. -
               & Q2‘-> C£xA i& \ . tk))piJo~t pQuicLu rt C0A)«aCott4r
                J jk f <* r o ct*-©-»l -
                IG '. ^ fc # a u h r t v t H     C C L ^Q vL ax^- U                Q h ilx /jp i^       .
U iiu * £ t<    D fiC ^                        u /s ic to u £ » r u c 4   d sc M    f ccL      a   > (~c t& jt& 4 -

                                      4 h i & f £ ic d >

                S 'lyv ic t \:u .(f* X te ., fx? £**<=- tfe* cwWft-eni G fe

                 S /T a ^ U v ’; t o                           u jt cutM* &/U<? t*
                                  H* Uoortt k u r puAe ^                                 *4 ^ .
         02        S           rtvtjjcfeafii^      (2*MtU« tfo i t , b f t c ^ U tctf\~
                       oAe^ c p z u A sl       c u k ^ - &****» s r C eth QjU \


          tH w/ft3XbW               • ^tA j£<                    *—> P tj           - a ockiUj^aJSn^
                 &J C^. fc> u A c tf              ^Ctpfttuai -               Pfli?                 Go
                   t^ o u -i     itt/-    £ 3 C .^    { . ) c jb u J n x S L , c tjtfq c K e o i(

                       tbcUo^t- J sU eufet (\& ccrcttciL ccM JC s                                  '
     PlUE K5TG
     H    H - L 6 G c f i2 > lX ^ (          CA SE



     2 i ( i (?7
                                                                                               %




& W W J» \ e i t f r c F          7 l» h 7     -   O u^     to r t - ^               iX ^ u u t , h x ^         <*\

         O fl» o                      ic \c C d U i    C < K f f i^ tic u - i i C tM jJ o U ’ A W            fo o to ).
         J U   i    H c£   l o u ^ poV- U i ^ c t« H C ,          cL » H a   ^       5 tU c U * « -          ftk ~ >
         C a n u te         4   f)k -t     •<v>»9 M r i A l o r t * A            e o . a u x ^ U jM f ^         ^
          V* 3 k c T t W K l •


cuje<s'icUcr(fst^ 9 7 K4>o«d cf H bu® R\hUs &t#ert:
         C u iu ^ - M ^           e < tv K    t* .K .e « 3 > u A * A             a      < % M :c F

         to fe tU ^        C e t v j c v ^ c i^ f it ) .                                  to        fk u >

         c tM f ^ b o v d u n A ^          C w v c ltx )      K te a x J ,                          H tu o   po$e»*


• tM f M           lU f c r f e O f V .a * ,.! ^ M a h b                                       .
              A              ^                                                   Sl^PLtl^it lOOt)V A
      T t i f * 0? ' | ? t t \ c' L                     ^ oa>                        s e ltc fe * h, k u
        |y& * |« U a            t                        u l W a^                u x je Cjm a/b alf
        a a -c ^ W    CF 3 ) 5 i a u O n lw p S tH .*. ^ a u i i a k ,
       *H ^ c ju ^ T . t^M a ccv tfc'^ aK           A > a .a /a J trf ‘
      t o b c v a U UcA)’^ ( b t c t      fJLtf*) , & k O ^ 5 ^

                                                             oLMcnJe. p la ^ ; cU cO k,*

               u,     o lc c u ^ u ^ c ,   fd ta      c f f b J     ^            G jU ir           c f U u ^ U < d -z
 o i c t t a &                 > blah 7              -Ke c ttd c u Z h *                       Ro$er
9 H
  ouu
    »wo
      ewcf x$u sUtuAkc, to ct cAhuXat
   UMahcUtcfc. Hk sh                                                flcLfc HtkAdXtiJ.
                                   <*                                AtiicW i.
    u
    iut4
       rS-Voi| piiuu. felct                                              _pLca

               I£ik/ z£la(9t tejuej- fe rt-c^
  C U \o m m    C sy -»   TV/       f to j/n K ^                                       < /-    T k &      r

   H c o %^ £ u b -a ^ c ^ l'k t $uj)pcT\‘ Gnttf) ■ CthfacJ-(f-
   MJ • X uiuXAr SGv USX, UJMAAa .                                                            »/><f fepts
    t ^ r ^ r 1                    Ufi>* ’« - « ': c t t t t k U ^ l O & o ,
    ^                                                      0    ,    *       ^                  lje

        h*                i®     ? * '* 1            ‘* f e         ^ f ^ s j          L xe /
                                        te> i>C (XJlXjjc Ihi&v tL * I i
        f c t n a    b f - / f t < * 0 u r t * (         h ta tx s ,     q       m      u

        K v tO U e + c              ^                                                                     fe
         o la U ; L ,                            ^          ^                                              /k


    ®     (C -rtlCT              K u w               e     to U a r tM ,_

         ~                i l'                              - < i^ a t j tc f i r t i x .
        tfliU f)     te tf c t     lo       C v y x X . IT U * , f o e / )           b /\M ^    .


                                    ? « , ,                                                   K -     ^
     lt)tuu^5 A44X3 feAUtSO. HV\
               letfe/cf $ h b 7                          ofeu»e.
                                                                                                                         3

    *Tioo k u r                             / M\ULi(k^>XH‘t O»©V)C>UH.
    P a ^ jL u c K < a           h i    X u o fy t         .
                     <"otecc c** oJbfacMtci. te to                                                ee/tt-

     JiscuHfiAfcinj u C la a.T fU 4 , O f e                                       D aha*                uMat
     i! £ M \ c o o t C U JV k - b y                                              -S0 2 / A          U 4.C *&

                      O y£L                            ^         ^      \A c ijQ )    Ib d fe & c        Ia k         f li^
     ix ^ L f-            u .te r > p £ ^ < < 3 * -*

    Ab         'u jc u v v H           f ^ H iU c r            t c ^ lL c t /x I t * * ,    fC ^ G W * * M

    cf        tV ft. C ft^ t^ d X .    C&-t< L                       c ^ tft% 'c tx 4 > K       to

                         ^ W       tt     ttr t.   c A A 4 .b \S c L .         A ^w J       6   v t l i 6 i£ L    t»

    ^AjOdL O' !«*• -
      * Aogcvi’iue. cvcC ais^uUL dfcfi                                                               ko jf
       p o l t t i C 0 ic fij> pcAvbjtoL t \ gejyjaX


„     *        C M -S o P e.           D o C iC & j r & j >                                      / k te tu la c J l^


      * bn9fc' CAr ^ Hw^JdUuoJtL?) (xffiicuiP tt<xJr gottjOA
        flof tuifiJc, cao*. J . p^Ucc <£t Kfluie i c , uAaJ~
                ^ Ui^ptA^cn- os ecoru .sfccjt-i -'.
                C U t l p C r ju N j c U r U ^ u ^ J - .


          '      ^                                     ^                                                         to
                  c U V x iu ^     .
       .         9h            ft. G&>QX) (? )
       * Sh c£                            SOT i
                                                                                                         M-

# T V it Ov            n o ' BlacL&ju .            CeyJauX^oi
   tf C      p o y c o -^ M t, -          wi                                          T V   d s ? fr \c \_

   uAHv                         ptoatuterf-1>               kwok C ku jp ■
    U jtu iU . m M .                                                         U j ^ k k h ^ ttc f
     offtck uAl’ K> aR|3xi< u^;|t> etAdUi^oa. cuxulaAJe
    OJ- <^cpM fa+d                              £uj
     u jc u , f a v r J b c 9            S iJ b b v ttu e            o v s u * f l to
      l£U #s , b u > uivx> tr &
          7 itbk ft       Kc^uXbL *> fAf                   p zfc
          (f- o \              plptA. hi? l1»t Icikm-Lj SftppcTt -
          C m |)fc                                                       ft* Ca^ ua^ cf
           tf\O L u £ /fo •   P C tO h a ^ b ^         ( ^ t g /u v A o .   U a -v

           o^ftdavvh O'         tt/idtvca.. •SkuAoL  fet
            a^pNtacU**. (*, flfi fhAux iK a . pfCUK.
           CU«-j U^vtv^C^UiCrt .
          ^ V it W \ t n v |       « ^ q p ecx n t o                     fU a > t           fc iM A U i,

           tot-                    iU   H , O v^w iJ’,                      A   a U ^i      v« 4
           jM     f tiu a J l   rtiA tw * .

           Qa £ r I s«4. no g iau 'v A w tt-tp M w j C/cyuufy
             w A rt^ s ic t     t< A ic iL ft    { M lM d S t* -     &      u _ ^ .
                                                         14    .      Q fC O ia.


                                 S l ^ l& T T            (
                   )&K< I         [y \o lt ,   I p c tC i
                                                  ,x p .                                                       ■ ; .................


                                    0 A < jS O t/i (X O               ~                       fO & :*h& -‘-*4~
                                                                              n-ff?         b u t j a i ~        aUcUf,

                                                                              \ \d£}~>                 ( /ia d j w d i n

                                                                                                 .                                     ..   ^




               "    D o \ ‘ f-                       O vsX U ^t              u,      J iE w ./       n J t e 4 > < j l 1.’

                                        C t> tX 0 ( u ^ \          O-v


      %             Q ty \H                ucAM'v OtcU/i^^ cJ-awtt cr i/of
          HI Hiocy Q M ,                             knun i^tL                     1-jQut) hof
                       r t f u b a J r k i$ M e f                  ^Q x h


                   l( I h A? S ycfhko-c cU cL,                                           o(j^ lf- fas u^ clU
                            l A A l t ^ (r@                                   "*


                      ? t        sm d o k j          -       ch ^ ed y                   &                cL tu ^ e C tid la c t,
M b       tf          L ^ Q M y n p a c v id ^               c ^ - e tA i^        f$ J p ) c M K     ~ M j2c I& U ,
      M                U -C tM y        f c u _ £ ^ c tc Y *                 6 ^ V        $C I h £ j


 M -f   (4                  DPP^         c te c c ^            o ^ fc e J U €a jo 4 J -(.


                       3     .         C X v h ffc       K     d io jt^




                                                                                                                       J C
                 t >          fe

                 Ci       k—
                           t( (f.lr£         v itv         U c/-             c tX c S L o ( •
                      3 Q - i 0 C A ^ ^ c /- o t > - X ^               o - v (. .

                  ■-te ^ p te -v y o C c i <(Ja


              \P m g o (            T O ^ (c f


                                         f

          v      Y ^ ( f ( h e               o Ia o       c b j& K           (j^ jeK          ¥ h Jt


   9 jU 6 C       -          fru J lA ,              G x X ^ l          ) Q > h A J^            r\Jb      P U JL y

                               [Ay^L                                                   ptdo-rt '                       y /d t
                                  LM £> 1 (           rv C h            tcM s^ c A        *



QAx t ^ ' ■                       ^ ^ a^             0jr<^      & u'                                   u M s b t- p A jA ^ i



U ^ t /v o a ^        -        C z M iu t ^ J t n                 cp*a\ -           2 0   ^       w          -P (u      pW «/
                               f e ix in u            •



                      /.'.        3 ^        k       w           t biCldxxfa cf- t c ^                          C^>{
                      K               p /5 b i^           ? J


                           c^ ' 2    H   o   ^   a           A tc^c^vW .                                     •*- c / u X , 6 0 jtJ
                           c^ t      Ia w a J -                         ft      ^             n c# U ^


         A o' (^ o C u y<                             Wfyi&J- sc fr^ t »
                                                          U O jM - C u L z ^ t"
                              K lC V ?/U /G xi*L -<              e /t    ^      /z y -M ti* -,'          •
     4 4 l( _ L S & & X % f


© DusU Tt?P OLCmJ- a& fL l3iS -a mjo« cull bu sA dead.
Q        IS there, w. I£KAL tkojUU AuJ&caZ, HaJfC/- *-uU c*L
         dLw * v f c _                ....
                   . J m, /crf-CctUt^L?
©                               l^ u ^ c A J M ^          o ^ J O ^ ic U jit1 * 5 5 - I b o o

(§>                               cf UaJbillts ?

<g) CoriMiT) cUjlM j Id &\fetWAU K. dt&4L[>tAO\: -
              VM+O , MflXe JfcfiO, W-ftW bi€>, HouJ (Yu Dig).
     ^ ALLdli^ ((f^                                                              dt<£ (i
     C n u lu ^ c / tzu + aM C
     C     c & jv u f r   A to f c p l"   p r O p f ltts ^ v   T u c U ra   p V JA   «A. o U L u k

         w ^ ( aifti’^ecJL d ta c t •
         Pttf. w
               t/o
                 p••C
                    Hffi. b
                          ®UJ
                            U,                                       I
                                                                     \§a tf*
                                                                           L«o
                                                                             j&o
                                                                               jUc
          b a tx c * o h ^ c occur* U K otL , U - 1 b n A u i e ,                            .
          UUtvt" (aU< (v 'fvfcu^' u »5Db( b
          at la/2. IftXj-1C&uJ&J- Kk« cF t5lScuM..
          C <u€mj a. U ai *" J U c L x ie A y ret* c o a l,
    Q>     n\jF LK itif lV w lH * Mo ca/ztuxc, H aifc^d. e u ^ fe r
