                                                               R E C E IV E D

From:               Chris Enzor
                                                                07 JAN 2000
To:                 chrisann                                    DIRECTOR,
Date:               7 January 2000 4:15pm
Subject:            Hillsborough                                CASEWORK
Re counsel's advice.
I remember a discussion with Dru over counsel's advice. W e were concerned that counsel had used a
recklessness test rather than gross negilgence. I attach a note I did to Dru - unfortunately I am not sure of the
date but my best guess is it was December 1998. This tries to analyse counsel's advicein relation to the
subsequent case law in the shape of Adomako.

CC:                 crostong
Dru Sharpling
CCP - Central Casework


cc      Robin Booth


                                                                     My Ref:
                                                                     Your Ref:




HILLSBOROUGH

1.   I have been considering the point about whether Adomako should be applied
     in this case and the extent to which the proper tests were applied by counsel in
     the 1990 advice when they went on to consider what was the appropriate test
     for involuntary manslaughter

2.   In his review, George briefly set out the applicable law in chapter 4. I have
     read and re-read Adomako this morning. The cases of Andrews and Bateman
     in 1925 and 1937 respectively indicated that gross negligence was then
     sufficient to found a conviction for manslaughter. The word ‘gross’ was not
     used on its own but was given as an example of the type of negligence under
     consideration.

3.   All would have been well had it not been for the case of Seymour in 1983
     where, in a driving case, the judge directed the jury in terms of recklessness,
     as defined in Lawrence. The House of Lords agreed that this was the correct
     approach.

4.   Despite this, Lord Mackay, in Adomako, said that Andrews was ‘the most
     authoritative statement of the present law’ and further that it was a ‘decision
     which [had] not been departed from’. I find this a little hard to reconcile, but
     the conclusion I am driven to is that Adomako clarified the law in that Lord
     Mackay specifically described Bateman and Andrews as ‘satisfactory as
     providing a proper basis for describing the crime of involuntary
     manslaughter’.

5.   I argue that Adomako did not change the law but clarified it.

6.   Thus, in my view, the appropriate test to be applied is the Adomako test, as set
     out by George in paragraph 4.2 of his review.

7.   The next question is whether counsel applied the correct test in 1990.
     Interestingly, one of the counsel who advised CPS in 1990 appeared for the
     appellant in Adomakol
8.    Counsel’s advice was principally directed to ‘reckless’ manslaughter, ie.
      where a person causes the death of another intending to do an act which
      creates an obvious and serious risk of causing personal injury (a) not giving
      thought to the possibility of such risk or (b) having recognised there was some
      risk involved, nonetheless going on to take it. Clearly this is not good law
      now.

9.    Counsel went on to say (paragraph 59 of the joint opinion) ‘it may also be
      manslaughter if the person causing the death intends to do an act, or omits to
      do an act where there is a duty to do so, being grossly negligent whether death
      or serious personal injury results’. In my view this is an adequate enunciation
      of the principles now set out in Adomako.

10.   Counsel went on to say that the law was uncertain, and made reference to
      Seymour and also Kong Cheuk Kwan. Counsel particularly noted that in the
      1986 case of Goodfellow, it was said of Kong Cheuk Kwan that the question
      was whether the defendant was ‘guilty of recklessness (or gross negligence)’.
      Counsel then went on to say that they considered that the gross negligence test
      was sufficient to establish the offence of manslaughter.

11.   Unfortunately, the matter does not stop there. In the 1990 advice, counsel
      referred to the case of R v West London Coroner’s Court, ex p Gray. The
      Divisional Court held that a Coroner should direct the jury in the following
      terms where the death is alleged to have been caused by neglect by the police:

      11.1 That they had to be satisfied of four ingredients, namely (a) that the
           police were under a duty to have regard to the health and welfare of the
           deceased, (b) that in the circumstances there was a failure to do what
           should have been done for the health and welfare of the deceased, (c)
           that the failure amounted to a substantial cause of death, and (d) that the
           failure amounted to recklessness.

      11.2 That the test of ‘recklessness’ was whether a police officer, having
           regard to his duty, was indifferent to an obvious and serious risk to the
           health and welfare of the deceased or, recognising that the risk to be
           present, deliberately chose to run it by doing nothing about it

      11.3 That a failure to appreciate that there was such a risk was not itself
           sufficient to amount to recklessness and

      11.4 That the jury could only return a verdict of unlawful killing if they could
           attribute the unlawful conduct to a single police officer.

12.   It is clear from the 1990 advice, that counsel felt that these points had a direct
      bearing on their advice (para 65).

13.   E xp Gray was cited in Adomako. Lord Mackay in approving of the use of the
      word ‘reckless’ in its ordinary sense in cases of involuntary manslaughter, said
      that ex p Gray was an example of a case where the word reckless had been
     used with complete accuracy. On the face of it, this is difficult to reconcile as
     the reference in paragraph 11.3 to recklessness appears to be something
     bordering on a Cunningham definition (note the reference to failure to
     appreciate that there was a risk not being sufficient to amount to recklessness).

14. I found the use of the word ‘indifferent’ difficult to reconcile here. I note,
     however, that failure to appreciate that there was a risk was specifically ruled
     out by the court as a sufficient state of mind for recklessness in this context.
     Accordingly, this only leaves a narrow scope for ‘indifference’ which I think
     must mean that the officer, bearing in mind his duty, must have deliberately
     shut his mind to the presence of the risk.

15. In my view, ex p Gray cannot stand against Adomako and it should not be
     regarded as good law. How then does this leave counsel’s advice, bearing in
     mind that ex p Gray was in the forefront of their minds?

16. At paragraph 81 of the 1990 opinion, counsel were considering the position of
    the police as an organisation in relation to a possible charge of corporate
    manslaughter. The say ‘...there seems to us to be no evidence that in making
    what were undoubtedly errors of judgment and practice, the police
    organisation, or any individual within it, acted recklessly or in a grossly
    negligent manner’. This is highly significant because, even if counsel applied
    the recklessness test in ex p Gray, they also clearly considered gross
    negligence as a separate head. It must have been separate as gross negligence
    does not feature in exp Gray.

17. So far as Mr Duckenfield is concerned, the position is more difficult. The
     weight of the opinion in paragraphs 83 to 89 is towards recklessness. At
     paragraph 88, counsel opine that the omissions to act did not create a risk
     which was obvious at the time.

18. Paragraph 89 says, and I quote in full: ‘We conclude, therefore, that there is
     insufficient evidence on which to found a charge of recklessness against Mr
     Duckenfield. Nor is there evidence that he was grossly negligent in failing to
     act as mentioned above. We bear in mind particularly the judgment of the
     Divisional Court in the West London Coroner’s Court case, the requirements
     of which are not in our view satisfied’.

19. Given that gross negligence and recklessness as defined in ex p Gray are
    substantially different, I am of the view that the reference in paragraph 89 to
    ex p Gray must be read as referring back to recklessness only and not to gross
    negligence. I recognise that this is a rather technical interpretation of
    paragraph 89 but I suggest it is nevertheless correct. After all, counsel quite
    properly directed themselves in the main to the current case law as understood
    by most people at the time (ie. recklessness was the test) and only added gross
     negligence out of a desire for completeness, bearing in mind their own views
     on the state of the law. It is a tribute to them that they were so accurate.
20.   If that is right, and I suggest that logically it must be, then counsel’s opinion
      can be said to have considered gross negligence manslaughter in the terms set
      out in Adomako.



Chris Enzor
Central Casework York Branch
DX 65204 York 6
® (
Fax            _
 December 1998
