From:               Chris Enzor
To:                 hboro
Date:               15 December 1998 8:55am
Subject:            Hillsborough

Following a brief discussion with Robin this morning, please could the following be done:
 1. Clare - please will you copy the latest draft of the press release and Q&A to Robin Booth and Chris Newell
2. George - please will you work up the draft letters we propose to send, telling of our decision, and send copies
to Robin and Chris for comment (a.s.a.p, please)
3. George - please will you start preparing a separate draft letter to the defendants' solicitors which answers the
question we are almost bound to be asked 'how did you reach your decision?'.

For information.
Chris - for the avoidance of doubt, having considered the Doody case, George and I agree that the decision not to
take over any of the charges is correct.
Also, the Home Office is included on the circulation list because of the particular interest shown by this Home
Secretary in the case, as evidenced by his appointment of Stuart-Smith LJ to conduct a scrutiny.
From:                Clare Stocks
To:                  DCE.NEWELLC, CCU.BOOTHR, CCU.LENNONC, DCE.longmana
Date:                15 December 1998 10:04am
Subject:             Hills - draft press notice & Q&A

Attached is a draft press notice and Q&A. Chris Enzor has cleared this version. We will be slightly vulnerable
over this as we are not explaining our tests which we apply to private prosecutions, because to do this in relation
to this case, would question the strength of the evidence of the case which will be continuing.

I know that the Director cannot be involved, but I think that we will need to show him the finalised press notice
etc, and the Law Officers may also need to be informed. Any views ?

However we may be called upon to give guidance in a non-specific way (if that is possible) as to our
responsibilities in private prosecutions etc. I think that this would be a likely and a legitimate question - what do
you think ? We can draft something.

The other aspect to note is that Bridgewater may be coming out this week, so it might be worth just staggering
these announcements. Karen Wiseman (1249) is dealing.

Clare

CC:                 CPSHQY.CCU.ENZORC, SALISBUL
DRAFT

CPS STATEMENT

HILLSBOROUGH CASE - ADLINGTON V DUCKENFIELD, ADLINGTON V
MURRAY


In early July 1998, solicitors acting for Chief Superintendent David Godfrey DUCKENFIELD,
(retired) and Superintendent Bernard Dean MURRAY (retired) asked the Crown Prosecution
Service to take over and discontinue the proceedings against them which have been started by
Ann Adlington on behalf of the Hillsborough Family Support Group.

After a re-review of all of the evidence, the Crown Prosecution Service has decided not to take
over any of the charges. This means that the private prosecution will continue.




                                              -ENDS-


Notes to Editors:

1.     Mr. Duckenfield faces two charges of manslaughter, one of wilful neglect to perform a
       public duty and one of attempting to pervert the course of justice; Mr. Murray faces
       two charges of manslaughter and one of wilful neglect to perform a public duty.

2.             They are next due in Leeds Magistrates' Court on 19 April 1999.

3.             As the case is continuing, it is still sub judice.
DRAFT QUESTION AND ANSWER

NB. The CPS will not comment in detail on this case at this stage as it is still sub judice.
We must not give any impression one way or the other about our view of the strength of
the evidence.


1.     What test has the CPS applied in deciding whether to take over these proceedings ?
A:     An answer to this question would be bound to lead to a conclusion about our view of
       the strength of the evidence. We can not comment.

2.     Why has the CPS not taken over the attempt to pervert the course of justice charge
       •>

A:     We have considered each of the charges in the context of the case as a whole and have
       decided that the appropriate course is not to intervene in the prosecution..

3.     Can the CPS take over only part of a case and discontinue it?
A:     We consider that we can, but we do not think it would be appropriate to do so in the
       circumstances of this case.

4.     What happens now?
A:     The case will continue. It will be up to the parties to decide what action to take next.

5:     Is Judicial Review likely?
A:     It is a matter for the parties whether they seek tocommence proceedings by way of
       judicial review.

6:     Why won't you take over manslaughter and discontinue when you wouldn't
       prosecute it yourself?
A:     An answer to this question would be bound to lead to a conclusion about our view of
       the strength of the evidence. We can not comment.

7:     Why can't you take it over and run it?
A:     An answer to this question would be bound to lead to aconclusion about our view of
       the strength of the evidence. We can not comment.

8:     Isn't this unfair on the individual who then has to foot the costs?
A:     The right for individuals to bring a private prosecution is establishedin legislation. We
       have not been asked to take over the case to prosecute it.

9:     How many private prosecutions are there every year?
A:     The CPS is not necessarily made aware of every private prosecution there is, and
       therefore we don't compile any statistics.

10:    How many does CPS take over and run or discontinue in a year?
A:     We do not compile these statistics.

11:    What happens if there is a conviction at the end of the day, does this mean the CPS
       was wrong not to bring it, and will you refund the private prosecutors' costs?
A:    This is hypothetical; but it doesn't mean the CPS was wrong. We can not comment any
      further as to do so would lead to a conclusion about our view of the strength of the
      evidence. Costs will be a matter for the court to determine at the end of the case.

12:   Who made the decision?
A:    The decision was taken by Mr Newell, Director of Casework Evaluation.

13:   Was the new Director involved?
A:    He has been kept informed of key developments.
14:   Why hasn't he made the decision in this case?
A:    Before he became DPP he advised one of the parties. Therefore he has not made any
      decisions in this case.

15:   Why has it taken you so long, the private prosecution started in July 1998?
A:    A thorough review of the case was undertaken. This involved consideration of
      representations made by the private prosecutor and the defendants. Some of these were
      received as recently as October 1998.

16:   Has the Attorney General been involved?
A:    The Attorney General has been kept informed.

17:   What happens if the case is thrown out at half time (e.g. like the Lawrence case)?
A:    That is a matter for the private prosecutors. However the same rules of court apply in a
      private prosecution e.g. you cannot be tried for the same offence twice.
From:               Chris Newell
To:                 CPSHQL.CCU(BOOTHR, LENNONC), CPSHQL.DCE(longmana),...
Date:               15 December 1998 9:02am
Subject:            Hillsborough -Reply

Chris

Thank you. I note the position. I look forward to seeing the various drafts in due course.

I understand why the Home Secretary has an interest in this case, but I am not yet persuaded that he should have
any (or a copy of any) specific briefing, as opposed to an advance copy of the press notice. Do others have a
view on this?

CWPN

CC:                 CPSHQY.CCU(JENNINGP),
From:                Lyn Salisbury
To:                  CPSHQL.CCU(BOOTHR, LENNONC), CPSHQL.DCE(longmana,...
Date:                15 December 1998 10:21am
Subject:             Hills - draft press notice & Q&A -Reply

I do not think we should show the Director the pn or q and a; if he is not involved he should not become so now.
I think we should send the Law Officers the pn and and q and a when agreed; how about a fact sheet on private
prosecutions? We can send it to journalists, put it on the Internet etc. Would no doubt come in handy in the
future also. As for timing - if we do Bridgewater this week we could do this one on 21 Dec. I don't think it
matters too much as long as they are staggered as you say.

In the press notice it sounds like the case is against the solicitors, not their clients - so suggest "proceedings
which" or "proceedings against their clients which".

CC:                  CPSHQY.CCU(ENZORC),
From:              Chris Enzor
To:                CPSHQL.CCU(BOOTHR, LENNONC), CPSHQL.DCE(longmana,...
Date:              15 December 1998 10:25am
Subject:           Hills - draft press notice & Q&A -Reply -Reply

Timing may be a problem. We are committed to no later than 18 Dec to give the decision to the parties. Previous
experience with HFSG suggests they will not delay in informing the press themselves.
From:                Chris Newell
To:                  CCU.BOOTHR, CPSHQY.CCU.ENZORC, CCU.LENNONC, DCOS.S...
Date:                15 December 1998 1:12pm
Subject:             Hills - draft press notice & Q&A -Reply -Reply

I have seen the flurry of E-mail messages of earlier. I must emphasise the point about timing that Chris Enzor
has already made. Assuming that we hear from the Law Officers this week (and I am reasonably confident that
we shall), we must inform the parties of our decision by close on Friday.

As far as the press notice is concerned, I suggest that the second sentence should read: "After a careful review"
- not re-review - "of all the evidence, and having taken account of all the representations made to the CPS
by the defendants and the private prosecutor, the CPS has decided not to take over the conduct of these
proceedings."

I agree that the Director does not need to be consulted about this, or involved in the drafting exercise, but I think
that he should be kept informed of the timetable and have advance sight of what is going to be said.

What do you have in mind, Lyn, when you refer to a fact sheet on private prosecutions? Are you thinking of a
summary of our Service policy in relation to private prosecutions? If so, this raises difficult questions, in which
others will have an interest - principally, Garry Patten. I am not sure where we are now on publication of, for
example, the Prosecution Manual, but there are implications for that issue, if it is still live.

The difficulty that we are facing is that any public discussion of our policy will lead directly to a discussion of its
application to the evidence in this particular case, thereby creating the prejudicial debate that we want to avoid
(and which we must not be seen - or even thought - to have fuelled).

I appreciate that the parties know what our policy is and that one side or another, for one reason or another, may
broadcast it. If that happens and we are questioned about it, we shall probably have no option but to confirm that
we have a policy and to indicate in general terms what it is. I think that we must then decline to answer any
questions about the application of the policy to this case, as any such comment from us might prejudice the
ongoing proceedings. I also think that it would probably be unwise to offer any information to journalists about
our policy, unless asked, because to do so would be to invite the further questions that we do not want to answer.

I should welcome any comments on these thoughts.

CWPN

CC:                  longmana
