               HILLSBOROUGH



                       THE REVIEW




By George R. Croston                8th May 1997
                   HILLSBOROUGH REVIEW

                    INDEX TO APPENDICES


1        Index to Annexes A to G of HFSG correspondence of
         4th March 1997.

2        Taylor Enquiry document list including documents 109
         and 110.

3        Taylor Enquiry video schedule description for documents
         109 and 110.

4       Taylor Enquiry video schedule for TB/1 and 2 (similar
        to Appendix 3).

5        Schedule of Camera 5 footage of Leppings Lane Terraces
         on Videos TB/1 and 2.

6        Compilation Video Tape Schedule as Exhibited to the
         Taylor Enquiry and Coroner’s Hearings (C278).

7      Police Incident Room Message re Video TB/2.

8      Transcript of Coroner’s Remarks to Jury re C 539 Video
        Tape on 13/3/90 and 15/3/90.

9        Coroner’s Exhibit List including C539.




MMS/246.97.V02
                                 2
                                 HILLSBOROUGH REVIEW



1        BACKGROUND

         1.1     In early December 1996, Granada TV screened a drama-documentary
                  programme concerning the Hillsborough Stadium disaster. It has since been
                  said by the Hillsborough Family Support Group (HFSG) in a letter of the 4th
                  March 1997 that the pre-production research for the programme and its
                  subsequent airing has brought to light fresh evidence and/or new witnesses
                  proving that suppression of evidence, perjury and conspiracy to pervert the
                  course of justice featured in the legal process that followed the disaster. In
                  addition letters have been received from the families of some of the deceased
                  requesting re-examination of the circumstances of the tragic events. As a
                  result of the above, internal correspondence has been generated between the
                  South Yorkshire Police, the Home Office, the Legal Secretariat to the Law
                  Officers (LSLO) and the CPS. A letter of 23/1/97 from Stephen Wooler of
                  the LSLO to Peter Pearson at Central Casework, York stated that at present
                 there was nothing in the television programme that materially affects the
                 applications (for consent to apply to a High Court Judge for an order directing
                 the hold of a fresh inquest) which the Attorney General had already
                 considered. In each of those cases it was concluded that there was not a
                  realistic prospect of the high Court granting such an order. In addition the
                 television programme itself was not evidence.

         1.2     On the 4th March 1997, Ms Anne Adlington, a solicitor representing the
                 HFSG wrote to the Director enclosing a bundle of documents and counsel’s
                 opinion. A fax was then received from Trevor Hicks, the chairman of the
                 HFSG, with his copy letter making allegations of the suppression of evidence
                 etc. as noted above. It was supported by a draft statement. Both this
                 statement and counsel’s opinion contained representations as to what should
                 happen now on the basis of the ‘new evidence’. A request was made for a
                 meeting with a senior CPS lawyer. The correspondence was acknowledged
                 by the Director’s office stating that a substantive reply would be provided
                 when the contents of the reports had been considered.

         1.3     The LSLO had considered it to be important that while each of the various
                 Government Departments must form their own judgement in relation to the
                 discharge of their own duties, it was equally important that there was a co­
                 herent and co-ordinated response to the representations made. Accordingly
                 on the 10th March 1997 a meeting was held at the Home Office with
                 representatives of their Police Policy Directorate (PPD), of the LSLO and of
                 CPS Central Casework. It was decided that each of the three groups should
                 report back to the PPD having conducted separate reviews of the allegations
                 made by Mr. Trevor Hicks and Alun Jones QC.

         1.4     On the 13th March 1997 the reviewing lawyer had a full day’s conference

MMS/246.97.V02
                                                3
                 with Chief Superintendent Lowe and D.C. Greenaway of South Yorkshire
                 Police at their offices in Sheffield. Original video tapes exhibited to the
                 Taylor enquiry and to the Coroner’s Hearing were viewed and access was
                 made to the transcripts of those hearings and to original witness statements.

         1.5     On the 1st April 1997 the Daily Mirror printed a report on Hillsborough. It
                 included an erroneous comment that the CPS had said "the nature and
                 volume" of the new evidence had forced it to re-open the enquiry into the
                 crush that killed the 95 Liverpool fans. The nature of this report was indeed
                 much of the earlier correspondence from the HFSG being made public.

         1.6     On the same day South Yorkshire Police issued a statement in response to the
                 press report to the effect that there was no new evidence.

         1.7     On the 7th April, a letter from Miss Adlington drew CPS Central Casework
                 attention to points made in the police statement and the HFSG rebuttal of
                 them. A reply was made to the effect that a full response could not be given
                 within 14 days of the previous acknowledgement from the CPS, but the matter
                 was receiving immediate consideration.




MMS/246.97.V02
                                               4
2        NEW EVIDENCE

         2.1     The new evidence is said to be:-

                 2.1.1   A video tape of footage from the scoreboard camera, known as camera
                         5, of the Leppings Lane Terraces area where the deaths occurred.

                 2.1.2 An affidavit (dated 25th November 1996) and statement (dated 11th
                       May 1989) of a Roger Houldsworth, the engineer responsible for the
                       design and maintenance of the Club and Police CCTV systems in
                       operation at Hillsborough Stadium. Exhibited to the affidavit are
                       comments on 13 points concerning the police evidence to the Taylor
                       enquiry and to the Coroner’s Inquest.

                 2.1.3   The statement of a Doctor Walker who volunteered his services at the
                         Northern General Hospital where many of the crush victims were
                         taken. He was involved in the resuscitation of the injured.

         2.2     This ‘new evidence’ will be considered in detail in parts 6 to 8 of this report.




MMS/246.97.V02
                                                5



                                                                                                    i
ALLEGATIONS

These are divided into two parts, those concerning the video evidence and those of
the medical evidence. They have been made by Trevor Hicks, Alun Jones QC and
Roger Houldsworth and will be considered in that order.


Video Evidence -

T revor Hicks says that:

3.1    P .C .’s Ryan and Bichard perjured themselves in giving evidence of the
       footage from camera 5 and the extent to which that camera could be used to
       view the Leppings Lane terraces.

3.2    The person who edited the inquest exhibit C278, known as the ‘compilation
       video’, must have been aware of the extensive footage from camera 5 but this
       footage was not produced despite several requests from the Inquest Jury.

3.3    Had the footage been produced and shown to the Jury it would have totally
       changed their view of what the police could see.

Alun Jones QC says th at:-

3.4    Video Tapes were deliberately suppressed and a number of officers committed
       peijuiy.

3.5   The evidence of Mr. Houldsworth was also deliberately suppressed.

3.6   The HFSG have acquired from Yorkshire Television tapes which appear to be
      those, or copies of those, taken away or stolen immediately after the disaster.

3.7    A tape (containing footage from camera 5) indicates that police officers were
       lying and that pictures of all relevant areas of the ground were clear, detailed
       and uninterrupted, contrary to the police evidence referred to by Mr.
       Houldsworth in his affidavit of November 1996. Events in the relevant area
       (Leppings Lane Terraces) may not, for various reasons, have been recorded
       on tape between 14.30 and 15.00 hours, but they were clearly visible on the
       monitors to those on duty at the time.

3.8    The Coroner had said that the assessment of the Terraces "may be the single
       most important factor" or a "very important factor" which the Jury have to
       weigh. The above evidence was not available in 1993 and yet it touched the
       core issue before 15.15 hours, the cut off time. It would have been of crucial
       significance to the High Court in 1993 as well as the Jury in 1991.
         R oger H ouldsw orth says that:

         3.9     At 0800 hrs. on the day of the disaster he had given all the cameras a final
                 check. There had been a problem with the score-board camera involving
                 flaring (picture white-out) due to an electrical fault when the score-board came
                 into use. There was no problem with the quality of the picture. By the time
                 he had finished his check, everything was working OK. P.C . Ryan came in
                 during this check and he would have shown both him and P.S. Goddard that
                 the cameras were working when he had finished. His 13 comments on the
                 police evidence are as follows:-

                 3.9.1   P.C. Ryan (who was in charge of telephones and public address system
                         in the police control box) says in his evidence to the Taylor Enquiry
                         re camera 5 that there was an apparent fault with it, the picture was
                         very distorted and was never satisfactory as far as he could recall, it
                         was not as clear as you would hope the picture to be and it was the
                         quality of that picture which was the problem.

                 RH:     The quality of the picture was never a problem, the flaring was fixed
                         by disconnecting the earth during the morning.


                 3.9.2 PS Goddard (who was in charge of the radios in the police control
                       box) says in his evidence to the Taylor Enquiry that it was not possible
                       to tell from the control box that the pens three and four (the central
                       pens where the injuries occurred) were full and that at no stage before
                       he saw people climbing over the pens did he notice any over-crowding.

                 RH:     He was able to see what the police could see on their monitors and he
                         specifically remembers that when the order was given to open the gates
                         he could see pens three and four were full to the point of over­
                         crowding.


                 3.9.3 P.S. Goddard gave evidence of a blind spot down at the front o f the
                       fencing whereby the first two rows of the Terrace were obstructed and
                       although you could see figures you would not be able to pick them out
                       individually.

                 RH:     Based on his knowledge of the control box the evidence did not make
                         any sense to him.


                 3.9.4 P.C. Bichard in his evidence to the Taylor Enquiry claimed, just like
                       P.C. Ryan, that there was a problem with the score-board camera
                       over-looking the Terraces (camera 5). He said that there had been
                       difficulty with that camera over a number of weeks; when the system
                       was switched on the picture would go white. It was thought to be a

MMS/246.97.V02                                  -7




                                                                                                    A
•
                             problem with the electrical supply to the camera. On the day it was
                             not up to the mark but was a lot better than it had been. "We were
                             getting pictures, that is the best way of describing it." At the inquest
                             P.C. Bichard said that camera 5 had been faulty and you were getting
                             what was called flare, that is, a reflection o f light and coloured objects
                             whereby the picture was lost. He went on to say that the camera was
                             not being used as much as it normally would be because o f the sub­
                             standard picture. It was inadequate.

                     RH:     While P.C. Bichard gave an accurate description of what the problem
                             had been the engineer disagreed that the camera was not up to the
                             mark. As far as he was concerned the camera was working perfectly
                             after he had fixed it during the morning.


                     3.9.5   At the Inquest, P.C. Bichard gave his opinion that it was not possible
                             to get what he would call a "view" of the centre pens from any of the
                             cameras and agreed with a comment that it was not possible to zoom
                             in so that one could clearly identify a given individual and clearly see
                             facial features.

                     RH:     He considers that it is possible to pick out facial features with the
                             camera and says that this is borne out by the evidence of the families
                             and lawyers who went to the ground. He does agree that it would be
                             more difficult to pick out facial features while events are happening
                             but considers that this was not the specific question that PC Bichard
                             was asked and responded to.

                     3.9.6 P.C. Bichard in evidence to the Taylor enquiry said that because o f the
                           position and angle of camera 5 it gave a false impression about the
                           crowd that was there. The picture created was a bit of an illusion
                           about the crowd that was in there. The position was that it was
                           difficult to assess that the pens would be getting over-crowded.

                     RH:     He did not consider that the above explanation made any sense at all.
                             He considers that there was a perceptive depth which would give an
                             indication of density and disagreed that it was difficult to assess that
                             the pens were getting over-crowded from the view of camera 5.


                     3.9.7 Again in his evidence to the Taylor enquiry P.C. Bichard said that
                           whilst the colour camera (camera 2) provided a better angled view of
                           the terraces it did not provide a close up picture as camera 5. The
                           zoom facility of the colour camera was not good enough to see
                           whether or not people were being crushed against the perimeter
                           fencing in pens 3 and 4. While the view enabled you to see the fence
                           you could not get a close up of the people there, that is, at best 30 or
                           40 heads and shoulders. At the inquest the officer said that the zoom

    MMS/246.97.V02
                                                     8
                        magnification of the colour camera was insufficient to create
                        identification.

                 RH:    He considers that the magnification of the colour camera, which was
                        designed for identification purposes was reasonable. He says that the
                        evidence of P.C. Bichard was contradictory and not altogether truthful.
                        You could certainly identify individuals with it as well as
                        distinguishing their clothing. A shot could give you six or seven heads
                        and shoulders depending on the crowd density.


                 3.9.8 During the Taylor enquiry P.C. Bichard describes the camera looking
                       down on Leppings Lane (camera 1) by saying "when you are using
                       your zoom facility the picture you are getting at the extreme is a rather
                       large and general one".

                 RH:    The camera had been replaced 6 months earlier and was so good that
                        a car number plate could be picked out at the end of Leppings Lane.


                 3.9.9 At the Taylor enquiry P.C. Bichard admitted that there was a video of
                       the situation on the west terraces, (Leppings Lane Terraces) from
                       about 14.30. The officer also claimed that o f the two video recordings
                       that were made, one expired at just after 15.00. The mode of
                       operation of the other tape was altered inadvertently between 14.30
                       and 15.00 when the officer believed that his knee caught an operating
                       button changing the recording from continuous to time lapse (that is
                       two frames per second rather than the normal continuously moving
                       picture). At the inquest he said that he could offer no explanation of
                       why there was no video material available from camera 5 before
                       15.02. He admitted that it would have been recording before then.

                 RH:    He says that no pictures from camera 5 were ever made available to
                        the enquiry or to the Inquest. He considers that the buttons on the
                        video machines are so tiny that it is unlikely that the officer could have
                        knocked one with his knee and more importantly says that it is actually
                        impossible to flick a switch and go into time lapse mode as P.C .
                        Bichard claims, when the machine is already recording.


                 3.9.10 Later during the Inquest P.C. Bichard says that the video pictures of
                        the Leppings Lane Terraces that were shown to the Jury were greatly
                        enhanced. He agreed with the Coroner that the image seen by the Jury
                        was infinitely clearer. He also said that the pictures which the court
                        had seen running on a time lapse system were not running at the same
                        speed as they would have been seen on the monitor.



MMS/246.97.V02




                                                                                                     A
•
                     RH:    He disagrees with P.C. Bichard’s evidence in that the information
                            obtained from watching the 14" monitors in the Police Control Room
                            was exactly the same as that seen on a larger screen in Court. He also
                            says that the pictures shown to the Court were taken from Camera 5,
                            the allegedly faulty camera, and showed the Leppings Lane Terraces.
                            He states that you will only get a time and date imprinting on the
                            recording if things are recorded at normal speed.


                     3.9.11 Also at the Inquest, P.C. Bichard says that camera 3 (a camera with
                            the maximum zoom facility) was not trained onto the Leppings Lane
                            Terraces because of an incident at the other end. The camera would
                            not have been good enough to enable identification of individuals at the
                            front of the Terraces as it would give an overall picture only.

                     RH: The camera was extremely powerful and it would have been able to
                          give a very clear picture of the Leppings Lane Terraces. The Officer
                          contradicts himself about which location this camera was focused
                          upon.


                     3.9.12 P.C. Bichard told the Jury that the reason the pictures from camera 3
                            when it was re-trained onto the Leppings Lane Terraces did not
                            become part of the recording was as follows: "the system operated
                            where by 2.30 I should have replaced both tapes. Because of what
                            was happening on Leppings Lane I didn’t replace those tapes and
                            eventually it ran out after 3.00. The camera was used but it was not
                            taping".

                     RH:   He considers it very unusual for the police to have needed to have
                           replaced both tapes at 2.30. It would suggest that they had been
                           recording everything in real time since 11.30.


                     3.9.13 The evidence of Chief Inspector McRobbie (who was an observer in
                            the police control box) is that he was impressed by the zoom facilities
                            of camera 5. It was used to pick out someone directly beneath the
                            control box who had dropped his trousers. He says that the definition
                            was quite reasonable.

                     RH:    He says that this appears to be the same camera that P.C. Ryan
                            described as "never satisfactory". The Chief Inspector is directly
                            contradicting the evidence of his colleagues and goes on to say to the
                            Taylor enquiry that you could see quite clearly that Pen 3 was full but
                            that Pen 2 (one of the side pens) had got space.




    MMS/246.97.V02
                                                   10
         M edical Evidence

         3.10 Alun Jones QC says that in February 1997 the evidence of a Dr. Ed Walker
               came to light (the doctor had been put in touch with the HFSG as a result of
               the Granada broadcast and met Mr. and Mrs. P. Hammond). This new
               material discloses that Philip Hammond Junior had sinus rhythm and cardiac
               output after his arrival at the hospital. The Doctor’s evidence shows serious
               criticism of the reaction to the disaster and that other victims were alive. It
               conflicts with the evidence of Dr. Slater. Dr. Walker was not called at the
               Inquest.

         3.11 In his opinion, Alun Jones goes on to say "it is difficult to exaggerate the
               significance of the concealment of Dr. Walker’s evidence. At page 10 of the
               Divisional Court’s Judgement, November 1993, the Court pointed to the
               Coroner’s reason for the 3.15 cut off. In all cases, it was said, the evidence
               disclosed the same pattern, of a rapid unconsciousness leading to rapid death.
               Dr. Walker expressly disagrees, especially with Dr. Slater. He states that a
               revealing remark was made by a senior hospital physician who said that
               almost immediately his department was flooded with large numbers of acutely
               ill patients requiring urgent resuscitation. However the whole inquest,
               spanning over 90 days, was structured by the Coroner on an utterly different
               factual assumption".

         3.12 The reviewing lawyer considers that the above opinion is intimating, as with
               the video evidence, the suppression of material facts, namely that at least one
               of the deceased (Philip Hammond) died after 15.15 and that this would have
               affected the decisions made at the Taylor Enquiry, Coroner’s Hearings and
               Judicial Review.

         3.13 In general Alun Jones considers that "one of the most striking aspects of this
               history is the way in which the evidence presented to the Inquest was evidence
               which tended to exculpate the South Yorkshire Authorities and the police from
               blame. Very serious questions arise as to the process by which evidence was
               selected by the West Midlands Police who assisted the Coroner".




MMS/246.97.V02
                                              11
4        H FSG REPRESENTATIONS

         4.1     The material provided to the CPS by the HFSG in support of their allegation
                  is composed of 8 volumes of papers and three video tapes. The index is
                  attached at Appendix 1. It has been fully considered during this review and
                  a copy can be made for the Director if required.

         4.2     The Crown Prosecution Service has been formally requested by Trevor
                  Hicks, Chairman of the HFSG, to examine the evidence and to initiate a full
                  and urgent criminal investigation into these matters. He states that all that has
                  ever been sought is a proper and even handed investigation into the events that
                  cost the lives of their loved ones. It is his belief that the footage from camera
                  5 between 12.00 and 15.23 hrs. has never been included in any police
                  compilation and/or other tapes that he had seen. In addition the footage
                  totally supported the position of Mr. Houldsworth.

         4.3     Alun Jones’ conclusions are that these new pieces o f evidence called for a full
                 police enquiry or public enquiry, that exhibits such as the tapes must be
                 secured and subjected to Forensic Analysis by some independent body with
                 powers to investigate and compel the production of evidence, and that
                 witnesses must be identified.

         4.4     Following the South Yorkshire Police Statement of the 1st April 1997 in
                  response to the Daily Mirror report on Hillsborough, the HFSG issued their
                  own response on the 8th April. Full details o f these rebuttals and counter­
                  rebuttals are contained within the relevant review section of this report.




MMS/246.97.V02
                                                 12
JU D IC IA L REVIEW

5.1   The skeleton argument presented to the Divisional Court in the application for
      Judicial Review to quash the Inquest Verdicts of Accidental Death was
      concerned with the following main points

      5.1.1   In deciding the statutory question ‘how’ the Coroner breached the
              Coroner’s rules re the procedure to be followed in taking evidence.

      5.1.2 Because the Coroner imposed a cut-off time o f 15.15, evidence in the
            possession of the Coroner and the police that four of the deceased were
            alive for a considerable time after sustaining injuries in the crush, was
            not adduced to the main inquest. There was a systematic failure by the
            Coroner to address the statutory questions of ‘who’, ‘when’, ‘where’
            and ‘how’. The Coroner had an apparent desire to establish rapid
            death. The imposition of this cut-off point was to prevent any further
            enquiry into the individual circumstances of the 95 deaths. Relevant
            witnesses were not called to give their controversial evidence.

      5.1.3 The Coroner was wrong to leave only the conclusions of unlawful
            killing, accidental death or an open verdict to the jury. He mis­
            directed the jury upon the elements of the offence of manslaughter.

5.2   The Divisional Court’s judgement was given on the 5th November 1993. The
      applicant’s abandonment of the point concerning the breach of the Coroner’s
      rules was accepted by the Court. They found that the Coroner had cut off the
      evidence at a reasonable and sustainable point bearing in mind the exhaustive
      public enquiry which had already been conducted by Taylor L.J. It was also
      a compassionate point from the aspect of the victim’s relatives. There was a
      sensible cut off point based on the plain and virtually unchallenged evidence
      of the pathologists as to when the deceased would have died. There was
      overwhelming medical evidence that death occurred by 15.15. The court were
      far from concluding that the Coroner wrongly exercised his discretion as to
      whom he should call to give evidence.

5.3   The Court’s conclusions were that the inquisition was correctly completed, the
      Coroner’s direction to the Jury was impeccable, and there was no good reason
      for ordering a new inquest. In fact the court queried the purpose of a fresh
      inquest. Criticism of the police had been firmly levelled by the Taylor Report
      and the police had admitted fault and paid compensation. It was doubted that
      more would be learned from the further examination o f the last minutes of the
      lives of the deceased. It was accepted that the families were pursuing the
      matter because of their deep instinct to know the circumstances in which their
      relatives died but the objective view and considering the interest of all
      involved was that this was not a case for ordering fresh inquests.

5.4   The Court stated that the essential complaint made against the Coroner was
      that having introduced evidence from the various pathologists into the causes
•
                     and probable time-scale of the deaths, he proceeded to limit or exclude
                     evidence from the main inquest which might have led the Jury to form a
                     different conclusion. In fact the Coroner led further evidence that might have
                     persuaded pathologists to form different conclusions than those previously
                     expressed, as well as exploring in the presence of the Jury      an alternative
                     factual basis for the pathologists’ conclusions.

            5.5      It was said that there was clear evidence that bodily functions may continue
                     and give a semblance of life when the prior occurrence of brain death renders
                     the existence of life unlikely, if not impossible. The overwhelming burden of
                     evidence was that there was no prolongation of life beyond the period o f about
                     10 minutes from the occurrence of the injury which lead to asphyxia.




    MMS/246.97.V02
                                                   14
6        REVIEW O F ALLEGATIONS: VIDEO EVIDENCE

         6.1     The allegations and comments made by Trevor Hicks, Alun Jones QC and
                 Roger Houldsworth are overlapping, but the only ‘new’ evidence comes from
                 the last named. The others take inferences from and make representations
                 about that particular evidence as well as evidence already heard at either the
                 Taylor Enquiry or the Coroner’s Hearing. In essence they are saying that
                 because the Jury or the Divisional Court did not have the benefit of Mr.
                 Houldsworth’s evidence nor of hearing argument on the proper inferences to
                 be made based on that evidence, there should be a full investigation leading
                 to a re-opening of the inquests or enquiry. They are also saying that the ‘new
                 evidence’ supports the allegation of the suppression of video evidence by the
                 police.

         6.2     On the 13th March 1997 I held a full day’s conference with Chief
                 Superintendent Lowe of South Yorkshire Police at his Sheffield office. I was
                 able to view original video tapes exhibited to the Taylor Enquiry and also
                 those shown at the Coroner’s Hearing. I had access to the transcripts of those
                 hearings and original witness statements which had not been exhibited but
                 were unused material. This report is concerned with 4 video tapes; TB/1 and
                 TB/2 which were exhibited to the Taylor Enquiry, the Coroner’s Exhibit C539
                 and the video recording that was generally known as the ‘compilation tape’.
                 TB/1 and TB/2 were the original tapes taken from the two police video
                 recorders in their control room above the Leppings Lane Terraces. There
                 were 5 television screens showing views from the 5 roving cameras fixed at
                 high points on the stands and directed both inside and outside the ground.
                 There was also a master screen which flicked in rotation from one camera
                 view to another and which made one of the two video recordings. A further
                 screen was connected to the second video recorder which could be switched
                 between the five main cameras as required by the operator. P.C. Bichard was
                 tasked with the operation of the video recorders as directed by his superior
                 officers. The tapes could record in two ways, that of continuous movement
                 or normal play, and of time-lapse where a different still frame was shown
                 every half second. This latter procedure gave a rather jerky sequence of
                 pictures but allowed for the longer use of any particular tape.

         6.3     At the end of the day the video tapes from the two recorders were secured and
                 eventually featured as evidence obtained during the police investigation of the
                 disaster.

         6.4     The Exhibit List produced for the Taylor Enquiry has document number 109
                 described as containing recordings from 5 separate locations at regular
                 intervals and that the material is of relevance. A copy of 109 shows it to be
                 a VHS video tape reference TB/1. TB being the initials of P.C. Bichard, the
                 video operator. Document 110 is described as a two part film of various
                 locations also containing relevant material. A copy of 110 shows it to be two
                 VHS video tapes reference TB/2 parts 1 and 2. See Appendices 2 and 3.


MMS/246.97.V02
                                               15
         6.5     TB/1 and 2 are described in detail in the video schedule prepared for the
                 Taylor Enquiry. (Appendix 4). TB/1 switches between the various police
                 cameras at intervals of 1 minute between the times 13.02 and 14.02.
                 However there are no views from camera 5 overlooking Leppings Lane
                 Terraces. The video recording TB/1 then appears to be under manual
                 operation and only shows the camera 5 viewpoint for a total of approximately
                 5 minutes between the times 14.59 to 15.04.

        6.6      TB/2 is switching between four of the police cameras, including camera 5, at
                 approximately 20 second intervals. It starts at 11.59 and ends just before
                 15.35. A new schedule prepared for me by the West Yorkshire Police
                 showed that the views from camera 5 feature on 41 occasions up until 15.00.
                 (Appendix 5). The final part of this tape from 15.03 until the end is the
                 camera 5 view of the fence behind the goal area where fans can be seen
                 climbing over onto the pitch, followed by some footage from a camera across
                 the pitch.

        6.7      I am informed by Dr. Stefan Popper, the Coroner for the Hillsborough
                 Inquests, that all the exhibits prepared for the Taylor Enquiry were made
                 available to the legal representatives at the Inquest. The police say that
                 material required for each day was placed in a side room to the hearings. The
                 rest o f the Unused Material, including Taylor Enquiry documents were kept
                 at a local police station (Nechells Green), where access was given to any
                 legal representatives that required it. Much of this material was unused at the
                 Inquest including Exhibits TB/1 and 2. A ‘compilation’ (Taylor Enquiry
                 Document 142) was edited from the footage made available by the police, club
                 and media. That particular video included little of TB/1 and 2 as much more
                 striking coverage of events was obtained from the other sources. None of the
                 TB/2 footage from camera 5 after 15.04 was shown on it. This compilation
                 was also seen by the Jury (Inquest Reference C278). See Appendix 6.

        6.8      During the hearing on the 13th March 1991, the Coroner said that the Jury
                 had twice asked about the video evidence of the Terraces. He stated that the
                 videos had been looked at and there was actually next to nothing on them
                 because not everything was recorded; there was a tiny bit on the compilation
                 tape, with another little bit which started at 15.03 and went on for a few
                 minutes. He said that it had been clipped and will be shown to the Jury but
                 was of poor quality and he did not think it would help very much.

         6.9     On the 15th March, Exhibit C539 was shown to the Jury. It was produced by
                 a P.S. Killoch who said that he had taken a short sequence from one of the
                 South Yorkshire Police videos showing scenes of the Leppings Lane pens, that
                 is, the West Stand. The sequence, most of which was in time-lapse, began
                 at 15.02. After the video was shown to the hearing, it was identified as being
                 C539 and P.S. Killoch stated that the original identification was TB/1, being
                 the West Midlands Police reference. No comment was made by any person
                 as to the quality of this specific footage.


MMS/246.97.V02
                                               16
         Reviewing Lawyers Comments

         6.10    The original police video tapes exhibited to the Taylor Enquiry as TB/1 and
                 TB/2 are still in existence and are in the hands of the West Yorkshire Police.
                 Two original master copies of C539, that were taken from the master copy of
                 TB/2, are also with the West Yorkshire Police. One of these was produced
                 by P.S. Killoch to the Coroner’s Hearing and was shown to the Jury. My
                 assessment of this particular footage is that whilst it is reasonably clear, the
                 position and angle of the view from the camera makes any assessment of
                 overcrowding in the centre pens to be difficult if not impossible. If the
                 camera had been panned or its angle of view increased then more might have
                 been seen in those crucial minutes after 15.03.

         6.11    As TB/1 and 2 were available to the Taylor Enquiry, it cannot be said that
                 they were suppressed. All of the enquiry exhibits were known to legal teams
                 involved at the Inquest. I have seen copies of correspondence between the
                 police and other organisations (Hillsborough Steering Committee and Borough
                 of Sefton) concerning video footage. This shows that access was granted at
                 Nechells Green Police station during May to August 1989 to the interested
                 parties (including Mr. Trevor Hicks) to view video evidence in police hands.
                 A police incident room message (see Appendix 7) dated 24/5/89 is a note of
                 a telephone conversation between an Inspector Layton and a D .C.I. Tope to
                 the effect that solicitors acting for Sheffield Wednesday Football Club had
                 been given permission to view video footage referred to as TB2/A/Part 4.
                 This is the footage of the Leppings Lane Terraces between 15.03 and 15.25
                 and the evidence alleged to have been suppressed. I am also satisfied that this
                 particular recording was therefore available for the purpose of the Inquest.I
                 am satisfied that while TB/1 and 2 were not themselves shown to the Jury, the
                 ‘compilation ’ and C539 videos were.

         6.12    C539 covers most of the camera 5 footage between 15.03 and 15.25 and was
                 shown to the Jury during the evidence of P.S. Killoch. However it can be
                 seen that the officer makes a mistake when he describes the exhibit as having
                 the original identification of TB/1. My viewing confirms that the material
                 contained within C539 comes from Exhibit TB/2 and agrees with the relevant
                 schedule (Appendix 4).

         6.13    The HFSG have provided a copy tape to the CPS which is said to be the one
                 shown to the Inquest Jury. It is in fact what appears to be a re-recording of
                 C539 that is of poor quality as accepted by Alun Jones QC in his opinion. I
                 am satisfied that the Jury saw the best copy available, that is, one of the two
                 original tapes taken from the master TB/2. This particular tape was referred
                 to by the Coroner as follows (transcript of 13th March 1990):-

                 "I do not think it is worth starting before lunch, but there is just one thing
                 which the Jury have mentioned to me. In fact they have mentioned it twice,
                 and that is what about the video evidence at the terraces. I have the videos
                 looked at and there is actually next to nothing on the videos because of

MMS/246.97.V02
                                               17
•
                     course, not everything was recorded. That does not mean to say they were
                     not possibly scenes but there is, I understand, a little tiny bit which is actually
                     in the compilation which you have seen. There is another little bit which
                     starts at 15.03 and goes on for a few minutes. What we have done is that we
                     have clipped it, if that is the right word, and we will show it to you, but it is
                     a very poor quality and I do not think it is going to help us very much. As
                     far as I can tell there isn’t much recorded. Does that help?"

             6.14    On the 15th March, prior to the C539 footage being shown to the Jury, the
                     Coroner said:-

                     "We are going to press on today, but what I want to do is you will remember
                     you were asking about the video, and I think we will show this video now of
                     the scene as far as we have got it at Leppings Lane. In fact, it was, of
                     course, taken by Mr. Bichard so it is a convenient time to actually look at it,
                     but I am going to get Mr. Killoch who has actually selected the piece out that
                     we need to describe it."

             6.15    The relevant parts of the transcript are exhibited at Appendix 8, with the
                     Exhibit list at Appendix 9.

             6.16    I have ascertained that the Coroner had authorised the recording by video tape
                     of all the main inquest proceedings. There are 186 tapes in all. The cameras
                     view point (from a higher level gallery) shows the Coroner, Jury, witness
                     stand and lawyers benches as well as the bottom part of the large video
                     screen. From the relevant tape I can confirm that C539 was shown in its
                     entirety and at one stage early in the viewing the Coroner remarks "I think we
                     can recognise him", presumably with reference to some un-named person on
                     the terraces. This remark is not noted in the transcript.

             6.17    The points I note from the above are that:

                     •      C539 was a 13 minute excerpt of camera 5 ’s view of the Leppings
                            Lane pens and was shown to the Inquest Jury. C539 was taken from
                            police video TB/2 (not TB/1 as stated by P.S. Killoch).

                     •      P.C. Bichard and other officers gave evidence of their perception that
                            monitor pictures from camera 5 were not of good quality, and that
                            they therefore disregarded them, especially as their attention prior to
                            15.03 was focused on the obvious danger area at the entrance gates.

                     •      The Coroner told the Jury that having had the videos (presumably
                            TB/1 and TB/2) looked at, a little bit starting at 15.03 and going on
                            for a few minutes (to 15.25) had been clipped and it would be shown
                            to them. He said that this tape was of very poor quality and would not
                            help very much.

                     •      The ‘new evidence’ from Mr. Houldsworth is that from his perception
    MMS/246.97.V02
                                                    18
•
                            the tape was of good quality and overcrowding in the pens could be
                            clearly seen. He therefore strongly disagrees with the police evidence
                            concerning the use of camera 5.

             6.18    On the 1st April 1997, South Yorkshire Police released a press statement
                     following a report in that mornings Daily M irror paper. They stated that the
                     tape from a CCTV camera showing the terraces had never been missing and
                     was made available to both the Taylor Enquiry and the Inquest. The
                     confusion over missing tapes seemed to arise from the fact that two tapes
                     recorded at the ground on the Club’s own CCTV system had gone missing
                     from a locked room. Neither tape was relevant to the enquiry.

             6.19    The HFSG response of the 7th April to us was that footage from camera 5 did
                     go missing and therefore could not be shown to the Inquest Jury. They said
                     that P.C. Bichard in his evidence confirmed that shots from camera 5 had
                     been recorded prior to 15.02 and he could not explain why relevant footage
                     could not be found. The HFSG also showed concern as to their understanding
                     that South Yorkshire Police were in a position to ‘select’ evidence for
                     admission to either the Taylor Enquiry or the Inquest, rather than the West
                     Midlands police who were the investigators. They make the point that the
                     South Yorkshire Police have changed tack in accepting that camera 5 was
                     indeed in working order, but that this is contrary to the evidence of P.C .s
                     Bichard and Ryan and P.S. Goddard who all disparaged the capability o f that
                     camera. The camera could pan, tilt and zoom and produce pictures of
                     sufficient quality and detail to identify facial features. They considered the
                     police are now alleging that it was the quality o f the transmission via the
                     monitors rather than the camera which was the problem. As regards the
                     stolen tapes, while the HFSG accept that they showed nothing of probative
                     value, the fact is that they were taken from a locked cupboard in an alarmed
                     and locked room with a massive police presence at the ground over-night.
                     The security could not have been breached by a stranger. The South
                     Yorkshire Police cannot dismiss the matter so lightly as clearly the thief
                     thought he/she was stealing something of value. We are then asked to take
                     these comments into account before coming to a decision.




    MMS/246.97.V02
                                                   19
7        REPO RT: VIDEO EVIDENCE

         Allegations m ade by Trevor Hicks:-

         7.1     (Refer to 3.1) It cannot be proved to the required standard that P.C .s Bichard
                 and Ryan gave false evidence. Their perception of the camera 5 footage was
                 based on the monitor picture within the police control room not on a viewing
                 of any video recording. They consider that as the pictures were of poor
                 quality they would therefore disregard them. P .C . Bichard stated in his
                 evidence to the Inquest that the pictures on the large screen there were clearer
                 than on the control room monitor. This would support the proposition that
                 regardless of any previous fault on the camera there was a lack o f picture
                 quality due to a monitor problem. Even so the Coroner considered that C539
                 was not of good quality (as opposed to Mr. Houldsworth’s different perception
                 of the quality). The tape was shown to the Jury and they, having also heard
                 the evidence of the police officers were able to make up their own minds as
                 to what the police in the control room could see o f the events unfolding both
                 at the turnstile and gates, and on the terraces. M r. Houldsworth’s evidence
                 in 1996 is that he could clearly see on the Club CCTV monitor that the pens
                 were full to over-crowding when the gate was opened leading to the fatal
                 crushing. His evidence from 1989 is not so precise, only that a dangerous
                 situation was developing. Here he says that it was not for two to three
                 minutes after going down onto the pitch and viewing the pens that he realised
                 the true situation and that there was not a pitch invasion. His later evidence
                 is therefore at variance with his early perceptions and may well have been
                 contaminated by subsequent events.

                 Findings: Any accusations of perjury or perverting the course o f justice
                 based on a witness perception differing from that o f the police officers, and
                 already considered by the Jury will not pass the evidential test.

         7.2     (Refer to 3.2). I accept that the editor of the ‘compilation video’ had access
                 to TB/1 and 2 as well as to all the many other tapes available. The Coroner
                 also accepts that C539 was a clipped part of another tape (TB/2). He said that
                 the Jury had twice mentioned video evidence o f the terraces. Because of that
                 he had had the videos looked at and C539 was then prepared. It was o f poor
                 quality and he did not think it would help very much.

                 Findings: The Jury’s request for footage o f the terraces was actioned by the
                 Coroner in what he obviously considered to be a satisfactory way. The
                 appropriate inference must be that TB/1 and 2 were looked at and that the
                 footage from Camera 5 prior to 14.30 was not considered to be of sufficient
                 relevance. There was no footage from that camera between 14.24 and 14.58,
                 the crucial time period where over-crowding began to occur. C 539 tape was
                 an edited version of TB/2 showing the pens between 15.03 and 15.16.

         7.3     (Refer to 3.3) The Jury viewed some of the relevant Camera 5 footage
                 between 15.03 and 15.16 and they came to their verdicts having considered
MMS/246.97.V02
                                               20
                 all the evidence put before them.


                 Findings: That the Jury did not see the last 9 Vi minutes of the camera 5
                 footage on TB/2 would not, in my opinion, have affected their overall
                 judgement and the decisions that they came to.

                 Allegations m ade by Alun Jones QC:-

         7.4     (Refer to 3.4) I have obtained copies of the Exhibit List to the Taylor
                 Enquiry showing that TB/1 and 2 were properly exhibited together with a
                 schedule breaking down the footage into details o f camera locations, timings,
                 and a description o f the scene shown. These tapes were available to the legal
                 representatives of the HFSG. Part of them was contained within the
                 ‘compilation video’. South Yorkshire Police have reported to me that all the
                 Taylor Enquiry material was available for the Inquest Hearings. A room in
                 the Inquest Building was set aside for original documents and all those exhibits
                 needed on a day to day basis. The remainder of the Exhibit material was kept
                 at the local police station and made available to the Coroner, lawyers and
                 certain of the families for viewing. I am awaiting a statement from a senior
                 officer concerned with those arrangements to confirm the police report.
                 However the previously mentioned correspondence (para 6.10) corroborates
                 that report. The Coroner, Dr. Popper, has also confirmed to me that all
                 Taylor Enquiry material was available.

                 Findings: I consider that there is no evidence to show that video tapes were
                 ever suppressed by the police or others. Counsel for the HFSG is obviously
                 confused as to which tapes went missing or were stolen. The two tapes that
                 were taken from the Club CCTV room were never recovered, but the police
                 video tapes have never been missing. I see no m erit in the HFSG intimation
                 that the police are in some way responsible for the theft of the two club tapes.
                 There is no evidence that this theft is of any relevance to the present review.

         7.5     (Refer to 3.5). Mr. Houldsworth has provided a copy of his statement made
                 on the 16th May 1989. He says how he re-designed and improved the
                 ground’s CCTV system, both for Club and Police use. He describes the 20
                 Club and 7 police monitors, 2 of the last being connected to video recorders.
                 He rectified a fault on one of the police cameras by re-adjusting the iris
                 controls. By 14.45 on the day he was able to see the build up of supporters
                 outside the turnstiles but while some stands were full the West Stand
                 (Leppings Lane Terraces) was only two thirds full. He commented to others
                 in the Club CCTV box that the kick off should be delayed to enable people
                 to get into the ground. Some time later he heard a radio request from a senior
                 police officer that a gate be opened in order to prevent deaths. A gate was
                 opened and a huge number of fans flooded the area. From the numbers
                 displayed on a monitor he realised that a dangerous situation was being
                 created. He went down to the pitch as the referee stopped the match. He saw
                 fans climbing over the West Stand fence and thought that there was a pitch

MMS/246.97.V02
                                               21
•
                     invasion. It was only after he watched for 2 to 3 minutes that he realised
                     what was really occurring. Later that afternoon he ejected the VCR tapes in
                     the club CCTV room (leaving them in the machines in the eject position) and
                     later locked the VCR cupboard and set the room’s alarm system. However
                     he did not specifically recall if all the tapes were still with each machine at
                     that time. He then asked a security guard (not police) to ensure that no one
                     entered the CCTV room. The next morning the room was still locked with
                     the alarm operative. He discovered that two tapes were missing, one from a
                     camera overlooking gates 9 to 16 and the other from an inactive VCR.

                     Findings: Mr. Houldsworth’s evidence concerns background material of the
                     CCTV workings and of a brief view of his perceptions. Other witnesses gave
                     similar evidence. The West Midlands Police Hillsborough Enquiry Master
                     Index shows that his statement was included within the investigation and was
                     therefore presented to the Taylor Enquiry. That he was not called to give live
                     evidence does not surprise me. I find no evidence of the deliberate
                     suppression of his statement nor of any police involvement with the two
                     missing tapes.

             7.6     (Refer to 3.6) The HFSG tapes are copies of those provided by the police to
                     Yorkshire Television at their request.

                     Findings: There is no evidence that the tapes TB/1 and 2 were ever involved
                     in a theft or had been improperly taken away.

             7.7     (Refer to 3.7) It would be well nigh impossible to prosecute a case involving
                     allegations of police lying (and therefore the perverting o f the course of
                     justice) based on the different perception o f one witness (Mr Houldsworth)
                     who did not view the actual police monitor showing the Leppings Lane
                     Terraces at the relevant times.

                     Findings: There is insufficient evidence to support the allegation.

             7.8     (Refer to 3.8) The TB/2 tapes were available in 1991 and 1993.

                     Findings: The tapes do not have the significance attributed to them by Alun
                     Jones.

             Allegations m ade by Roger Houldsw orth:-

             7.9     (Refer to 3.9.1 to 13) Most of his comments have been addressed in the
                     previous paragraphs where Trevor Hicks and Alun Jones QC tender their
                     version of the inferences to be taken from his ‘new evidence’. Roger
                     Houldsworth considers that Camera 5 was working properly and the evidence
                     of police officers, is, as he has put it, "not altogether truthful". He identifies
                     contradictions in the evidence of P.C. Bichard and generally denigrates the
                     perceptions of the police officers as to the capabilities of the camera. The
                     thrust of these comments as picked out by Mr. Hicks and Alun Jones QC must

    MMS/246.97.V02
                                                    22
•
                     Jones QC must be that these perceptions (and also the alleged loss of tapes)
                     are told as deliberate lies in order to cover up the gross negligence of the
                     police in the control room in not noticing the crush in the pens at an earlier
                     stage.

             7.10    Particular comment is made by him (at paragraph 3.9.9) that P.C. Bichard
                     was asked why there was no video material for Camera 5 before 15.02, and
                     that the officer could offer no explanation although he said that there would
                     have been a recording. As P.C. Bichard was not involved in exhibit
                     production I accept that he could not have had any explanation as to
                     unsupported allegations, re matters not under his control or within his
                     knowledge.

             7.11    M r Houldsworth goes on (paragraph 3.9.10) that there is only a time and date
                     imprinting on a recording if it is made at the normal speed. He is thus stating
                     that with a time-lapse mode there is no such imprint. This expert opinion of
                     his is patently false as the time-lapse recording between 15.03 and 15.25
                     clearly shows the time and date imprint.

             7.12    He says (at paragraph 3.9.13) that a Chief Inspector’s evidence contradicts
                     that of P.C. Ryan as to how satisfactory Camera 5 was. However the Chief
                     Inspector’s view from the Camera was a close up from a very short distance
                     while Camera 5 was focused at the far end of the pens between 15.03 and
                     15.25. As Mr. Houldsworth admits (see para 3.9.5) it would be difficult to
                     pick out facial features while events are happening.

                     Findings: Mr. Houldsworth’s evidence and comments are generally a matter
                     of his perception versus that of the police officers. I do not consider that it
                     any way comes close to the sufficiency required for obtaining a realistic
                     prospect of conviction on the criminal allegations. The police have fully
                     admitted civil liability and an extension of their negligence into the realms of
                     criminal misconduct by way of an alleged cover up operation is not tenable
                     on the evidence available.




    MMS/246.97.V02
                                                    23
8        REVIEW O F M EDICAL EVIDENCE

         8.1     While any application by the HFSG for a re-opening of the Inquest based on
                 new medical evidence is within the province of the Home Office, Alun Jones
                 QC does allege at paragraph 11 of his opinion that Dr. Walker’s evidence was
                 concealed. In which case there must be consideration of that evidence going
                 towards the offence of Perverting the Course of Justice. The HFSG
                 intimation must be of a Conspiracy to Pervert the Court of Justice by the two
                 police forces involved, the West Midlands and South Yorkshire Police, and
                 also by the Coroner if it can be shown that he knew of the evidence o f Dr.
                 Walker.

         8.2     Dr. Walker’s evidence:    The HFSG have produced in their Annex F the
                 following documents :-

                 8.2.1   Dr. Walker’s undated statements (which are not in the Criminal Justice
                         Act format) re the events at Hillsborough.

                 8.2.2 A letter of the 3rd May 1989 from a Hospital Consultant (Mr.
                       Wardrope) describing how Dr. Walker (a Senior House Officer in
                       Anaesthetics) was instrumental in bringing speedy treatment and
                       resuscitation to patients on the 15th April 1989.

                 8.2.3 A standard form letter of the 15th June 1989 from the same consultant
                       to (presumably) Dr. Walker warning him that he may be asked to give
                       a statement to the police for the benefit o f the Coroner.

                 8.2.4 A letter of the 3rd May 1989 thanking Dr. Walker for his report and
                       the work he did.

                 8.2.5 A letter of the 8th February 1997 from Dr. Walker to that consultant
                       stating that Mr. Philip Hammond (junior) was the first victim that he
                       attempted to resuscitate. He asks why he was not contacted by the
                       police to provide an official statement or to appear at the inquest. He
                       confirms his statement made to the consultant in that Philip Hammond
                       had sinus rhythm and cardiac output which was obviously at odds with
                       Dr. Slater’s evidence.

                 8.2.6 Dr. Walker’s letter of the 13th February 1997 to the British Medical
                       Journal asking for contact to be made with other Doctors who were
                       involved on the day but not asked to provide statements.

         8.3     The question for consideration is whether or not the alleged omission in not
                 taking his statement was done with criminal intent so as to suppress his
                 evidence because, for example, it would have embarrassed the police or led
                 to a different verdict from the Jury.

         8.4     The Judicial Review of the Medical Evidence found that the pathologists who

MMS/246.97.V02
                                               24
•
                     were Drs. Gumpert, Dr. Slater and Professor Usher, were as one in that once
                     a victim’s chest was fixed (when crushing occurs) then irrecoverable brain
                     damage will ensue in 4 to 6 minutes. The court’s conclusions have been
                     noted above.

             8.5     Dr. Walker’s statement begins with his description of how he came to
                     volunteer his services to the Northern General Hospital when he hears of
                     problems at Hillsborough Stadium. On arrival at the Hospital he went to the
                     Casualty Department to be told that a paediatric cardiac arrest was coming in.
                     The first child received was in cardio-respiratory standstill and he with others
                     instigated routine cardio-pulmonary resuscitation. There was evidence of gross
                     inhalation of stomach contents and as far as he could recall sinus rhythm and
                     cardiac output was established, although the boy’s pupils were fixed and
                     dilated. He believed that the boy had since died. A second child arrived in
                     cardio-pulmonary arrest during resuscitation of the first patient. Similar
                     measures were carried out and this child was also brought back into sinus
                     rhythm with a good output though he again had fixed dilated pupils throughout
                     and has since died. Dr. Walker then continues in the statement with details
                     of other victims that he dealt with and which are not relevant for the purposes
                     of this review. The statement does not give patient names.

                     Findings:

             8.6     I do not consider that Dr. Walker’s observations as made in his personal
                     statement of 1989 and the letters of 1987 comprise such vital new evidence as
                     to show that the life of Philip Hammond continued after the cut off period of
                     15.15.

             8.7     Dr. Walker contends that he was not asked to make a statement by the police
                     (whether it be the West Midlands or West Yorkshire (sic) police as he states
                     in two different letters). However the police file which I have seen contains
                     Dr. Walker’s original manuscript statement of the 20th July 1989 as obtained
                     by the West Midlands Police Force. Each page is signed by him and
                     witnessed by two other persons. It is somewhat different to his undated
                     personal statement which is said to have been made in 1989. In the police
                     statement he says that he attended to the first casualty to arrive, a boy he
                     knows only as ‘Lee’ and who he believed was declared brain dead in the
                     Intensive Care Unit two days later. This patient was in cardio-pulmonary
                     arrest with fixed dilated pupils. The heart had stopped beating but the medical
                     team managed to re-establish normal rhythm. While the boy was being
                     treated the second victim arrived also in cardio-pulmonary arrest. This boy
                     was also established in a normal sinus heart rhythm but again the pupils were
                     fixed and dilated throughout and it is believed that the boy has since died.
                     The description given by Dr. Walker of the second boy fits that of the victim
                     Philip Hammond.

             8.8     The Doctor’s evidence concerning these first two victims shows that both
                     arrived without apparent signs of life. Although a normal heart rhythm was

    MMS/246.97.V02
                                                   25
                 established it could not be sustained and the two boys eventually died. I
                 understand that Lee’s bodily functions were maintained for two days as he was
                 to be an organ donor.

         8.9     However, the doctor’s letter of 8th February 1997 to Mr. Wardrope says that
                 Philip Hammond was the first victim that he attempted to resuscitate. That
                 recollection is presumably based on the undated 1989 personal statement.
                 Here he describes the establishment of sinus rhythm and cardiac output in the
                 first two victims he treated (no names are given) and that both had fixed and
                 dilated pupils throughout and subsequently were believed to have died.

         8.10 A police action message dated 2nd April 1990 shows that an officer was
               directed to contact Dr. Walker and warn him that he may be required to
              attend the Inquest. The Doctor’s contact telephone number was to be
              obtained. There is a manuscript note of a telephone number on this message.
              The result of the above action is noted that the doctor was not required.

         8.11 The statement of Mr. James Wardrope (a consultant in Accident and
               Emergency Medicine at the Northern General Hospital) dated 6th June 1989
               gives details of various Hillsborough patients as contained within the medical
               records in his possession and the post mortem evidence provided by the
              Coroner. The paragraph concerning Philip Hammond is as follows:-

                 "There is no definite documentary evidence in the medical notes that Mr.
                 Hammond received resuscitation, but the post mortem states that there were
                 three ECG electrodes attached to his chest. I would interpret this as being
                 probable he did enter the resuscitation room of the Northern General Hospital,
                 but a cardiac tracing showed no cardiac activity and in view of the large
                 number of patients present at the time, resuscitation attempts were not taken
                 any further".

         8.12    His comments concerning a Lee Nichol are as follows:-

                 "This young boy was brought in as a cardiac-arrest. Resuscitation resulted in
                 return of normal cardiac output, but he did not breathe on his own. He was
                 therefore transferred to the General Intensive Care Unit and I believe he died
                 on the Intensive Care Unit three days later".

         8.13    Later in the statement Mr. Wardrope says that no patient admitted in the state
                 of cardiac arrest had survived.

         8.14    In his evidence to the Coroner’s Hearing, this consultant confirmed that there
                 was no documentary evidence as to what had happened with Philip Hammond
                 apart from the post-mortem report concerning the electrode marks. He was
                 asked to give his best guess as to how that may have happened and replied:-

                 "In the initial part of the incident I was sending people who came in with a
                 cardiac arrest, patients undergoing mouth to mouth resuscitation and external

MMS/246.97.V02
                                               26
•
                     cardiac massage, I sent to the resuscitation room initially to see whether they
                     could have a chance of being brought found to start the heart going. The fact
                     that the only post-mortem evidence were three ECG electrodes, I think
                     possibly he was sent to the resuscitation room but the ECG showed no cardiac
                     activity, and because of the great pressure on the resuscitation beds at that
                     time he would be sent to the mortuary."

             8.15    A P.C. Taylor who was at the football ground gave evidence that he
                     approached a youth who was identified as Philip Hammond and who was lying
                     on the ground and appeared to be unconscious. He took the boy to an
                     ambulance and attempted to revive him with the assistance of others. Heart
                     massage was performed and they were able to re-start the heart and feel a
                     pulse. However it is said by the officer that later at the hospital, the doctor
                     could not detect signs of life after 20 minutes of resuscitation.

             8.16    The West Midlands Police report for the coroner concerning the death of
                     Philip Hammond contains further evidence. A statement from a Dr. Doore
                     refers to a body number 93 which is the deceased reference number for Philip
                     Hammond. She says that this body was one of 11 casualties that she
                     examined on being brought into the hospital. In total she examined 11
                     casualties that day, found no signs of life in any, and in her opinion all were
                     dead on arrival at the hospital. In a later statement she confirms that one of
                     the persons she examined was Philip Hammond. Dr. David Slater conducted
                     the autopsy of Philip Hammond and his conclusions were that the injuries
                     were consistent with a severe intensive blunt compression of the chest
                     especially on the right side.

             8.17    Based on the above findings I consider that there has been no suppression of
                     medical evidence by either the police or other persons as alleged by Alun
                     Jones. I agree that Dr. Walker’s evidence conflicts with that of Dr. Slater,
                     however it also conflicts with that of every other witness who has made a
                     statement concerning Philip Hammond. Alun Jones states that it is difficult
                     to exaggerate the significance of the concealment of Dr. Walker’s evidence,
                     a remark that I find to be completely misguided when the overall evidence is
                     considered. That this evidence tended to exculpate the South Yorkshire
                     authorities and the police from blame may well be because there was no
                     evidence to inculpate those organisations. I cannot accept the intimation that
                     there was misconduct in the selections by the West Midlands Police of the
                     evidence to put before the Coroner.

             8.18    Consideration should be given to allowing either Dr. Slater or Professor Usher
                     to comment on what Dr. Walker has now said.




    MMS/246.97.V02
                                                   27
9        RECOM MENDATIONS

         9.1     There are no grounds for the Crown Prosecution Service to recommend to the
                 Home Office that there should be further investigation of criminal allegations
                 against the police or other persons.

         9.2     Alun Jones QC has requested the meeting with a senior lawyer of the CPS to
                 allow him to expand upon his advice. I note the Chief Crown Prosecutor’s
                 initial reaction is to refuse based on the fact that there are only powers to
                 invite the police to investigate the matter further. I appreciate the difficulties
                 which the HFSG has where the allegations of criminal conduct are made
                 against the police forces involved in the Hillsborough Investigation. My
                 overall view is that no new material has been put before us. It would be
                 politic to explain any reasons for our decision to the HFSG or at least to their
                 legal representatives. However, perhaps this should be done by the officers
                 of the Police Policy Directorate at the Home Office following consultation as
                 to the handling of the reporting of any decisions made in this matter.




G .R .C .
8th May 1997




MMS/246.97.V02
                                                28
