   •»« ■m ?if       ®01?1 m       8450                                                          UNITED HOUSE              11001/002




                                                                                                             CPS
                                                                                                             CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                             50 Ludgate HiU
                                                                                                             London EC4M 7EX


                                                                                                Suiitehbaard; 0171-273 8000
                                                                                                      DX No: 300850 Ludgate EC4
                                                1
 Keva Coombes Esq.,
                                                                                                      273 8450
 Legal Advisor
 Hillsborough Family Support Group
                                                                          D ina Line; 0171-           273 8099
 1st Floor
 Central Buildings                                                      Our Reference:                YBFi'3341/89
 41 North John Street
^Liverpool L2 6RR                               J                       Your Reference:


                                                                                                      11 August 1998




  Dear Sir,
  RE: HILLSBOROUGH: ADLINGTON -v- DUCKENFIELD and MURRAY

  Your letter of 4 August 1998 addressed to the Director of PubUc Prosecutions^has been
  passed to me for reply in the absence of the Director herself and the Chief Crown Prosecutor
  for CPS Central Casework.
  You raise two issues, the first of which concerns the storage of original sutements. I do
  appreciate your concerns about the propriety of the South Yorkshire Police holding the
  originals, particularly as they were not the investigating force.

  In most cases, the normal practice is that the police retain the originals of witness statements
  until they are required for the purposes of committal proceedings or trial at the magistrates
  court The CPS does not usually receive them until they are so required. (There are some
  exceptions where, for historical reasons, the police send the original statements at an earlier
  stage). This practice applies in all cases even where police officers themselves are the
  defendants or potential defendants.

   In the Hillsborough case, the matter is obviously sensitive, but it is not different in principle
   to cases where police officers have been investigated by their own force.

   The West Midlands Police carried out the investigation in this case but I understand that
   currently they have no involvement in the matter.

   The Crown Prosecution Service has no formal standing in the case at the moment as we
   decided some time ago not to commence proceedings ourselves. We are^onslde^ W^®*f
   to take over the prosecution you have launched but we have not yet m a d e a decmon In the
   a S e o f any formal role at this stage, I am not in a position to make any request for
   alternative measures in relation to the safe keeping of the original papers.




                          s*                    » I Wn*hiyitt f i r   the. 1   7   1   o f ItiSttGG
* ^.1/08 '98   14:18     © 0 17 1 273 8450                                   UNITED HOUSE       % 002/002


                                                      chief Constable of South Y ortah.re Police,
                                 anv cancems with the u u e i v-v
        I suggest that you         y                               -.i™, whether to take over and

        The second

                                                                    -j       -   *• c“      crown
                              C e n S Casework and the          personaHy.


         I hope this reply is helpful-

         Yours faithfully




          S S £ K ? £ w           CROWN PROSECUTOR
                                                                                      tV% «




                                                            *    s     £     >


Keva Coombes Esq.,
Legal Advisor
Hillsborough Family Support Group
1st Floor
Central Buildings
41 North John Street                                                          ybf/3341/89
Liverpool 12 6RR


                                                                                 August 1998



Dear Sir,

RE: HILLSBOROUGH: ADLINGTON -v- DUCKENFIELD and MURRAY

Your letter of 4 August 1998 addressed to the Director of Public Prosecutions has been
passed to me for reply in the absence of the Director herself and the Chief Crown Prosecutor
for CPS Central Casework.


You raise two issues, the first of which concerns the storage of original statements. I <Xq
appreciate thafc-youflaave. concerns rqgarciMg the propriety of the South Yorkshire Police
                                            OLA
holding the originals, particularly Soaring in mind that they were not the investigating force.


In most cases, the normal practice is that the police retain the originals of witness statements
until they are required for the purposes of committal proceedings or trial at the magistrates’
court. The CPS does not usually receive them until they are so required. (There are some
exceptions where, for historical reasons, the police send the original statements at an earlier
stage). This practice applies ev^w ^re*police officers themselves are the defendants.*^            .



In the Hillsborough case, the matter is obviously sensitive, but is not different in principle
to cases where police officers have been investigated by their own force.
                                                                                        CMfrlk
The West Midlands Police carried out the investigation in this case but I understand that they
have no ciwfeat involvement in the matter.


The Crown Prosecution Service has no formal standing in the case at the moment as we
decided some time ago not to commence proceedings ourselves. We are considering whether          ^

to take over the prosecution you have launched but not yet made a decision. In the absence
                                                    yV


of any formal role at this stage, I am not in a position to make any request for alternative
measures in relation to the safe keeping of the original papers.


I suggest that you raise any concerns with the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police.


The second issue you raise relates to who will take the decision whether to take over and
discontinue your private prosecution. A report will be prepared by Mr Croston, the lawyer
who is assigned to the case, after he has finished reviewing the evidence. Once that report
has been prepared, there will be consultation with the Chief Crown Prosecutor for CPS
Central Casework and the Director personally.


I hope this reply is helpful.


Yours faithfully




M Kennedy
Assistant Chief Crown Prosecutor
