                                                                                mR           0   RiNCPfOTH

Press Summary                                                                                CPS

                               WEDNESDAY 2nd APRIL 1997

1. CPS studying Hillsborough tapes (1-3)
The CPS yesterday confirmed it was studying video footage of the Hillsborough tragedy,
which shows the disaster unfolding on surveillance cameras. The CPS said it was paying
urgent attention to the tape, sent by the Hillsborough Family Support Group, saying that
"the nature and volume of the material has generated further consideration". It has
promised the families a swift response to their calls for the case to be re-opened.
Independent p4 also Guardian p5, Daily Star p2, Times p2, Daily Mail pl7, Daily Mirror
p ll

2. Reconviction rates (4)
Only a misuse of the government’s latest figures on reconviction rates prove ’prison
works’, says Paul Cavadino.
Guardian pS2

3. TV doubt over IRA bomb suspect (5)
Manfred Schmidt, one of the chief witnesses in the case against Roisin McAliskey, has
appeared in a television programme on the ARD network and cast doubt on his own
evidence. However, the Federal Prosecutor’s office in Karlsruehe insisted that the case
would still go ahead. The CPS said yesterday that it was unaware of the ARD programme
and had not been contacted by the authorities in Karlsruehe.
Guardian p2

4. Police set national pav scale for informers (6-6a)
Detectives are to fix a national pay scale for police informers in an attempt to bring
proper accounting to the practice. Tips will be valued using a points system agreed by all
forces. Plans for the scale have been drawn up by a working party within the Association
of Chief Police Officers and will be put to a conference of senior detectives this week.
Times p i, Guardian p6

5. Woman is named as new chief constable (7-8)
Elizabeth Neville became the second woman to be promoted to the rank of chief constable
yesterday, when she took control of the Wiltshire force on the retirement of its present
chief, Walter Girven.
Times p2 also Daily Telegraph pll , Daily Mail pl5

6. Former chief of Resort Hotels jailed (9-13)
Mr Robert Feld, the former managing director of Resort Hotels, was jailed for eight
years at Middlesex Guildhall Crown Court yesterday for a £20m fraud on the company’s
shareholders. He was also disqualified as a company director for 10 years.
Financial Times pl2 also Times p25, Daily Telegraph p31, Independent p21, Daily Mail
p56, Guardian p22, Daily Express p57




                                     For press cuttings please contact:
             The Press Office, Crown Prosecution Service, 50 Ludgate Hill, London EC4M 7EX
                                         T el: 0171-273 S I27
7. ’Rat Boy’ jailed for four years (14-17a)
Teenage criminal Anthony Kennedy, known until now only as ’Rat Boy’, was sentenced
to four years at a young offenders’ institution by Newcastle Crown Court yesterday after
admitting two burglaries.
Times p4 also Daily Telegraph pl4, Daily Mail p6, Daily Star pl4, Daily Mirror pll,
Guardian p6

8. Headmaster suspended for allegedly hitting pupils (18)
Primary school headmaster Kevin Crabb has been suspended from his job at Wawne
Primary School, near Hull, after allegedly hitting two pupils. Mr Crabb was interviewed
by police after a boy aged nine claimed he was slapped across the face. A file is being
prepared for the CPS.
Daily Mail p2

9. Armed bus driver stuns raider (19)
Manchester bus driver Robert Amos may face prosecution after allegedly firing a replica
gun at a teenage raider. The teenager, who fell from the bus, is being questioned by the
police.
Guardian p5

10. Television review (20)
Roy Hattersley reviews last night’s Rough Justice programme on BBC1.
Daily Express p69             !

11. Letters (21)
Lay magistrates
Letters on the training of lay magistrates.
Times p21
