                Kings Court, 12 King Street, Leeds, LSI 2HL. Telephone 0113 2832500.
            Facsimile 0113 2459412. D o cu m en t Exchange 12051 Leeds 24, Email info@walkermorris.co.uk
                                         Web: http://www.walkerrnorris.co.uk


For the attention of George R Croston                                                     Our ref               R B M M /T /M IJR R A Y
Prosecution Team Leader
Crown Prosecution Service                                                                 Your ref              YOF/3341/98
Central Casework
D.X. 65204 YORK 6                                                                          13 January 1999




Dear Sirs

ADLINGTON -V- DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

We acknowledge receipt of your letter of the 12th January. We regret that we have to
significantly differ with you about the conversation of the 21st December. At no time was it
said that the decision to be taken in London was whether a reply would be given at all. When
we returned to the meeting and to Court following the conversation, it was on the clear
understanding that we were to have a substantive response by the 24th December. If it had
been otherwise we could not have given the assurances to the Stipendiary Magistrate as to the
time within which we expected to be able to lodge our application for the judicial review.
That application will either have to say that you have refiised to give a substantive answer
despite a request, or it will deal with the answer that you give. It is as a direct consequence
of the fact that we have no answer that at the moment we find it impossible to complete our
application.

At no time, until your telephone call of the 7th January, has it ever been suggested that it
would not be usual for such detailed reasons to be given. We would submit that the fact that
such comment was not made by you or invited by us earlier, is our clear understanding that
reasons were drafted and would be given. How can one possibly explain why you have
actually drafted reasons and submitted these to London for approval, if you felt it was not
usual for such detailed reasons to be given. Surely you would have said “I will ask London
whether they want me to give reasons, because it is not usual to do so”. You of course agree
that there was no such conversation.

As to what a Divisional Court will do, that seems to us not to be relevant at this moment.

We note, for the record, that as at the 13th January we still have no substantive response to
the request of the 18th December 1998.




R.B. Maiming
Partner                                                                                                                               C A ^ E l'V O R X
                                                                                                                                      ~      i ’ ;i S ' *

                                                                                                                                              j 4-iKi I     ,,;jj




H:\WP\CRIM-MAT\RBM\REVIEW\MURRAY20.LET\13 January 1999
                                                                                                                                                     S i? f K


         A list o f the partners names is open to inspection a t the above address. Regulated by The Law Society in the conduct o f investm ent business.
