                                00V") fXT HA fc>                    O^AAicklJ^"

                                                                          YaM         o H j^ cJ^ qa

                                C5P-9'
Keva Coombes Esq.
Legal Advisor                                                              273 8450
Hillsborough Family Support Group
1st Floor                                                                  273 8099
Central Buildings
41 North John Street                                                      YBF/3341/89
LIVERPOOL L2 6RR



                                                                          25 August 1998




Dear Sir

RE: HILLSBOROUGH: ADLINGTON -v- DUCKENFIELD and MURRAY

Thank you for your letter of 17 August and enclosures, and I apologise for my delay in
answering. I understand that Mr Croston in York has explained by telephone to Ms
Adlington that as he holds the main bundle of papers in the case he has to advise me on the
history of what has gone on before.

I note your continuing concern as to the propriety of the papers remaining in the custody of
the South Yorkshire Police, however as I stated in my previous letter to you I am not in any
position to make any request for alternative measures in relation to the safekeeping of the
original papers. My understanding of the enclosed correspondence from the police is that
they are deferring the consideration of voluntary disclosure as requested by yourselves until
the CPS review decision has been made. I do not accept that it is their argument that CPS
guidance is the justification for a policy of maintaining custody of the archive. It may be that
there is some confusion between the basis of the policy on voluntary disclosure and that of
the responsibility for storage of the material. As it was the Police Complaints Authority who
supervised the original investigation by the West Midlands Police that generated the archive
material held in South Yorkshire, you may wish to contact the Chairman, Mr P W
Moorhouse, to ascertain whether or not he has any remit to assist you. However my
understanding is that the material is the property of the South Yorkshire Police and it would
be a matter for the Chief Constable to decide.

While I appreciate your desire to obtain disclosure of documents in the possession of the
police and the CPS as quickly as possible, I can only agree with Mr Croston’s
recommendation to me and his guidance to the police that consideration of voluntary
disclosure should be deferred until after our review decision has been made. If our decision
•
         I      *




    is to let the private prosecution continue then voluntary disclosure will be given as
    expeditiously as possible (except for material subject to public interest immunity or legal
    privilege). If, however, we found that there was clearly no case to answer then we would
    be bound to take the case over in order to discontinue it; in which case the extremely onerous
    task for all parties to produce and/or examine the voluminous material would no longer be
    necessary.

    Mr Croston has now informed all parties to this prosecution that he hopes to place his report
    before myself and the Chief Crown Prosecutor for Central Casework by the end of
    September. This is a target date only and may be subject to delays occasioned by any new
    material that is brought to our attention. The Director will then be consulted before any
    decision is made. I note that the next date of hearing is for 30 October at Leeds Magistrates’
    Court and that provisional dates for an oral committal have been set for mid-December.

    I have read your representations on the facts and law in this matter with great interest, and
    have asked Mr Croston to consider these points in the preparation of his report.

    I hope this reply is helpful.

    Yours faithfully




    M G KENNEDY
    ASSISTANT CHIEF CROWN PROSECUTOR
