Dr S Popper                                             GJD/VSC
Her Majesty's Coroner for
South Yorkshire (West District)                         18 August 1989
Medico-Legal Centre
Watery Street
Sheffield
S3 7ET




Dear Dr Popper

HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
Thank you for your letter of 1 August 1989 inviting me to undertake the
enquiries on your behalf into the 95 people who died at Hillsborough on
15 April 1989. Your letter was most useful in clearing the lines of
responsibility with South Yorkshire Police.

As you know the Director of Public Prosecutions has suggested to Mr Peter
Wright, Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police, that it would be
appropriate for a full criminal investigation to follow. Mr Wright has
written to me and invited me to undertake that investigation. I will be
accepting that responsibility.

Of course this will have an effect on the timing of your full inquests
which I know were scheduled to commence on 15 January 1990. Our criminal
investigation clearly will take some months before we are in a position
to submit a file of evidence to the Director of Public Prosecutions.
Furthermore, it is unlikely that the Director of Public Prosecutions will
respond very quickly on this very important issue. Consequently, I
cannot realistically see the Director of Public Prosecutions giving his
decision until the summer of 1990 at the very earliest.

 As you appreciate this will impact upon your inquests. As you know Rule
 26 of the Coroner's Rules 1984 indicates that I should make application
 to you for you to adjourn your inquests for 28 days or for a longer
 period as you may think fit. At this point in the investigation I
 cannot say whether any person or persons may be charged with an offence,
 but we cannot discount the possibility.  I think it appropriate,
 therefore, for me to formally request you to continue your adjournment
 of the inquests until such a time that we have received a response from
 the Director of Public Prosecutions. At that time, depending upon his
 decision, we can perhaps discuss further the way forward.
                                   -   2   -




In the meantime we will continue our enquiries into the deaths so that
we will be in a position, when we receive the Director of Public
Prosecutions decision, and if it is to the effect that no further
action will be taken, to proceed with your inquests as soon as
practicable.

As you know Mervyn Jones is leading the investigation and over the
coming months he will keep you informed, on a confidential basis, of
developments.

Can I also add at this stage how much we have appreciated your direction,
advice and support. The Hillsborough Inquiry, given that there are
effectively four investigations within one, would have been further
complicated if you had not taken such a helpful and supportive role. I
am sure that Lord Justice Taylor also sees it that way.

Yours sincerely




Chief Constable
