C W P Newell
Director, Casework
                                                   ru. i£ *-%
                                                            .                             CPS
                                                      t v . C ^ rrl/fu .
                                                                                          Headquarters
                                                                                          50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                          London EC4M 7EX


 r                                                 1
                                                            dk          / i\
                                                                                Direct Line: 0207 796 8553
                                                                               Switchboard:  0207 796 8000
     Stephen Parkinson Esq                                                        Facsimile: 0207 796 8680
                                                                                    DX No: 300850 Ludgate EC4
     Deputy Legal Secretary
     The Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers
     Attorney General’s Chambers
     9 Buckingham Gate
     London SW1E 6JP
L                                                 J                              5 November 1999




     HILLSBOROUGH PRIVATE PROSECUTION : ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD

     Further to my letter of 21 October 1999,1 am now able to reply substantively to yours of 19
     October.

     You have asked for my observations on the request from Mr Duckenfield’s solicitors for the
     entry of a nolle prosequi in respect of counts 4 and 5 on the indictment against him.

  Counts 4 and 5 refer to the allegation that Mr Duckenfield made a statement or statements
  about the cause of the fatal crush that was/were untruthful. In commenting on the application
  for a nolle prosequi, it is important to compare those counts with the earlier charge that I
  discontinued on 12 April 1999. That charge alleged that Mr Duckenfield

          “with intent to pervert the course of justice did an act which had a tendency to
          pervert the course of justice in that he lied about the circumstances in which gate
          C became open.”

  The particulars of offence in count 4 describe at (a) and (b) two distinct allegations - the first
  of commission, the second of omission. I leave it to others to judge whether the latter can
  amount to the offence of “making statements...etc”; but I do observe that this second
  allegation appears to go wider than the original charge.

 Count 5 describes the same two allegations, but as particulars of the offence of misconduct in
 public office. That, of course, is not the same offence as was originally charged.

 I understand your letter to be seeking my comments on the comparatively narrow point set out
 in the final sentence of your second paragraph. In other words, I assume that you are not
 seeking my comments on thp law in relation to counts 4 and 5, nor in relation to the strength
of the evidence in support of those allegations. If I am wrong in that assumption, you will no
doubt let me know.

The letter from Mr Duckenfield’s solicitors argues cogently that the inclusion of counts 4 and
5 negates my decision to discontinue, thereby frustrating my expectations and, by implication,
those of the defendant. It is important to emphasize, however, that in my opinion only the
allegation at (a) of the particulars of offence in count 4 could" have that effect. I have not
discontinued any charge alleging conduct as alleged at (b) of those particulars; nor have I
discontinued (or considered discontinuing) any charge of misconduct in public office based
on the alleged untruthful statement(s).

With that important point in mind, however, I agree that the inclusion of count 4 in the
indictment does have the effect of negating my earlier decision and frustrating any
expectations arising from it. Laws LJ, in giving the judgment of the Divisional Court in the
judicial review of my decision not to take over and discontinue the proceedings generally,
expressly approved the approach in our policy on intervention in private prosecutions that he
described as “the ‘clearly no case to answer’ test” (transcript at page 12, lines 4-18). I am
bound to find it undesirable that the application of that policy, at the instigation of the
Divisional Court, to a charge in respect of which I felt that there was clearly no case to answer
can be negated.

The Crown Prosecution Service has not been asked at this stage to intervene again and take
over the conduct of the proceedings with a view to offering no evidence on count 4. I do not
know whether the evidence on which that count is now based differs from the evidence that I
considered in relation to the original charge. It is, of course, a matter for the Solicitor
General; but in my opinion, if the Solicitor reaches the conclusion that there is clearly no case
to answer in relation to count 4, then - to the extent that that count replicates the original,
discontinued charge - it would be appropriate for him to enter a nolle prosequi. For the
reasons that I have set out above, I am expressly confining my comments to count 4 and to the
extent that that count replicates the original, discontinued charge.

I note that you may wish to disclose this letter to both the prosecution and defence solicitors
in the case. If I have misunderstood your letter, or if there is any other way in which you
think that I might be able to assist, please do not hesitate to let me know.




                 1
                                                    /




C W P NEWELL
