Miss D. H. Sharpling
Chief Crown Prosecutor
                                                                                                       CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                       United House
                                                                                                       Piccadilly
                                                                                                       York YOl 1PQ

                                                                                            Switchboard: 01904-450070
 r                                                     ~]                                       DX No: 65204 York 6
     Keva Coombes
     HFSG                                                                  Facsimile: 01904-
     1st Floor
     Central Buildings                                                   Direct Line: 01904-
     41 North John Street
     LIVERPOOL L2 6RR                                                  Our Reference:           YBF/CE/3341/89
 L                                                                    Ymr Reference:




                                                                                                  4 August 1998
     Dear Sirs,

     RE:      HILLSBOROUGH: ADL1NGTON v DUCKENFIELD and MURRAY

     Thank you for your letter of 31 July 1998. Unfortunately our fax machine was playing up
     and we only received part of it by fax on that day. The original arrived by post on 3 August
     f998.

     I have noted carefully the representations you have made and I will draw Mr. Croston’s
     attention to these on his return from leave. I think it appropriate for me to make some
     comments about particular issues you raise.

     You particularly mention the Stephen Lawrence case and the approach taken by Mr.
     Youngerwood. Obviously I am aware of the case but not the fine detail. I know that Mr.
     Croston has been in touch with colleagues who were involved in the decisions in the
     Lawrencecase. The only point I would make here is that the Crown Prosecution Service
     considers each case on its own merits. We do, of course, endeavour to iq^ly consistent
     standards. As indicated by Mr. Croston, so -far as the*evidenee is concerned, the appropriate
     test is whether there is clearly no case to answer. That is the test we will apply.

     In your letter you mention a number of public interest factors and you ask specifically which
     of those factors might apply. I cannot give you a clear indication until the review has been
     finished. You will be aware that the Code for Crown Prosecutors sets outcome common
     public interest factors both for and against prosecution. The list in the Code is not
     exhaustive. I note your observations but, until the case has been reviewed again, I cannot
     MMS/S 16.98




                          Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests of justice
say which factors may or may not apply.

You specifically raise passage of time. This is frequently a factor which is considered in
other cases. I can do no better than refer you to paragraph 6.5d of the Code for Grown
Prosecutors which sets out some of the key points. Whilst delay may be a matter for the
court, the Code indicates that it is also a matter for the Crown Prosecution Service to
consider. For the reasons mentioned above, I am not able to give you a considered view as
to whether delay is or is not a factor of weight in this case.

You mention health as a public interest factor. I note what you say but make no further
comment.

You also raise publicity. I disagree with your assertion that "it would be a most dangerous
precedent to discontinue a prosecution on this ground". There will undoubtedly be -cases
where a prosecution is stopped in order to protect sources of information, international
relations or national security. Whether "publicity" has any relevance to this case is not clear
to me and will only be apparent onoe Mr. Croston’s review is complete.

You also mention that you fail to see the relevance of the additional criterion "likely to
damage the interests of justice". These might be cases where the continuation of a private
prosecution could interfere with the investigation of other criminal offences. In those
circumstances, we would have to make a judgement.

You mention the previous investigations and I note what you say. In particular you raise two
questions:

         •     the extent to which statements were made available to solicitors for the injured
               and bereaved;

         •     the reason for compiling the master witness list.

I am unable to answer these questions at this stage. Indeed, my view at the moment is that
the answers will be apparent onoe the papers have been reviewed by Mr. Croston.

You raise the issue about the editing of statements. Again, this is an issue which will have
to be considered carefully in the overall review o f the case and it will be inappropriate for
me to make any detailed comment. I can add, however, that we would normally exclude
from our minds opinion and comment contained within statements when making prosecution
decisions on the grounds that they would be unlikely to be admissible in evidence in a
criminal court in any event.

You make reference to the Phillips report. It appears from your letter that this report was
MMS/516.98
prepared for the purpose of civil proceedings. In relation to the policy about disclosure, this
would appear to be a matter for the police.

You mention the need for early disclosure which I can well understand. I accept tibat it will
take us some time to audit the papers and review the case again.

As you will have gathered, the aim of the Crown Prosecution Service is to assist and to be
as open as possible (hence the reason for copying items of correspondence to solicitors for
the defendants). I must, however, ask for clarification on one point. You indicate that you
are entitled to see the statements in our possession. I am not awai?e of anybinding authority
for that assertion. If there is one, please would you let me know.

You raise the issue of abuse of process and your need to protect yourself against a defence
application. You must be satisfied that you have sufficient material to deal with that matter,
otherwise it would not have been appropriate to commence proceedings.

You again mention the'Stephen Lawrence case and the fact that the CPS papers ware made
available immediately. I do not know whether we had been specifically asked to consider
taking over the Stephen Lawrence case. As you know, we have been asked to take over this
case and we are considering that very carefully. I have not spoken to Mr. Youngerwood but
I note from the newspaper article you kindly sent me that his motive in making his papers
available was to try and persuade the private prosecutor to bring the proceedings to a halt for
fear that continuation of the case at that stage would prevent a subsequent prosecution from
taking place. This case is, of course, different in that we have been asked to take the case
over.

You comment about the advice given to the South Yorkshire Police. I disagree with you.
It seemed reasonable for us to let the police know what our policy is so at least they knew
how we were approaching the issues in this case. Much of Mr. Croston’s letter advised the
police of the nature of our policy and the principles we applied.

You ask whether we have copied your last letter to us to the solicitors For the defendants.
I cannot see any evidence of your letter of 20 July 1998 being copied to the solicitors for the
defendants. So far as the ground rules axe concerned, we ate aiming to be as open as
possible and, therefore, fair to all parties.

I note the contents of paragraph 27 of your letter and you say there are no grounds for us
to take the case over. Having received a specific request to do so, we must give careful
consideration as to whether the case should be taken over; the process of -review has started
and judgement will be formed in due course.

I have also received your letter of 3 August 1998. The review of the case will be conducted
MMS/S 16.98
     by Mr. Croston personally and to that extent progress will not be made whilst he is away.
   / In his absence, I shall assist you in whatever way I can. I have asked for the items referred
\ / to in the final paragraph of your letter of 3 August 1998 to be traced and I will consider then
     whether it can be copied at this stage.

     I am sending a copy of this letter to Messrs. Walker Morris, Solicitors, Messrs. Hammond
     Suddards, Solicitors and Messrs. Winckworth and Pemberton, Solciitors.


     Yours faithfully,




   Christopher H. Enzor
    Branch Crown Prosecutor




    MMS/516.98
