04/08   99   08:41   FAX + 4 4   0207   796   8650                                                    @0 0 1




                                               FACSIMILE TRANSMISSION


         TO:               Chris Enzor
                           CPS
                           United House
                           York


         FROM:             Ann Longman
                           PS to Chris Newell
                           Director, Casework
                           Crown Prosecution Service
                           50 Ludgate Hill
                           London EC4M 7EX



         Our Telephone Number:                0207 796 8553

         Our Fax Number;                      0207 796 8680/8650

        Date:                                 4 August 1999

        Time:                                 8.40am


        This fax transmission consists of this page and 1 other.


        Chris

        Just this top sheet to you for now. I’ll return original and all other documents by DX
        tonight.

        Ann




                                                                   04/08   '99 WED 08:42   [TX/RX NO 5006]
                               FILE NOTE

                          HILLSBOROUGH

                               YBF/3341/99


26 July 1999

1.    T/C to Ann Adlington of the HFSG. I asked her for copies of the Depositions
       from the committal hearing. She will send me:

       •   Depositions
       •   List of statements on the Taylor Master witness List that were read out
       •   Copies of statements not on the above List that were read out

2.    PDH is confirmed for 3 September.

4.    Hooper J has set trial date for 8 weeks in June and July 2000.

5.    Defence solicitors are claiming £80K against Ann for their costs in the judicial
      review of the Police Authority's decision to discontinue the defence funding.
      She considers that this is 'dishonest'. They are likely to go to taxation.


ACTION: GC to finish briefing note for Chris Newell and update chronology.


George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
From:               G eorge Croston
To:                 C PSH Q L.D C O S.seddonj
Date:               2 2 /0 7 /9 9 (Thu) 11 :00am
Subject:            Hillsborough update

Duckenfield and Murray are committed to Leeds Crown Court. The d ate of 2 4 August 1999 for the next hearing
is incorrect. It w as set by the stipendiary magistrate but has been changed bt the court listing officer.

There is to be a Pleas and Directions Hearing before Mr Justice Hooper (who has reserved the trial to himself)
on Friday 3 Septem ber 1999.

Ann Adlington of the H F S G tells m e that Mr Clegg Q C (representing Mr Duckenfield) has intimated that the
defendants will not be making an application to the Divisional Court for a judicial review of M r Cadbury's
decisions on abuse of process and the committal.

G eorge
2 2 .7 .9 9
From:               G eorge Croston
To:                 C P S H Q L .D C E .N E W E L L C , E N Z O R C
Date:               2 0 /0 7 /9 9 (Tue) 5:43pm
Subject:            Hillsborough update

I've just received news that the two defendants have been committed to the Crown Court on the charges of
manslaughter and misconduct in a public office.

As you may know they failed in their abuse of process application to the magistrates' court. That decision was
m ade on 15 July.

I am expecting there to be a judicial review application to the Divisional Court by the defence as this was
intimated by them over a w ee k ago.

George
20 July 1999

CC:                 C P S H Q L .D C E .Ion g m ana
Fro m :             G eorge Croston
T o:                C P S H Q L .D C E .N E W E L L C , E N Z O R C
D ate:              2 2 /0 7 /9 9 (Thu) 10:29am
S u b je c t:       Hillsborough update

I spoke to Ann Adlington of the H FSG yesterday and she informed me that thare is to be a PDH at Leeds Crown
Court on Friday 3 Septem ber 1999.

T h e Defence have intimated to her that there will not be an application for a judicial review of the latest
decisions.

G eorge
2 2 .7 .9 9

CC:                 C P S H Q L .D C E .Ion g m ana
                                 FILENOTE

          HILLSBOROUGH CASE: YBF/3341/89

24 June 1999

1.    See orange file cover No 8 titled 'Coroner's Concern'. Latest correspondence
      re disclosure is as a result of Dr Popper, the Coroner for the 89/90 inquest,
      writing and telephoning me about the statement of Inspector Harry White that
      he had seen in 1991. The correspondence bundle tells the story.

2.    I have obtained the permission of Dr Popper (T/C of 24.6), Peter Metcalf for
      the Chief Constable (T/C of 25.6) and of Ann Adlington (T/C of 24.6) to
      disclose to all relevant parties the correspondence in my possession. PM
      strikes a note of warning re the disclosure of police/CPS correspondence being
      PII material and the possible setting of a precedent. I said that I would explain
      to all parties the reason why PII in these specific documents is overridden by
      disclosure being in the public interest.

3.    I consider that it is in the interests of justice that the information in my
      possession re the statements of Inspector White be disclosed to all the parties
      including the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire. If there is in existence the
      statement of Inspector White dated 25 February 1991 (or 1990) then it is
      certainly Keane relevant. I understand that the officer is still very poorly and
      that his solicitor is refusing access to him by the HFSG. Ann Adlington
      informs me that she the defence solicitors on 23.6 and the person acting for Mr
      Duckenfield told her that he might be able to arrange contact through other
      parties.



ACTION:        GC write to all parties re above information. CE informed and to
               see letters before posting.
                                  FILENQTE

                     HILLSBOROUGH CASE


3 June 1999

1.     Re disclosure: T/C from Ann Adlington of the HFSG. She asked for a further
copy of the statement of Glenn Kirton as they have mislaid their copy. I agreed to
send one in the post.

2.      She told me an interesting piece of news. They have discovered a document
in the unused material held by South Yorkshire Police. It is supposed to be a note of a
meeting held by senior police officers soon after the disaster in 1989. She says that it
shows that senior officers knew about the closing off of the centre tunnel in 1988. If
this knowledge can be imputed to Duckenfield and/or Murray prior to the event then a
conviction may be more likely than not. PCOJ by the officers would also be relevant.
She will send me a copy in the post.

ACTION: GC review new evidence and especially consider whether or not it would
have affected any of our previous decisions. Report to CE and CN as required.


George RCroston                                      W tc X          3 1b    ( U fc fc T O v l^ \
Prosecution Team Leader                 “             ?




    H PK         U td ty fiL     a ta o t,       K       (V )h



   S’ K                                 w k      Iq Qc - ho                 IamL

 i 5 /6 (* ? 9               ^               K                            7 ^

                                 jo a lK pcOTt^ .                      ta H c ^ u i f
                          re H c u ptu h is ^ i i t u                  u G w a f tic U              sk$i
            fl-cLf        (kit   U f a cf 3> l              6    oxol c x K / a ci tl. be
                     to    f>b          C lu e /                      *


                      ro f               le b jto    u tw        b                           * I



   T7 l           oW              fei       u ^ fc A S    U&r < / a A w t -
1 3 - AUG. ’ 9 9 ( F R 1 ) 1 1 : 5 6      S. Y. P. C H I EF DEPT          TEL =01 14 2 5 2 3 4 8 1   8481
f


                                       S o u th Y o rk s h ire

                                       POLICE                              Ian Daines, BA(Hons) Dip.Ed,
                                                                                    Assistant ChiefConstable
                                   .JUSTICE         with   COURAGE




                 Ref: ACC/IDA/E


                 11 August 1999


                 Mr G Croston
                 CPS Special Casework
                 Crown Prosecution Service
                 Ryedale Building
                 60 Piccadilly
                 YORK Y01 1NS


                Dear Mr Croston

                Re. Adllngton v Duckenfield and Murray

                Thank you for your letter of 4 August 1999. I have discussed your proposal with Simon Hills
                of Hammond Suddards. I am happy to accept your advice about disclosure to Ms Adlington.
                Your staff tell me that you are on leave so I have written the attached letter to HFSG pending
                your return.

                Perhaps you could contact me when you return to work.
                Yours sincerely




               Ian Daines
               Assistant Chief Constable




                                 Police Headquarters


                                 Sheffield S3 8LY
                                                   I
                                Tel: 0114 220 2020 Fax: 0114 252 3243




                                                                        13/08   '99 FRI 12:02          [TX/RX NO 5086]
1 3 - AUG. ’ 9 9 ( F R I ) 1 1 : 5 6    S. Y. P. C H I E F DEPT                         T E L : 0 1 14 2 5 2 3 4 8 1   8481          P, 002


                                   S o u th Y o rk s h ire
           f l i p
                                   POLICE                                                Ian Daines, ba(Hous> Dip.Ed.
                                                                                                   Assistant ChiefConstable
                                   JUSTICE         with   COURAGE


                 Ref: ACC/ID/VE


                 11 August 1999


                Ms Ann Adlington                                                                                        BY F
                Solicitor
                HFSG
                1STFloor Central Buildings
                41 North John Street
                LIVERPOOL L2 6RR



                Dear Ms Adlington

                Adlington v Duckenfleld & Murray

                I have asked the Director Public Prosecutions for advice on disclosure to you of material that
               may be relevant to the prosecuting you are conducting. I have now received that advice. I
               have consulted my legal adviser and I am happy to accept the DPP's advice. Mr George
               Croston, Prosecution Team Leader, offered the advice on behalf of the DPP. He is on leave
               this week. As soon as he returns, I will be able to write to you again making specific
               proposals.

               Yours sincerely




               Ian Daines
               Assistant Chief Constable




                                Police Headquarters
                                Snig Hill
                                Sheffield S3 SLY
                                Tel: 0114 220 2020 Fax: 0114 252 3243
                                                  0114 2523405     Direct Fax; 01142523481

                                                                                    13/08       '99 FRI 12:02            [TX/RX NO 5086]
Ms Ann Adlington
Hillsborough Family Support
Group
1st Floor, Central Buildings
41 North John Street                                                   YBF/GC/3341/89
Liverpool L2 6RR


                                                                        5 August 1999


Dear Ms Adlington

RE: ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

Thank you for your letter of 22 July 1999 which I acknowledged during our telephone
conversation of 26 July. I have also received the further documents that you kindly
agreed to send me to assist in our continuing review of this case.

In your letter you request that the CPS advise the Chief Constable to surrender
possession of the archive in the changed circumstances of the case. You also
summarise your arguments and ask us to comment if we disagree.

As you remember your first request has been dealt with on previous occasions when
we declined to advise the Chief Constable on the matter. We have reviewed the latest
circumstances following committal, but are still not persuaded that that it is
appropriate to give advice to the South Yorkshire Police in the manner requested.

Further, we consider that, as we are not a party to the proceedings, we should not
comment on your legal arguments which may be put to the court on 3 September
1999.

I am able to indicate that I have given certain advice to the Chief Constable on
disclosure and permitting access to the archive in his possession. When the police
have considered my proposals I shall contact you again.

Please let me know if I can assist you further.

Yours sincerely


George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
Ian Daines,BA(Hons) Dip.Ed
Assistant Chief Constable
South Yorkshire Police
Police Headquarters
Snig Hill                                                               YBF/GC/3341/89
Sheffield S3 8LY
                                                                        ACC/ID/VE


                                                                        4 August 1999


Dear Mr Daines

RE: ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

Further to my letter of 22 July 1999 I am now able to give you substantive answers to
the questions that you posed in your letter to us of 21 July 1999.

The Director Casework, Mr C Newell, has been consulted on the latest developments
in the case and, following a M l review of all the present circumstances, it has been
decided that it is not appropriate for us to intervene in the private prosecution.

Now that the matter has been committed to the Crown Court the HFSG should be able
to obtain a summons directing the police to disclose such statements and exhibits as
would allow the private prosecutor to comply with their duty of disclosure to the
defendants. I understand that the hearing before Mr Justice Hooper on 3 September
1999 may be for that purpose.

Our advice is that you should allow unfettered, albeit supervised, access to all the non
sensitive documents in the archives. This would be less time consuming for your
officers than endeavouring to ascertain what is and is not relevant before giving
access. I am willing to assist your archivist in such supervision if that would be
helpful. As regards any material subject to PII, I would also offer my services in
helping your officers to prepare a schedule of the relevant material. That schedule
could be provided to the HFSG so that they may, if they wish, make an application to
the court for the disclosure of any particular documents.

The HFSG have again asked us to advise the Chief Constable to surrender possession
of the archive. Having conducted another review of the circumstances we are writing
to the HFSG to inform them that as we see no valid grounds for their proposition we
decline to so advise.
You may wish to discuss the above advice with Hammond Suddards. I would be
grateful if we could consult on the content of any draft letter offering disclosure to the
HFSG where it might involve CPS actions.

Yours sincerely




George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
04/08   ’ 99   08:41   FAX + 4 4   0207   796   8650                                                   @002




                                                 R E C E IV E D
                                                  0 2 AUG 1999
                                                 D IR E C T O R ,
          Mr. C. W. P. Newell                    CASEWORK
          Director, Casework
          CPS HQ
          DX 300850
          LUDGATE EC4


          CC       Mr. G. Croston (without enclosure)



          RE:      THE HILLSBOROUGH CASE

          1        I enclose a copy of George Cioston’s briefing note together with accompanying
                   documentation.

          2        As you made the decision that we should not intervene in the private prosecution I
                   think you should have the opportunity to consider where the decision needs to be
                   made on the outstanding issues outlined by George.

          3        I am more than happy to take these decisions. I recognise, that as you were involved
                    earlier, you. may wish to maintain, involvement for the purposes of continuity.

          4        Please would you let me know whether you wish me to take the decisions as soon as
                   possible.




          Christopher H. Enzor
          Head of York Division
          Casework Directorate
          30 July, 1999
          Tel:
          Fax
          DX: 65204 - YORK 6                                            uS\ Cit-s

4 fv      (*443^ . PiA&U.




                                                                    04/08   '99 WED 08:42   [TX/RX NO 5006]
                                                     f> 0;                  m
C W P Newell                                                                CPS
Director, Casework
                                                                            Headquarten
                                                                            50 Ludgate Hill.
                                                                            London EC4M 7EX

    4 August 1999                                            Direct Line:   0207 796 8553
                                                             Switchboard:   0207 796 8000
    Chris, returning to you the set of                         Facsimile:   0207 796 8680
    papers that we spoke about earlier today.                    d x No:    300850 Ludgate EC4


    Ann
                                          I0
                                                                            With Compliments
                                                (U
Mr. C. W. P. Newell
Director, Casework
CPS HQ
DX 300850
LUDGATE EC4


CC    Mr. G. Croston (without enclosure)



RE:   THE HILLSBOROUGH CASE

1     I enclose a copy of George Croston’s briefing note together with accompanying
      documentation.

2     As you made the decision that we should not intervene in the private prosecution I
      think you should have the opportunity to consider where the decision needs to be
      made on the outstanding issues outlined by George.

3     I am more than happy to take these decisions. I recognise, that as you were involved
       earlier, you may wish to maintain involvement for the purposes of continuity.

4     Please would you let me know whether you wish me to take the decisions as soon as
      possible.




Christopher H. Enzor
Head of York Division
Casework Directorate
30 July, 1999
Tel: i
Fax:
DX: 65204-YORK 6
           BRIEFING NOTE ON HILLSBOROUGH

                                 YBF/3341/89


1.    ISSUE

1.1   Following the recent committal of Duckenfield and Murray to the Crown
      Court on counts of manslaughter and misconduct in a public office, ACC
      Daines of the South Yorkshire Police has written to the Casework Directorate
      at York to ask if the Director will be reviewing the case to determine whether
      the CPS should now take over the proceedings and conduct the prosecution.

1.2   He expects that the HFSG will make further requests for material from the
      archives under SYP control and he considers it inappropriate to give this
      disclosure if it was our intention to take over the case.

1.3   In the event that we do not intervene, the police wish our advice on how to
       respond to HFSG requests for further disclosure. See letter of 21 July 1999
       attached at Annex A.

1.4   The HFSG have written to York and requested our views on the custody of the
      archive held by the SYP now that the case has been committed. They invite us
      to advise the SYP to surrender the possession of the archive, and to inform
      them of any disagreement we may have with their legal arguments. They
      enclose a copy of their letter to the solicitors acting for the Chief Constable
      where they repeat their views that the archive should not be held by the SYP.
      Their letter of 22 July 1999 is attached at Annex B.

2.    ACTION REQUIRED

2.1    A substantive response is required to the linked requests of ACC Daines and
      of the HFSG. As the decision on non intervention in the private prosecution
      was taken by the Director Casework, he should have the opportunity to
      consider the level at which this decision should be taken.

2.2   Holding letters were sent to the police and the HFSG on 23 July.

3.    TIMING

3.1   We have been informed that Mr Justice Hooper, the trial judge, has a PDH
      listed for 3 September 1999. He has had the trial listed for 8 weeks in June
      and July 2000.

3.2   The HFSG expect a comprehensive reply from the police by 6 August 1999
       and have asked us to deal with their requests swiftly so that their preparation
       for the trial can begin.




                                                                                     1
4.    BACKGROUND

4.1   The Director Casework is well aware of the detail of this case up to and
      including the Divisional Court's decision in the application for judicial review
      by the two defendants. In particular his decision that we should not intervene
      at the request of the defendants in order to take over the private prosecution
      and then discontinue it.

4.2   The CPS has previously considered requests by the HFSG to advise the Chief
      Constable of SYP that he should not hold the Hillsborough Archive. These
      requests have been refused. It has been considered that the CPS does not have
      the authority to advise the police on this point. The Hillsborough chronology
      schedule at items 34,40, 56, 68, 73 and 81 refers.

4.3   On 20 July 1999 Mr N Cadbury, the stipendiary magistrate sitting at Leeds
      Magistrates' Court, committed Duckenfield and Murray to the Crown Court on
      charges of manslaughter and misconduct in a public office. The previous
      week he had rejected the defence submission that the proceedings were an
      abuse of the process of the court.

5.    KEY CONSIDERATIONS

      SYP Request re Intervention

5.1   On 18 December 1998 the Director Casework informed all the parties to the
      private prosecution of his decision not to intervene. This decision was based
      on the policy which appears in the CPS Prosecution Manual at chapter 7 of
      volume 1.

5.2   Paragraph 7.18 of the chapter Private Prosecutions shows the change in
      circumstances that may occur following a committal and the acceptance by the
      court that a prima facie case exists. It is also said that the public expectation
      of a case being pursued has been raised. The guidance is that, if requested to
      do so by the private prosecutor, we should take over the case and continue
      with the prosecution unless it is clear that there is no realistic prospect of
      conviction or the public interest factors tending against prosecution clearly
      outweigh those factors tending in favour. We are exhorted to consider the
      evidence very carefully before concluding that there is not a realistic prospect
      of conviction.

5.3   My understanding of the CPS deliberations on the case is that we were
      satisfied that there was no realistic prospect of conviction on any of the
      charges, but, except for the allegation of perverting the course of justice - the
      'disgraceful lie', we could not say that there was clearly no case to answer.
      That was based on all the evidence which had been brought to our attention for
      the purposes of the original case decision of 1990 and of the subsequent CPS
      reviews in 1997 and 1998. The 1997 review decision as to the sufficiency of
      evidence was endorsed by the report of the scrutiny conducted by Lord Justice
      Stuart-Smith, and that of 1998 by the judgement of the Divisional Court on the
      judicial review application. In giving the judgement of the court Lord Justice


                                                                                     2
      Laws said "The DPP might, in my judgement, lawfully have decided to
      discontinue". This could be considered to be a judicial recognition that a CPS
      decision to intervene and then to discontinue all the charges would not have
      been unreasonable.

5.4   Since the Director of Casework reviewed this case further material evidence
      has come to light. This is noted in the Hillsborough Chronology as items 210,
      215, 219, 220, and 231. The SYP were forced to disclose notes of three
      briefings given to senior and other police officers shortly after the disaster.
      These are attached at Annex C.

5.5   Prior to the commencement of the abuse of process hearing I had received
      information from the Hillsborough Coroner (now retired) concerning a
       statement that had purportedly not been seen since the inquest. It was the
       statement of an Inspector White dated 25 February 1991. In April 1997 Dr
      Popper contacted the BCP of the Police Complaints Division at York about his
      concern re the differences between the evidence of Inspector White and that of
       Supr Murray as to when the latter became aware that the gates to the tunnel
       entrance had been closed in 1988. The Taylor Enquiry had found that in 1988
       entry to the tunnel had been blocked off by police shortly before kick-off
      because the pens were deemed to be full. It was said that this closure seemed
      to have been unknown to the senior officers on duty at the time, it did not
       figure in the de-briefing notes and therefore had no influence on the planning
       for 1989. However, the coroner's recollection was that White had told Murray
      of that closure prior to the 1989 disaster. This would be in complete
      contradiction of Murray's evidence that he did not learn of the earlier tunnel
      closure until after the disaster. At that time in 1997 the police instituted a
       search of the database on my advice. The statement which the coroner
      remembered was not found and it was presumed that his recollection was
      wrong.

5.6   It was only on 21 June 1999 that the coroner gave me further information
       about the statement, that is, the date that it was made and the existence of a file
       note that he had written at the time. I then advised the police to conduct
       another search of the archive. This they promptly agreed to and although there
       was no record of the statement on the Holmes database, a manual search of the
       archive papers unearthed it in a file dedicated to the inquest. The statement
       was received by the CPS on 6 July , the second day of the abuse hearing. It
       was immediately disclosed to all parties. It was apparent that the HFSG,
       myself and the present archivist had not seen this evidence before. The
       statement is attached as Annex D.

5.7   The prosecution made use of the contents of the statement in order to show
      that Murray knew about the 1988 tunnel closure before the disaster. Counsel
      for Murray argued that the new statement proved no such thing. On
      examining the document I am satisfied that Inspector White's evidence is of
      his personal knowledge of a procedure at league matches that he would follow
      in order to close off temporarily the gates to the tunnel when the central pen
      was full. Although this officer discussed the above procedure with Murray in
      April 1988, he does not say that he told Murray about the 1988 problem that


                                                                                        3
       required the closure of the tunnel. The statement is evidence of the senior
       officer's policy that the fans should be left to find their own level.

5.8    The notes of the briefings of police officers after the disaster are also new
       evidence that had not been seen by the HFSG or, to my knowledge, the CPS.
       While these notes bring up interesting points about the tactical procedures and
       policies, it does not in my estimation provide the basis for the submission that
       either Duckenfield and/or Murray must have known that there had been a
       requirement to close off the tunnel in 1988 because the central pens were full.

5.9    The note of the first briefing shows the discussion between senior officers,
       including the two defendants and Inspector White, concerning the opening of
       gate C and what went through the minds of officers as the disaster unfolded.
       There is nothing in that note that supports the allegation that the defendants,
       especially Murray, knew of the 1988 tunnel closure which was done in order
       to alleviate the crush in the pens. If there had been such knowledge the HFSG
       would have stronger evidence for the assertion of gross negligence.

5.10 The second note again concerns a discussion between the senior officers,
     including the two defendants. There is a comment that "Top of the tunnel
     solid with horses - that procedure happened last year". The comment may
     refer to the 1988 tunnel closure mentioned by Inspector White , although he
     did not speak of the use of horses but of officers. Again it does not show that
     either Murray or Duckenfield knew of the previous year's closure so that it
     should have been to the forefront of their minds when Gate C was opened.
     The general discussion touches upon a contingency plan to shut off the tunnel
     when it became full. There is contradictory evidence from officers about
     whether the tunnel was full or not in 1989 after Gate C was opened.

5.11   The third briefing was attended by some of the more junior management
       officers and the note shows a discussion of tunnel control. The second
       paragraph refers to a Sergeant Burman stating that pens 3 & 4 were filled by
        2.00pm. His exact words were "The area that filled the quickest was Pen 3 of
        the Leppings Lane terraces and I saw that by 2.00pm (1400) the fans were
        cramped in this section of the terraces". Further on it is said that there was
       nothing in either the operational order or at the briefings re police protection
        of the tunnel to restrict or prevent spectator entry. However officers
        remembered that in previous years this had been done by the use of horses and
        static police lines. This was known as Superintendent Freeman's policy.
        There is no evidence that either of the defendants knew of this policy which
        appears to have been disseminated by word of mouth only.

5.12 The HFSG have provided me with copies of the following documents:-

       •   Depositions taken at the committal hearing
       •   Witness statements read out at the committal

5.13 The deposition of Moneypenny describes his entry through Gate C and then
      down a crowded tunnel. It may be the prosecution argument that as the tunnel



                                                                                      4
       was crowded Supr Freeman's policy noted above should have been brought
       into play. Both depositions are copied at Annex E.

5.14. The statements read out during the committal proceedings tell the story of the
      crush outside the turnstiles, the opening of the gate and the rush through the
      tunnel into the stands and the eventual disaster. Except for that of Mr
      Moneypenny, all the statements featured on the Master Witness list of the
      Taylor Inquiry and have therefore been reviewed before.

       The Hillsborough Archive

5.11   The possession of this archive has been considered previously at Senior Civil
       Service level. Mr M Kennedy had written to the HFSG on 27 August 1998 in
       answer to their concern about the SYP continuing to hold the archive. In the
       absence of any impropriety he did not feel it was appropriate to request the
       SYP to make alternative arrangements for the safekeeping of the papers.

5.12 While the HFSG have made many allegations about the suppression of
     material evidence by the SYP from 1989 to the present day, my 1997 review
     and the later scrutiny found no support for their submissions of suppression of
     evidence by the police. They are now saying that the police have misled the
     DPP from day one and that the scrutiny was not shown all the evidence in
     police possession. For that reason the archive should be taken away from the
     SYP. Although new material is coming to light, I am still not persuaded that
     we have the authority or reasonable cause to advise the Chief Constable that it
     is in the interests of justice that at this late stage of the proceedings he should
     surrender up the archive. Neither the late Lord Taylor or Lord Justice Stuart-
     Smith expressed concern at the SYP being in control of all the papers.
     Without evidence of impropriety I would find it difficult to support a change
     of our view.

5.13   The police are concerned at the amount of work and time involved in giving
       full disclosure of the archive to the HFSG. The CPS policy on disclosure in
       private prosecutions was made clear to the police in our letter of 15 July 1998
       (see item 17 in the chronology). Our guidance to them was based on that
       contained in paragraphs 7.29 to 7.41 of the chapter on private prosecutions.
       We have given full voluntary disclosure of all non sensitive documents in our
       possession to all parties. It was suggested to the police that they should
       consider doing the same. We are now at the stage where the duty of
       disclosure can be forced upon the police by way of the Crown Court granting
       the private prosecutor a witness summons to secure the production of relevant
       material.

5.14   There is some force to the argument that the SYP have been less than
       forthcoming in the giving of voluntary disclosure. When the HFSG learnt of
       the existence of the briefing notes made following the disaster, the SYP
       strongly contested their production until ordered to disclose by the
       Magistrates' Court. In 1997 the SYP had difficulty in finding the missing
       statement of Inspector White, and it could be surmised that the archive
       harbours any number of previously undisclosed but material documents.


                                                                                       5
6.    RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1   I am satisfied that this new evidence, comprised of the briefing notes, the
      statement of Inspector White and the depositions, is not so material as might
      have affected our decisions in 1990 and 1997, or the decision of 1998 for non
      intervention. Except for the fact of the case having been committed to the
      Crown Court, the evidential and public interest considerations remain the
      same as they were in December 1998. In which case my careful consideration
      of the evidence still leads to the conclusion that there is no realistic prospect of
      a conviction. I therefore recommend that we inform the Chief Constable that
      having considered the circumstances of the committal we have decided that
      there are no grounds for us intervene.

6.2   If the above is accepted then 1 recommend that we can advise the Chief
      Constable that it would be in the interests of justice for him to make available
      all the non sensitive documents in the archive to both defence and prosecution.
      This should be done without regard to applying the Keane test of materiality
      under the common law. The police would have more problems in trying to
      divide the papers into relevant and non relevant piles than in supervising
      unfettered access to non sensitive material. While access to sensitive material
      subject to PII considerations can be initially restricted, a schedule of those
      documents could be provided to the parties so that they can, if they wish, make
      an application to the court. This is preferable to using the old common law
      procedure of ex parte applications to the judge. However I do not believe that
      there is any large amount of such documents. Otherwise it might be
      acceptable to all parties that I be allowed to examine sensitive documents as to
      materiality and make recommendations to the police for disclosure where
      necessary.

6.2   I also recommend that we decline to advise the Chief Constable on the hand
      over of the Hillsborough Archive to any other party. It is not for us to enter
      into a contentious discussion as to the ownership of the property rights in the
      archive papers.

7.    CONCLUSION

7.1   That the above recommendations be considered to enable a swift response to
       the police and HFSG.

George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
29 July 99




                                                                                        6
M lU S S tM u M

4 NNEXCS

    A ro
Q b L T u iU U 0 € 3 * 7 .4 1
POST£ g / CARD   AFFIX
                 STAMP
                  HERE
2 2 - J U L . ' 9 9 (THU) 11 = 17      S. Y. P. C HIEF DEPT                   TEL =01 14 2523481     8481        P. 001


                              South Yorkshire
                                                                                                                   A
                             P O L IC E                                       Ian Dames, b a (H oos) DiP.Ed.
                                                                                    Assistant C hief Constable
                              JUSTICE           with    COURAGE




              Ref: ACC/IDA/E

              21 July 1999


              Mr G Croston
              CPS Special Casework
              Crown Prosecution Service
              Ryedale Building
              60 Piccadilly
              YORK Y 011N S


               Dear Mr Croston

               Private Pfpseci>tlor» by Anne Adllngton of David Duckenfieid and Bernard Murray

               The stipendary magistrate at Leeds has committed Mr Duckefield and Mr Murray to Leeds
               Crown Court for trial on alleged offences of manslaughter and neglect of duty. The
               prosecution has been brought by a private individual, Ms Anne Adlington.

               Now that the matter has been committed I wonder if the Director of Public Prosecutions will
               be reviewing the matter to determine whether he will take over the prosecution and conduct it
               himself.

               In the months leading up to the commital I have received numerous requests from Ms
               Adlington for material held in the South Yorkshire Police archieves. I expect Ms Adlington
               will be contacting me again in the very near future to seek further material to sustain the
               prosecution. Clearly, if the Director of Public Prosections takes over the proseuction then it
               would be inappropriate for me to furnish her with that material.

               I will be obliged if you would advise me of the Director of Public Prosecutions intentions. If
               the Director of Public Prosecutions does not take over the prosection I will be obliged to
               receive your advice on how to respond to the requests I am likely to receive from
               Ms Adlington.

               Yours sincerely




               Ian Daines
               Assistant Chief Constable

               Copy to:             Peter Metcalfe, Hammond Suddards


                               Police Headquarters
                               SnigHill
                               S h a ffia ld S 3 8LY
                               Tel: 0114 2 2 0 2 0 2 0 Fox- 0114 2 5 2 3243
HFSG                                   ® +0151-236-1936                2 2/07 '9 9 13:06 0 :02




     Sl/ppQ^
                         Hillsborough Family Support Group
   George R Croston
   Prosecution Team Leader
   CPS Central Casework
   United House
   Piccadilly
   York
   Y 019P Q

   22nd July 1999


   Dear Mr Croston,

   R v. Duckenfield and Murray

     ou will have heard that this case has been committed for trial. We were not able to call a
   number o f the witnesses on whom we relied because o f the problems caused by the timetable
    \i e magistrate was able after three days and a retirement o f under an hour and a half to
       a case to miswcr on both charges against both defendants on our core material.

                       ,Ctter that 1 have today written to Mr Metcalf o f Hammond Suddards and
  ih h      J«e     n       1 should be grateful for your views on the custody o f the archive in
  Chief Corf* C“ ™ ™ tancc* o f the casc        prosecution invites you to give advice to the
  m M te r t                    p° ^ ssion o f the « * * * «"d requests you to deal with this
                 f * 7,e can ^            our preparations for the trial as soon as possible. We
  expect that Mr Justice Hooper will wish to set a tight timetable.

                     VCfy fam,',ar with the ar8uments we have summarised in the letter to Mr

                                   X     " Buraen,s' 1 would invi,e


  Yours sincerely,



  A •/f            bsK
  Ann Adlingtcr.
  Solicitor




          , f i ° a'® 151 236 * » » .  0151 234 tS X . E Mail iafiKShft. a n
              Floor Central BaiM iog, 41 North jo b . Strm           U «RR
                                               9   +0151-236-1936              22/07 *99 13:06 0 :03




                              Hillsborough Family Support Group

    Y our R ef PCM SB.CHI.057-9

    Hammond Suddards
    Solicitors
    2 Park Lane
    Leeds
    LS3 IBS

    22nd July 1999


Dear Mr Metc41f,

R v. Duckenfield and Murray

1         The defendants in this case were committed for trial on 20mJuly on charges o f
          manslaughter and misfeasance. The stipendiary magistrate, Mr Nigel Cadbury had
          heard five days o f argument, and sworn oral evidence from me, before rejecting the
          aetence argument that the prosecution was an abuse o f process o f the court and
          oppressive. He then rejected a defence argument that there was no case to answer
          after a mere three days o f evidence and argument.
                      .»



2         w* understand that the Presiding Judge o f the North-Eastern Circuit, Mr Justice
          ^ ooper, wishes to hold a preliminary hearing soon, probably on 3rt September but




3         for                     ^    |bCen T f " 8 for nearIy a year now that there is no lawiu! basis
          1Q8!             Yorkshire police to hold the papers. By virtue ofthe fact that on 16* April
         the       V fidT a^ d?^ t         f ° Uth Yorkshire P°,ice      * e Chief Constable o f
         disaster it appears t t o           T ^ quiry. 11,40 the          « the Hillsborough
         W * th «                  / ^ ' ° n has * * * maMrtaincd ^at South Yorkshire policT
          own the information, o f which, it has been said, they are “principals”.

*        Therefore, it is apparently argued, the South Yorkshire police were the orimarv
                            T * ? * r 1 ‘nqui,y’ md other investigative and legafb od S were
         ^        T                   the So“th Yorkshire police has been able, u p o n y o u ro ^
         1     9     9    0    ^       uOSC material to the bereaved families at the Inquest in
              , and (b) to deny it to the prosecution in 1998-9.




                 <w»r Central Bafldmga 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 «RR
HF S G                                   1 ? +0151-236-1936              22/07 *99 13:06 pi :U4       ,




    5     For the same reason, the South Yorkshire police was, on your advice,able to
           influence, in its own favour, the supply o f information and evidence to the CPS in
           1989-90, when a decision whether to prosecute woa under consideration, gnd, no
           doubt, to influence the supply o f information to the Police Complaints Authority.

    6     Although we have repeatedly deployed these arguments in the course o f the various
          applications by the defendants to have the proceedings stayed or discontinued, and in
          the course o f their applications for public funding, we have never heard an answer to
          them. Neither have you offered any rebuttal or contradiction at all over the last twelve


    7    A conspicuous feature o f the case in the last twelve months had been the support that
          the South Yorkshire police has given to the defendants. The Chief Constable has
          urged the South Yorkshire Polite Authority, successfully, that it should pay the entire
          legal fees and out o f pocket expenses o f the defendants on the ground that they acted
         “reasonably and in good faith” at the time o f the Hillsborough disaster, and that it was
         necessary to do this to maintain the morale o f officers who have to take “split-second”
         decisions.

   8     it ts obviously absurd that the Crown, in whose name the prosecution will now be
          conducted, is denied access to evidential material which is obviously relevant to the
          case by a body which is actively supporting the defence. Furthermore, as you will
          know, the prosecution has duties or disclosure to the defence, namely, to disclose any
          material m the possession o f organs o f the state that may arguably assist the defence
          subject to public interest immunity considerations and legal professional privilege. ’




         to S        v‘     S      i^   , ° U ° °n,end   ' he ^     bel0",i ,0- or "             *.

         (^w hether the Chief Constable is prepared to hand the archive over to a neutral third
         r*** v »



                    <’th' r * eP* * *     'C° n8table pr0p0Se, " “ kc to “ -O P ** , with th.

   10
         ln^hcp*M you hare faded to assist the prosecution. We believe th « this refiml was
                          !“ ««ken View expressed by Mr Dames in 1998. before the
         hurdle ” " w' r' t f " 1*       private prosecution was likely to “fiH at the first
         hurdfe w . U ^ e him now to take this « s e seriously. Since the argument?
         August.    y° U’ WC SU8gCSt       we can reasonably expect a comprehensive reply by 6*




                                                   2
HFSG                                     9 +0151-236-1936            22/07 «99 13:07 0 : 05




         In the light o f that reply, we shall prepare for the Crown Court bundles o f
         correspondence and compile a skeleton argument, and consider the legal options
         available to us should you refuse co-operation. No doubt you will wish to attend the
         txrst hearing o f the case and be represented. We shall keep you informed o f the date
         „ e ? qend a coPy o f this letter to the defendants and to Mr Croston o f the CPS
         from whom the Chief Constable may wish to seek advice under section 3 (2) fe) o f the
         Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985.

   12    I look forward to your reply.



  Yours sincerely,

   /? /IclUnytlih
  Ann Adlingfon
  Solicitor




                                              3
H F S G                                                                                  ^+ 01 5 1 -2 3 6 -1 9 3 6                       2 2 / 0 7 '9 9 1 8 :1 4 0 : 0 2

                                                                                                                                                        A   k io    B   c   C



                 0 pr                                                                 CHIEF CONSTABLE'S BRIEFING WITH
                 o.                                 s..,,                            -g a g e d ON* F.A. CU? s e m i -f i n a l d u t i e s

                                                     9.00 AM, SUNDAY ic APRIL 1939




  Mr ? { right    C3E, Chisf Constable
                 An*? r?<■** ..,                _
     t £**-”     Q?M L”             >!A’ C « ?atrC hie? Ccnsteble
  D e : ; ^ ; ; cc h ^ ^ ^ : ; ! - ^ ^ : ! \ Co?S£abla
  r-v-*            V -    -*~>-=nt Accis
  c:::!;.w:ye- nrfnc-“r3 Ouefeenfieia and *-sbit
   l^'sUat” ”           Ch*,“ ni c ™*"-«o4, Marshall. Mc.\ay, Hurray, ? 4„
                                                                                                                                                            '-at-

                  t0”    6* ^ ; C rsss' r ' Ka?“<jr--h ’ « » « — «
                           £e la .a ,y ’                K.rv*y , S /^                                                                   and Whit*
              Codcars, Guccher and Kortcn
  t.-n»waoles Middua and Ryan
  L.j.ncsay Me.*arcane (Press Office” )




 Cr.ief Constable:
                                q
                                                     T . 1™ 53* 0f                decisions,
                                       t.on^.j graphics, I know chat e v s - v r h H i -w*- .
                                was done in the prS3er s ^ ^ ’-           — I' I' ?5 ■           ss cone
                                csalir.* with a very vsr/ d l f f i c u l t ^ ! ; ^ - * — 1^ ^ ? 5*
                                c « « n o l o 1y of event, which it se9,s to
                                i0r rae t0 s«c i*". my mine.       I though- the b e . -       “nt-aI
                                ao this is to So throu,, the e v e n t s ' J l ^          ^  -   t   ^
                                       t3 5®c tr;* individuals who can corarent on m'” '
                                     x understand the* to say so         Dcn'-t?/                 events
                                disai— i-,-            »        •-            *• be l e a r n e d about
                                                                                                  ; “* an° 11 *ou ^ s a s - s e w ith my
                                    .. --s '-'*ns._ng C4 w-at I think happened say so bu- <-'«

                                r7 * i - 0* V b i i ^ v - t0 SraS? th * o v e ra il P ic tu re . Y ^ r n k
                                ; 'I * r V                                   S0°a ldea ° f it: now bH= there will be d - - M

                                                    _ .._ssea »nd we knew the parasetsrs of wp*r
                                                                                                                              *ln d ' the d e c a il o f .v«n*s‘
                                                                                                                                                            ,
                          ■ad^'3 -8 V8ry narrov w ’    nen tir“i and therefore don': t~y and
                           . ^ - S: y° “r *"n lnd Co 'vhat Someone e ls8 is Sayin    S t^
                                  ^ou <vJiow, stick to what you saw and d o n ’t *ff

                                                                                                                              *nd.*‘k % l° fic of ^'.^ecause
                              as 12 00 noon and by 2 * 3 0 p m ^ t h r ^ o t t i n g h ^ sec t-o^ox^t”
                              Jround » „ falrly r u U but ,t tSa: time l“ h l ^                                                                              U
                              l o t ’o r L a a : ; j l *? th * *r ° umi « a i l s . i t h a t chars ve-e“
                              L  i ' . - . !--? •”5/ " ? —
                              t - i_ \ i «A f * ^        * —>* >• V 4 Q 4 C 4 9 t
                                                           l0C
                                                             I    8f ^   ^      « f t U v l th i n f s .
                                                                                 a   a   id             *f**        *    __
                              Liverpool stand. That's at 2.30 j
                              pSTore 2.30 pm that anybody 3e « s |                                    !^ 'b a p p e rt'

Ch Supc
                          I looked out at 2.^0 nn                                                                    th®      ,Vnrr<n    _   -
Ouckanfield:              £ , s 5 i r s„                                                 r <              j      -   '
                                                                         w.*'; in cf,-e 0,*h«- a-»as on the south s“and and
                          ‘     e                    -   •       =   »       «       «   !    «     «          <■>.- M j g ^ w ^ w i a t a s t ^ H e . ^ ^ ,
HF S G                                        U +0151-236-1936                    22/07 *99 18:14 0 :03
 ► *^
                                                            - 2 -


                               stand was almost empty and also the Leppimrs Lan*
                               particularly on the terracin*.            ®   ^   atan*r


            Conscas-:                            «-vs »        «*?la«at!on as to why they aren't



    iup- Marshall:
                               aetausa they vare drinking outside sfr-licents*.


    C.._ef Cor.stao:.*:        Is this personal perception?


    Supc Marshal:
                                             '" I ;- ”'-:;:-5' 1! " 3*r         « = « u y ...„ n . «
                              .       ,T'a    kCWv' ins C« caway supermarket «n      — w ..,
                              ««-* seizing four jacks and bottles cf wins — 0 *^'“:
                              hoi. in -".e dccr. There were hoards of psoole'or t -
                              s ss Corsica .-.a^foras nssr Halifax Road driv.-<t- ’7 -„a
                                        ••       5            W4-- liU0              o u tsid e z1'*     ?
                                     hous^ drinking.  Every off-l'c-nce
                              wa* doing a rearing trade.        ~ c - * c * ch., was open


     :sp Sykes:
                              Can i try and put it into perspective,                      iz 2
                                                                                  —- - ’- -3^'JioCi Wj
                                               e c.ossc t:-.9 read to ’/shicular tra:*''-'
                                                                                                              tha:
                              '-as t.-.e sheer veight of '’•'^bsrs ouc ther
                                                                                              a t tha; ti:ie

   £-pt M arshall;
                                                                    « .* •«        ^ p t r . s s u .-., v ., f u l :
                                   '         f--~ -•• -c-.* air»c;ions and war? drin>-'nr a-i-» «a

                                          o. —            1C._. u.iat service buses were s-'11 __ '~-
                              fr,cn th9                              the Leppings Lane « « » £ .    *
                  t
   CL-.ief Constab'ls
                                             5"'" ‘ ? i ; *u r * cr People froa Liveraool in th«
                                             w [ ,,-e grounc.      rfttre  got any evi.d«nej» n.a«.
                          fcf* S ■“ *?• 5 “* H r ln c r*r r .1-' ch«             rasuU ed ’ S - 't S r ’- -
                          | g p o o l         fans        arrival «       eh. iround'b..„s i, u i , „            i;



      scp: Nesbit:
                          N’o sir, _ car. tell you that as far as *•-1      -- •
                          h a u ax .vsaz -.a langsas: Road thac ts.y we~» c- o ^ -
                          sterile of football traffic, it was               “?;•;«!>
                          ?    : n “j             -  ■ - u w < ls = - a ^ . n r , c e r : 3 ; <■> v i v -
                                       -               e - » v a u . d all the Way rraa Jhe city'c^
                          a_l wne way tnrouga to Halifax Road.


  C.iief Constable:
                          ?? !lh* rt iS r-;? evid*ac* whatsoever of eh« delay 'n c— na'-
                          6^ i ' \ ISr3:              ^     ^anl .IF?1*** ac th» ground v ic ta itv "
                           .jrly «a°uSh to jo in the ground but instead wane   ’
                          drinking.      THIS WAS AGREED.             ' -n t -
HF S G                                                 ^ + 0 1 5 1 -2 3 6 -1 9 3 6                  22/07 '99 18:14 0 : 0 4




  Ins? Sykes:                         Th*r*“ wers
                                             w-   far.
                                                  fa’s there woo said there had been a-’ay r*..«
                                      no Iddsa whether they case by csr, coach, er cr&i^ ’ " ’'


    ilef Constabis
                                      Can we Jus- check en that aspect on the network of d-o't*
                                      ana cove-s to make sure whether or not there is any
                                      anywhere. It's si~piy z o gat . . .


  • «><s w ^® J*i« * ^ £ V* 5 £ *    ^ ^"   ■V p            ^ B^ ( ,s w     w * * «.* •< /            ,
                        ,_3-.              vne spe-_..a_ * = ,  ear.y i z was due a- m o ? and f---
                                     W&? ,
                                         lr‘ e: aoouc 2. r; pr, and that was the cnly trs-'n
                                     which Is contributory as well ...
                                                                                  r           •




  Cr.ief Constable:                  What about the buses?


  i.-.sp “ir!c-D5.viias:             N'o r a a l problems £3 f a r as . . .


  Ch Sup: Nesbit':                   No sir, you could travel - at 2.30* cm Idrove frora                                         *:~,s
                                     Penistone Road cast the ground toHalifax Read and                                           ther-
                                     was no traffic whatsoever.


  .::i*f Ccnscable                   J 1- -    .   ,
                                           -S--- 1 >*/a* 1st s use as a
                                     v.'£5 delay         ■a* individual                                    *   1 «*   «• ~ - —   *    *

                                     and chars b'asr. V any holdup
                                                                                              - a i d e d tc the frustrate:
                                     of people COi-i ~-s tc the ,^at
                                                                                              ihar seerr.s to be s e r a i r h :
                                     forv;ari.

                                     Now SXedrly at 2 . 3 0 pa w e ’d got problems In. .that ar«a
                                     tve'c s« _ ch« r=4 i clo«d. we’d got the sheer t r W - T       ^
                                     peop.e, Would anyone like t o ^ v e ne and .      weTv / i;„ ^ s
                                     1 is-, ^   O;   J /-
                                      ,                 «-»Cr.Ci-l5
                                                            >     !a “'l2       *,-»-*        r a
                                                                                      * C.WN,g*n.    ~ ■
                                                                                                  u3 cn.c^«t                         -*»s   r

                                         M "c c f. ^ a « d figure-thas was given to a*. Sow was
                                           a b? 11Q       m =•«*••>. 2 .30 /2 .a? ?□. Sc what n-^be-s
                                     a.* we talking abauc at 2.30 pit?


 Supt McKay:                         In «XC3SS of 5 000 M d fra!_ wh__ .                                  ^

                                                                            »
 Ci"is: Cor.atacle:                 At c . 30 pm?


 Su? = McKay:                       Ve* and increasing. Can I take you back, ic’s ,,.0~ h
                                     mencionia* the history and this of course is a re^at of
                          ’         la-- v ! ^                   1 W M « e* « * « * tapping Lane
                                     laav ye 2.* . the rans were carcainly r.ot the-* in t^ose
                                                                                             !*<= = y . a r „ d       c !» " ln c r< u .
                                    ci.ua ». 2 .,, f3 vr.tr. a__ c m ar-jni«i louts »=p„--.i ,-d
                                    wanted entrance then.                            y?      *“a


 Chief Constable:
                                    3u; w e ’d goc problems before 2.53 pa
                                        ® +0151-236-1936                     22/07 '99 18:15 0 :05




 Supt McKay:                    had, they wers•arriving


            -3ns-et.«:      2c?; z:s:'s ja/rur. on ahaad and this* a whas I'm a - w — c
                            *c ' — « focU5       this enquiry will be on the p«-'od"t~-
                            as I see ic from about 2.30 pa to about 3.1q pm."After
                     ,      taat It1a j u s z a question of how we dealt with it' afta-



z-j.zz Me?'s.;;:




(Mr Wright than scans P2e3 for Ins? Purdy - who was no; Prsse-c fa- -
     worsinj e iScvhar* /


Chief C o n - * - * :      Secau*. as I
                                                                  Her-, -
                                                                        ” r Purdy was very



=u?c . v a r s - a ^ i :   Yea h i was b e c a u s e by 2 .U=         c h a r e was a n ar.arnwu-
                           Oi rj..-.- pushing ...


Chisf Constat:-;           o-f.«v. bu- f ' c —    ■••* z-- -o *> •-            •
                           .    ‘ .     7 "     ’"         ^          P......... as a n y o n e    ar.v;hir.* ■
                     !     *a_, s:su*   ;r.e peri zz fcs c-.ve-r. 2 .30/ i .^5 p.T,?


supt Marshall:




         Cv,nava a _ e-    ,Ar.i snould.v t have bsen any problem.                 AGREED - NOME.

                           Can you tall     whac che g e n ^ . ^ . c c u r . a w „ .              how many
                           a-,ss:s were ta.<ir.* place? WR?r«-.there
                           ptacs? AGREED - XONS.                                                  ■ ^   w   *n ®
H F S G                                          ©+0151-236-1936        22/07 '99 18:15 0       :06
      t




   Ins? Sykes:               Virtually impossible, the people who were arriving c.z-i
                             csen driny-.ir.r end the sheer rr.ass of nu“ber 3 cf pec-l* wit;
                             d r i n k   s-.-l                     '




   Chief Constable           And if ve'd started r.s/.ir.r arrests w» v/ould have


                             Tali S3 about -he radio.         Th=re was scrr.e fault/crcbi*.-



   Supt Murray:         ,    Ac that ti.-a reports wers cc.ting in into the control rocn
                             free, officers outside.


   Chit:' Ccr.sc5.3i*        Vftrs you in control?


   Sup; Murray:        ’     Ites sir, chac there were radio problems that siessaias were
                             breaking u? £ri<± they weren't receiving control.    We h*ve a
                             civilian cqaraunicacior.s officer on stand-by and befora v-
                             could contact hisn r.e actually caiize round to the control
                             room and said 'the radios are breaking up I've ca-e ra see
                             what I can do'.    He did replace the pack set.


  Ciliaf Constable            Can anybody say whether that caused anything a;h#r than
                               irritation. Vtd. it in any way contribute to the events
                            sa-which followed"

   5<1c z Ma.c s ri-i 1L*    Yes, I thins it did. -I was trying to pass a .r.essaie about
                             the gate snd E'could not get through on the radio ar.d I
                             eventually changed channel er. sty set to Kar.-erto- -cad't;
                                  scouc — ne cr3 3j.3.ii o: cn^ gate. Z. would ssv tlrac t^“t*
                             was a little bit later than u , 3 0 pci because tha prob’ .acis
                             surrounding -he gate vers about 2.^5 pm.


  Chief Constable            -3U see nJw. you've 5 0 -t to be very careful hare because we
                                 talking about the gata a.-.d tha gate s . You are t$
                                   h o w ’oany gates?


  Sups Marshal1:             I was talking about the gate at tha side of the Lettings
                             Lane turn3tile.


  (Mr Kayes clari fias and point3 on the plan to the gate spoken of).


  Chief Constable            T h a t 1$ 'jgata'G*. There's another gate, gate t o
                                                                                n f   •••
                                                                                    . mat
                             feature it saens to me, I ’m anxious to get this particul’
                             aspect...       You were talking about relieving the press in
                             front of the thin; and the press was caused by everybody
                             crying to get in the ground vithin a short period of tirz^
HF S G                               9 +0151-236-1936             22/07 «99 18:15 0 :07




                       When the message was passed that you wanted the gats
                       opened It wasn't received In the first instance.  Is that
                       right? I've oads a statement ...


 Supc Marshall: ;      That is rlgh t .   Eventually I was able   ...


 Chief Cor.stable:     What tine F.ozer, what “ ise are we talking about?


 Supt Marshall : 1     Probably about 2.^5*

                   i
 Chief Constable:      About 2.^5 pm when you first cetited, in conjunction with
                       Mr Purdy as well.


 Supc Marshall:        Tha situation becase untenable outside and Hr rurdy was ir.
                        extremis ac th*= stage and was beg-ging for me to do
                        something to relieve Che problem.


 Cr.ief Constable:     When ha was talking about the gate which gace was he
                        talking about?


  Supc Marshall:       He's talking about the 52-15   s.z tha side, gate ' C .


  Supt McKay:      ‘   Would it help If I 1 ..Heated the ... at this point because
                        Che gate 'C ‘ was never under any pressure ac that coir.;,
                        it was not a point of entry and It was just ignored.


  Chief Constable:     , Ffeople were not trying to go down the road they w ere--
                !       crying to get through the turnstiles, THIS WAS ACF.ill

                        Can anybody describe the nature cf the events outside
                        those turnsciies?


  Ch Supt              . Can I give you a view as I saw it from the control rocs
  Duckenfield:           sir? Titles are difficult but at sotse stags we did have
                         this radio difficulty and I'v* got it in my mind that the
                         sirua'icn couldn't be assessed and developed because cf a
                         man in the control room changing radios and there was a
                         delay.     Hr Marshall was asking for help and the gate to be
                         opened and for one or two reasons he didn't get it. either,
                   !     firstly becausa we didn't receive the message from the       y
                         radio or secondly I know et one stage that I was delaying .
                         the situation because of assessing Vhat the consequences :
                         would be when the cates opened.      The situation wa 3 this
                         about 2.^5 and I'll corae back to the gate as I saw it. At
                         2 . ^ 5 there was a crisis and a decision had to fee made
                         whether or not to support Hr Marshall and for se to make
                          that decision to support Mr .Marshall. On the outside
                          there were C .- .V 3.--C fans. As 1 saw the situation in
HF S G                                 t i +0151-236-1936          22/07 *99 18:16 0 :08


                                                7 -

                           tha ground “hers were spaces at either end cf Lepcir.cs
                           L a n a. iehind tha- west stand there is a concourse area
                           that will easily accommodate if I've gat     . right the
                           crowd outside.' The inside was full. Quite a lerga area.
                           So on that basis, then the other consideration was right

                           csiiyiris tr.s kick c?f the players ran out onto the site’ -
                           which sxisz fcs I prssuse 2 .-D and that decision was taken
                           away.   Mr Marshall then ca-e across or sc.ua body did aad
                           the. massage cams in to the control room 'if you don't ocen
                           “his gate scon someone ig gain? to get killed outside
                           here ’ . And I could see. tha developing situation.


   Chief Constable:        And you don't know who said that?


   Ch Supc                 - i -~ t know who said the?, I know that somebody said an
   Cue *1-5n   id.:        the radio in a very distressed state, quite properly it
                           wasn u panic i.c w«s a case cf xor C o o 1s sake helo us h*r*
                           because there are people who are going to be in<uT-»- t„.-»
                           killed.


  Sup: Marshall:           I said that.


  Ch Supt                  N’cw I think the people in the control room will say what"
  Duckenfie I-        i    we heard.      Murray turned to sr.s and said 'I-ir DuckanfleV;
                           he want’s the gates opened what's ycur decision’. ■


  Chief Constable:         Let's pursue that.     We did-'- know which gate


  Ch Suat                  Well no bet the thing is I can take it a little bit
  Duckenfield:             further.  N'ow we get a situation where I can see on the ’
                           video and 1 think it’s the gate on the entrance fro.t the
                           soutn stand.   I ••don't know the number of it but I wer.t to
                           it last night.


  (Mr Kayes identi :ied and pointed to tha gate on the plan).


  Ch Supc                 Sight, now, there's a video sequence tha-'s running tna:
  Duckenfield:
                          shows that at that point fans were climbing over a wail,
                          fans were not only climbing over a wall they were
                          harassing a horse and a horseman was having extreme
                          difficulty. Now X know that x've heard someone say it
                          lifted but certainly that man was in great difficulty,
                          that horseman, and the situation there was,
                           CW % . * ~ C8 had'burst open.   Now I don't know                  '
                          TS-hat."'- ~                                 •••


          C onstable:     If anybody opened it it should be obvious, on. the video
F S G                                   f ? +0151-236-1936              22/07 *99 18:16 0 :09




  ? SiJP^ . .              v;ail 15 shcul«. if you 1   -3ok Tor that corner where I «»•"
  Duc.'.en: _eia:          watching i t , z hat 5 as 2 cper.ed...

                 i
  Cluef Cons/csc,.*:      -t". couldn't ce opened from outside could it?             kGR~~j SQ


  u.'.e: sup-              The- ;»-s cpe.-si ar.d it was shut arsir            rs,.
  •j-c<srf ■  •           ••«*•         v-,- r      j »                •”    *      — ro r.Cu
                           “T v s*r5           1        1 = w* s =?«-sc again. Sue t-e
                           situat-on was then that froa recollection chit pecpl* w'-c
                           ca"-£ .-” f"*» t-*re didn't appear cr. the vices to be
                           caus-.ng sajcr prcclejns ana also net only could I vate’       - t*-
                           vidao I could watch the terracing and loosing”*- th*"”
                           terracingthere was scill plenty cf space around the sices
                           and c s n s . c e - n g the video and the terracing the situation
                           dian't Io o k cifficult ac that stage,


  CJu.sf Constable;       Coupled with the large area inside the turnstiles.


  Ofc Hayes idp ci f ie d ar.d pointed cn                       the large area which ev's-3
  La ^ * * a l'"e rSa‘ ° f th" We3C     sZ&-n'd arid the 5upnstil*s leading to Lappings


  i.n.sp Delaney j        ? <<
                                 it was r.c prcbleni because I wsnt through there.
                  i
  v».'ief Ccr.st5.tla ;       1c'- rsci*


  In so Oela*;-v •                  <                       ■ -
             ‘ •          Qa~ & c              ’^ s open anc 1 vent through the g*te.


  Chief Constable:        ••r.a - t ir.e was that?

                  t
  1-3? DeUney:            : d=n*t <nov vhat.-tiiae it was.


 Cr.ie: Constable:        ? re-match, after zacch?


 Ins? Delaney:
                          ?re-:nacch.          .My serial' v:as directed to assist v<th t>-e
                                        a -:    ZA 0       r*       r3Urid to th * fcac< *?'***
                          .               c l a u s e peop.e were causing disorder at the



 Chiei Consta’rii:        Are you saying.


 Insp Oelaney:            the public...


 Chii f Constable:.
                          ■•-~ tics c: the turnstiles inside th e ground.
HF S G                                    H +0151-236-1936                22/07 '9 9 18:16 0 :10




  Ins? Delaney:           ' In3ids that area, inside that area at the bask of tha
                            turnstiles.
                     i
  Chief Constable:          Ir.sic
                            ir.sice tr.&t area'saraes      Au .      th-s WAS AG a ££D.


   •.a? Delaney:           And they were saying that if something was r.ot ccns
                           3C,T.eons was going to get killed our there.  r hsard a
                           asssage        ever tha radio 'cosn the gates e; the ba:> o;
                           Lappings Lana terracing’ . “is' gats was opened ar.d I went*
                           through that gate...


  Chief Constable:         Afiy’i'dea who authorised that?           That was at cventy-to?


  -ns? Delaney:            I don't know who authorised it. No that was after sir
                           because I was there for a few rr.inutes before...I ven-
                           tnrougn that gate ss.z saw Mr Purdy and I was then enraged
                           in pulling paople off the turnstiles because they were
                           getting crushed.  I was pulling them out to get through
                           the gate.


  vl"1*:’ Carts tab _ L    Can I just get that clear in r.y mini. When you were
                           directed in response to Mr Marshall’s plea for heir in th<
                           area you took your serial...


  .nst Delaney:            - o , I went I was c.n my own at that tirr.e. My serial vis a:
                           the back of the first gate which was gace 'A'.


  w;r .-.ayesthen pointed to gate 'A' on the          plan)


  :?.j; fl«L»My:           My serial was there. In response to that message I went
                            through round to gate ' C to sea what tha probler. was and
                            the gates were opened.   I went round the back.

                     t                                 r
  v-'-.r .-ayes then identified which gate Mr Delaney was referring co (gate ’C ) o-
  cne jls.nl



  ~ns? Delaney:            Invent through that gate and the gates            were chan ooer.ed,
                     t     'Z' gate was opened ar.d I went through the gate.

  Chis: Constable:         Whan you say it was opened^


  j-nip Oelaney:           r d c n ’t know who opened it. the gate was opened, we]


         >-onitao-e :      '.-.’ho was ,' was there ar. officer...
HF S G                                       U +0151-??*-1936                   22/07 '99 18:16 0 :1


                                                    -   10   -




                      !
  Insp Delaney:             Well share nus; have fcsan stewards on t.nat ga.e.


  -     - Me via••:         “hat gate was opened e nur.csr of tises.                 I was cy that
      II*




                            g&ca for so.?,e 20 .?.ir.u t£ 3 . 1


                            Is it a gs-ta that's normally used for caople to go ir. ar.:
                            out?


  Supt McKay:               T h a " 1s right and in fact it hat tc ce cpsneo to e.__t>v-
  ~                            n*ursd carscr.s ir.- There wera several injured psrssr.s _
                             went through in a car led of 2 0 .tiir.utes end It was 0 5 5 * 1.-5
                             and shutting all tha tirce but it was never under tha
                             pressure that...


  Srt Gutcher:              My serial was between/on tr.e turns tiles one tc _o ^ir ar.d
                             “ car. support thara vara sc~s yery distressac tscp.e
                             coiT.ir.s through there, ^sou cou_c see tne cru£r. ur.r0 u.3 r- t.i
                                                 ar.(i I cold che man to just cuc his foot or, tha
                      !      pedal ar.d let tha people through to cry to relieve scsie 0
                              cr.a c r ■j. 5 n ing forgett —cxets a- cna** s^age, — was d-a^^—..
                             people ovir the too of Che wheel and eventually want cut
                              therf. it was horrific out there.


      Chief Constable :      Well fine, wha: we'd jst is a real problem cuts', da the^
                                       * 4 •*                  C CC'^uC cL3C si•* ,».»£.-• •
                             opening of the gate, now can wa tall< about what happenac
                             whsrTthat 5 * ^ was ojaned because there ware a r.u.T.ber of
                               --
                              cri-r.js, cr,e is ■■ucser.ftalc saying chat there didn’t
                                            rC€ a p*
                              c2 rr.*..^      --T^Sr‘
                              C’r.* 573end anc               3 •-her   one is that there is a rush cf
                              -»a ^•»"*.»■ CC.T.17.S
                              csaing c"«•v


        :?•: Marshal]         There was a movement _cf people who had been queuing in t
                              f;:r.stiles , who cue ce z und*r cr.e barrier, it's a sort of
                                                                            «« a ua<* • f
                              it' 3 a ? b arrie r. tha y ducted un<
                              that gate. It was ay            impression
                              V■*U    « that there v«3 7^ r»‘t chat “an, n*«a 11
                                    f*9
                                 -<•«
                              iii       that . It ViStST;* Z en e no rr.rus


       v.hiaf ucnstao.ua:      When we calk about opening tha gate, it's a concertina
                               g at a .


       3upt Marshall:          I t ’s a concertina gata bus'it was only opened far abcut
                               four foot of its eight or nine fooc...


                              W o w was’ there a police horse there as well?                A'-r.i-3 - 'i
HF S G                             © + 0 15 1-2 36 -19 36      22/07 ‘99 18:17 0 : 1 2




   Supt Murray.         Yes sir. Can X give you my perception from the control” -
                        rcc- pcir.t of vie:-;, We wars g e 11 i- r me 552 .5 5 * in the
                        control room to open the gates and considering the
                        consequences of tha: and'before we ‘i x,ads the decision to
                        ops:; the gate the r = ' 2 was opened or burst or whatever and
                        a r.u.Tiber of people jot into the ground, whoever was round
                        there. That rate was not the one that was sectiny all the
                        pressure, the pres;..:.- v;as -ear the turnstiles. Gate ’A'
                        v/as open.    I 'r. talking about gate 'C.


   Chief Constable:     That's right but when you said the pressure           cn the
                         turnstiles.cr. the gate ' 1 ’ basically, that cr.e , it sake*
                   i    sense...


   Supt Murray:         We couldn’t see the gates sir on the video all you could
                        si« v»j the r.££5 but certainly the gate ‘C ’ there was net
                        the tremendous amount of pressure cn it. So gate 'C'
                        opened sir. n.cw I thought ar.d I was only looking ac it 3 -
                        tha video because you can't see it visually, I thought a
                        gate had burst ©per.. It n:ay wall is sacisone had opened i:
                        but that vaa before the decision fron the control rttn
                        ca.T.e to ooen the gate. A mounted officer recovered that
                        situation and out his horse outside and the gate then
                        closed.


          Constable-:   So really what we are entering into hers is a situation
                        where the gats.WE5tStiit*^che' ga5a;;cp¥n«d;;«4-‘ta«ri;w«s tu


                        aRcdirrolata- chain 'of action. ‘
                         >•- .

   Supt Murray:         Y o u ’ve gtt da .tar.c3 from tha ground co~ur.ar.der wanting the
                         gate open, the decision is being considered the
                         consequences from the control room and the gate is then
                         opened or burst..,; I t’s then recovered by counted officers
                         and shut and tha requests are still coming in frtm the
                         ground to ’open the gate open the gata’ and getting tore
                         demanding and so tha decision was taken to open tha gate
                         again. That tir.a fron ay recollection was a large number
                         of people ca.r.3 in but again amounted officer was acting
                         as a sort of a wedge and allowing ...


   Chief Constable:      And wa will in fact see the number of people who ca.te in
                         on tha video,


   Supt Murray:         After that I think tha numbers swelled and I just can’t
                   >    recall exactly wh_.   r.bars came in.


    Ir.sp Sykca:        The pressure on all those gates was trer.er.d0 u 3 and at
                         stages all the gates ’A*. *3’ a.nS 1J ’ were ail opened.
                         No: jiit ga;-» *C’ *i; thi gn:es wvsre opened.
HFSG                    !                          9 +0151- I S o - 1936                 22/07 '99 18:17 0 :13


                                                             -   12   -




  Sup" MarshaiJ:                 ^ a s k e d Tor the gate to the north stand to beopened.                    ;*~


  Chi*f C o n s t a b l e :      You •*'■=re t a l h i r .g a '::'- '. £ - - a ' - * ?


  --?* r t a r s h a l i :       T h a t ' s th e cr.e. y e s. (ACTUALLY MEA'iT GATE 'A ' ) There was e
                                  c r u s h . . . : asked f t r - h i t cr.i to be opened a t a L a te r i t a z e
                                  because ch at 52.-5 was being a t t a c h e d but t h a t would have’

                                  be tw een. . .


  Chief Constable:               l^ifhe position now is that because cf the pressure on all
                                  Cfre -areas at some time all three gates we reopened.    THIS
                        (        WAS AO a IZD. New car. we puc any tise cr, the cor.junctisn
                                  of, is that .a wail- vpointing co the plan)


  Ch Sup- Nesbijt:               It's a fence, £ steel fence.


  Chief Carts:               ;    So anyone going through there is cf r.o concern because
                                  they are going co the norta stand.

                                  .Vow anyone v;hc c o t .;j through hare (pointing co the plan)
                                  can. get through there as well.       A3", *13. Can v/e put a
                                  con junc tier. on these gates at all?


  m a p White:                   Yes sir. My attention was drawn ta the people coaling
                                  through gate ' C I was in the area sar'xed one to 1 6 . I
                                 cou«o see enrough tne gat in tne wall the gate had
                                 obvieusly opened.   I ha in'c heard an order for it to be                         •
                                 opened but bearing in .r.ir.d the noise that is
                                 undars-aniabls. I fought ray way out to see what Was
                                 happening because obviously there was a trer.e.ndeus press
                                 of people out there ar.d I feared people ware going to be
                                  crushed against tur-T"’ les a. to g. and I went outside
                                  there...


  Chief Conscaale:               Kcw did you get outside there?


                                  i, weric out of gite 'C', it was open. I went out there and
                                  we started physically pulling people 0uc of the crowd to
                                  release that press ana it seer.ed about a minute but it was
                                  probably four or five, suddenly the pres 3 Just seeded to
                                  ease I realised gate '6 ' then had been opened.


  Chief Constable:               Was the end product of all thht that all this pressure




  -:;s? ..'hita:                  Yes. the whole pressure was released.                      Sut can I say s:;e
HF S G                             9 + 0 1 5 1 -2 3 6 -1 9 3 6     22/07 *99 18:17 0 : 1 4



                                            - 'o

                       tha: if they burs: through sr wen: Ir. a deluge through
                       S»-« ’S' the ner-e.1 place for than to go into the north
                       staps cc tha west stand which chars would be enough
                       stewards on there to prevent them, the nor~ai way they
                       would gt through would-bs to go round ths corner to the
                       alaveted section which is on the north end cf tha c s r r E . c e
                       the elevated one ,  they would really have to turn to cose
                       nr.r-UgTri znnz                        .




   Chief Constable;    Are ycu ir. a position to give us a tints for che release cf
                       tha pressure?  Is the time you toe-; ycur prisoner out
                       there?
                   1

   I.-.sp White:       I cstie back    from the prisoner and noticed the tine when I
                        was in the police      room was 2/43. I case straight back
                        because ycu cculd     hear there was exciting things on the
                        radio cut couldn’t make out what they wars and I'd be bae's
                        aacout i.=0 when I realised chat someone had opened gate
                        'C' and y o ur ’ra probably calking another two/chrse minutes
                        before gate *3' happens.


   Chief Constable:    Now ail that was pre-kick off.            AGREED YES.    And so ^Be
                       sBjjflfions".in-opening the gates cook place and the-'pressure
                       tte£*rrelieved before the match started.



                       happened in a ».ir.ute the release cf that pressure.             Zz was
                       li::e a boiler bursting and they went through the gates cut
                       the surge cf people from the road outside would taka
                                           •- I*ut all chose people through that gate
                       and whilst chat was going cr. there was ^S^^er-.Venc^up'
                   ,   iftsilde' tha ground and chat added ur 3 «ri8 y£€cr‘*8 2 ?.'.rx&i&RT
                       piiaple inside the gate and 1 ’s. convinced that the cheer
                        from the ground whether the players were out or whether
                        the aia;ch had started was the catalyst that gave the a that
                       e:-:tra spur to gat into the ground through the gate.


   Cr.ief Constable:   Again, I ’u asking virtually the Impossible. The situation
                       is that *e have got ticket holders and non-ticket holders.
                       If the people'who were there were ticket holders and got
                       inside the ground they were intended to. gMBjWSg-gStg-any
                       jftsrpception of. th e number o f p e o p le 'who'^e.'revrseea «-:jnon~..
                       ^TcJc'et*'holders o u t s i d e Leppings Lane? .


   Supc Marshall:      M.ust have been ac- least 2C0/250 probably more.
                   I
   C.nef Constable;    Set r*ally w«'-r« calking about 3 ,0'30A ,00Q of when - if
                       you've get a ticket yo u’re not in the queue are you?
HF S G                                      9 + 0 1 5 1 -2 3 6 -1 9 3 6                 22/07 '99 18:18 0 =15




   i.ns? sysas:                                                                         ,                       \
                                         miilinj arcane the are » where tha queues a n
                                 :e Staja i tut a cordon of relics horses across chars to
                                 ilease th*   rassura cn       :uaj - .(<3 v-




   -"s? •'■-ii’id-iiviis:   I :;&s cr. duty Ir. that afa* ar.d I think char
                                                                       <-ri*r® are tninrs
                            which need to be said that ars crucial to tha eveit.



                            cir.cr. a tic.-:*t. to rob a ticket, to get through e
                            "-rr.sti le but ths press Ir. there was somethin; I've r.svsr
                            excarianced before.      This feeling-that thay push ths
                            carson in front tc j«t in cuicker and to go back 2 0 /3 0 / 1 0 0
                            revs had to he sear, to ba believed ar.d wa vert wcrkir.z
                            •*ry haro tc say '*0 0 get oac.<’ but they don't seea to
                            listen, chav dcrvc sass to have sr.y response. they're not
                            r.crr.al in ttha: respect.   I think that we r.ust sak* the
                            P -—.> - cr.iw cri.*.:'.    £ cij s&rc.


    ’.is:' Constable:
                -----       T
                            ..       -> ^
                                  ----  r -e ^ -
                                               ^ a „iS
                                                     s
                                                                     _■— ...•-i
                                                                   - - - «W---
                                                                               t ___,
                                                                              J. S~;i7Zi      .
                            * • ' * • *
                                      3  ^    . •>->*-
                            «-’**--------— -,,5 •>C -3 csr.tr* 1          Z Z> c.~k L    ____ __
                                                          seen T.n
                                                                 to r.a doir.; -i m
                                 :ac.-.a « ■ «            hi.'k let
                                                  ar.i - cMI.-fc             ;
                                                                 1 st ether cecpl*  find that cut,
                                                          tely.     1verybed;
                                                          y a ques tior, c:*


  -tap Hand-Javias:              tractate th at ’s ^j •*
                                 nation with       , GOO    o?_a a police horse would jo Ir.
                            ar.t they
                                 tr.ay wculi Z3 7 1 fer
                                             zav«    for ht.r. and rsspor.d to tha recuesc
                                 a people ve rsr/ t re      r.dir.f to any request 3 cr
                            directions they %-era Just intent cr. getting thresh'chose
                            turnstiles as ^uick as they could.


                                                 hs coriort of police horses across there to
                                                   assure...


  Cr.iei Constable:         What tiaa did you cordon Mr Sykes?


  j.nso aykes:              Across curr.sclias one to la (shows area cr. plan) ar.d they
                             were even divir.j under stozaohs of police horses.


  Chie f   :r-3 ; .         Hov tar.y people •.'••her. you put tha cordon                    :ro33 wr.at sort
                             - ..v...w c . s ',v —e ir, Le^^in^s lar.«
HF S G                                            9 + 0 1 5 1 -2 3 6 -1 9 3 6         22/07 *99 18:18 0 : 1 6




  (At :his point soraeone said possibly 1,000, 5^0 «-t Least)

                     i
          sykes :                    Mors, probably ftiore . becauss w e c.csed it of? ca traffic
                                     tc reduce the aass of pecple.      It was virtually like when
                                     the g-cund empties. yc-i'.c *■- 1 a ~sss cf people there. .At
                                     least 7 .0 0 0 /8 ,0 0 0 .


                                                     iszi.~z.~-z how isany r.cn-ticket holders were
                                     0 c 5 5 it help tc
                                     outside Lappings Lane when we lack at the actual numbers
                                     who have .one thrcurh the cs-putarised systs-n which
                                     indicated something in tne region of li ,GQG/i2 ,; 0 0 p* op is


   Chi if Constable:                 So about 1,500...


   ci. :upt N'esbit:                 Precisely, so we're ts..i.*"-ng in tartcs I wauis suggest if
                                      there's 3 , 0 0 0 peopl-'--tsice and there’s still 1 , 5 0 0
                                     ceocle cotting in we are looking possibly. . .


   Cni if Constable:                 Mine you, how -.any of     those would be for the north stand.
                                      Ke'ce calkins about 1 ^ , 0 0 0 fcr the west stand, we don't
                     !               know how many in that     eroup will cefor the ncrtn stand    -a
                                      we.


                                      Again, I think they car. :ii- ycu r.cw Es.ny people nave gtr.e
                                      into the north stand but else there is a dual access...


         ef Constable:                X think what v;e need tc - t m s is a rnatr.enaticai tning we
                                      need t: look at but tne real situation is you have get
                                      people legitimately trying t* sain entry in grave danger
                                      of their lives and injury and acticn was taken to release
                                      chat and clearly it's obvious there was need that the?e
                                      was need for action and all w e ’re tryins to ass»s 3 new i*
                                      the other forces that that allowed into play.


        Supt         1                 I can give yen a figure for the north stand - 9,800 and
   o




       :kenf i   e       l   d   M    r   Seal's print-out frca Sheffield..,


    Ch, .ef Constable:                So there’s another 1.300 there who could have been trying
                  ,                   tto get in there. Give tie a little more so that I can...



                                      •Jft'Ju* 7 , wHecHer- anybody was s e r i o u s l y i n j u r e d ?


         Insp Creaser:                The situation outside the section of the Leppings Lane
                                      terraces standing area, the inspector there spoke to ase
                                      and I tcli hi' tc withdraw his officers who were stationed
                                      two    a turnstile to search people cosing through. Those
HF S G                                  9 +0151-236-1936            22/07 *99 18:18 0 :17
                    !



                             officers were at serious risk cf ir.'ury. Shortly after ”
                             they wars wichdrawn chars were six. seven people passad
                             bodily cvi: ground who hadn't rs.Lr.Zii but who had nearly
                             fainted if that gives scr.e idea cf what the situaticr. was
                             like. I didn't see anyone havir.r er.bultnce crsatnent but
                             Chs.-s     a couple ef          being passed over tha haads
                             who wars suffering fr-osi crush-type .. .


  Cr.isf   Zsr.szs.z-Ls:     It saar.s tc r.e now that what “ust have, if you'd goc
                             and you have a ticket cnce you ra r.r. a__ you re looking
                             for is your j U s s to go. If you haven't sot a ticket
                             y o u ’re looking for i -.lit* to hid-. Did anybody see
                             anything that iiappansd through tha tunnel?


  SuptGreenwocc:             I want round tha i.nsida of the grcunc and tha ciosescale I
                              can put cn it is tha: I wen* to the area cf tha Upping*
                    t        Lana tarrata*. walked round on -ha teri.tacsr traok and
                              whan I got to the Spion Xop it was nearly kick-off tisia
                              and I went to the players' cu.nnel. So the timespan it
                              took rr.a to do that I can now re lata to what tha situation
                              was in Lappings Lana cerracmg.      it was a carniva^.
                              acmospnere,    In fact cnere were people, tnere was r\o
                              problem with that crowd ac that ti~e , there were people
                              who were pushing a little bit in chs ncr.ns.1 way of things
                              and they ware having a gtr.s wi zr. a uigntwaignt cea.cn ca_i.
                    ,        which was. being flipped between supporters.     Tixescale
                              wis* I started round a. oha Lappings Lana tsrrroing, saw
                               ihis. happy with everything, no problems, walked round
                               into the north stand to the Spion Kcp w e ’d had a problem
                               there, couldn't stop because it was nearly Kick-off ci“.a,
                              walked round to che players tunr.su and sncrc_y a*ter onac
                               the players ca.~e ou:.
                    [■
   ChiefConst«.L’l-s :        So now whan you got bath co tha west stand che atmosphere
                              was still as you described it.


   Supc Ore?'!-'—        •    Well, yes. thac's prior co che kick-off. Whan I want to
                              tha olayers tunnel we had this problem it was tha strategy
                              that: was arranged and we knew chars was going to be this
                              problems with tha press and Brian Clough in cerss of his
                              seat and oha arrangement was that r.e would co~a cut after
                              ths re firs a and lir.asr.in chat's after ch* players had gone
                              onto che field and indeed after tha trainers what have
                              you.    Ke case ouc .iftar the match had kicked-off. in fact
                              we had co clear the press photographers there.       I turned
                               to one of them and said 'what are you waiting far' and ha
                              said 'you know d&nm wall what - 's waiting for, we're all
                              waiting for 5rian Clough' but by chad tir.e the ga-^e had
                              kicxed-off. we had to clear chem off, Clough cook his seac
                               just behind che dug-out and I went b a c k 'into che entrance
                               of che tunnel, looked to ay left and ac that scage I saw
                               people clir.bi.ng over che fence in chat cer.cral pen. I
                               ironsdiately then went round to tr.e scene at chao scaje.
                    *          “her-s w:» . 1 : was --..--ult to clearly relate in tsrrss of
F S G                               1 ? +0151-236-1936             22/07 '99 18:19 0 :18




                         t i z s 5 z 9. l t but my distinct impression is thee ch* cur,nei"i,c
                         ch* back of che terracing was no; full in ochsr words one
                         was     sujj*scinj.. •


 Chisf Constable:        That tile tunnel was jasasd full of people.


 3 upc Greenweed:        Exactly. The terracir.j was full but not ac the tunnel a:
                         the tael*, cc succest that chsrs vers peopls...


 Chi* f Cons cable:      Inexorable pressur-


  Suae Graanwacc:


  Chi*?   Constable:     I can’t understand, I've locked at how chat pressure can
                         butli up co so .aar.y deaths.
                J




  Sup: Greenweed:        Seen it before, if I car. cozr.er.t or. chat first if I cay.
                          Ir. fact if 1 can coin.'ns^c on the Liverpool supporters. I
                          chinjc this has got co be very relevant and che treeless
                         ar.d tha way n’.y serials and inspectors are being Cai/.ed cr.
                          ir. terns c? the Liverpool supporters.     In 1 9 SC/ 0 I v* had s.
                          similar problen.    That was the FA cup ~.ac.:h with Wolves
                          -v- Sours.   Spurs had the Leppinis Ls.ns end and sorts Spuri
                          supporters appeared tr. c.'.e Scion -lot for whatever reescr.
                          they were transferred to the lappings Lane enc and as ycu
                          *;ncw we have the 71 cc.tnunity constables who sit cn che
                          frtr.t a? chose pens and it was necessary cn chat cay fcr
                          us to cpen a gate.


  Chief Co- 5 :s':I* :   Haw r.any titnes durtnr the course of a season...


  Supt Crear.wcod:       It’s che cniy ti.?.* I've knev.n it.


  Ch Supc       (        N'o, in 1979 sir.     It's happened before in chat area.
  ■ruev.anrti.o;'


  Sgt Goddard:           [•’» hav» done that before 3 ir wich Liverpool and Man U and
                          they ars about eh.e only two teams. Moe necessariLy ?A cup
                          nsriTt&- rcistwcn^st.


  Chief Constable:       And tha reason w a ’vs opened tha gate is for the self sar.e




                          No. when w e ’re calkin; about transferring people across.
HF S G                              ^ + 0 1 5 1 -2 3 6 -1 9 3 6            22/07 *99 18:19 0 : 1 9




                                             .a -

                        *s 5 o/ 3 * is ir.tarsstir.j, it certainly is frora r.y ctir.t
Sue; Crssr.wcci:
                              b g -s.,«s tracitally i*       cr-s s 'aS* Z^rth*r
                   : asz; ^ 6; % : " ir. 1980/31. Certainly in l f - 0 / 8 ; tt,
                   thinz v.-as apparent chat jecpls v e r s .screaking o u t , tr.sy
                                         ,                -v«.r
                   V«T5 J793S5Z                                   i i •‘-a-** VJi'-'B —***—“« V***
                                                                       -------i---/--          •'**-
                   > e« c-.-g        rhev crsr.ei the xates and cr. tnat cccs.-ic."
                                   t5t t W o u t but it «a* again tjressur* f?:a
                   the sac’
                          * e.-.d I want to cake that point quite clearly that


                   insHpcctor'S    ware briefed
                   suoporters      froa ~y esjeriar.ee of the* I f everything is
                   I3ins well      then there really isn’t much proole*.    s m z y .

                   jn-fr-s are     against thea they turn, they are nasty, ar.a




                    -      v  ck£y wh2" everything is fcinf for Chea. Ncv -
                    -,/a = «— c«f-? «a=*r.t to sav that if Che gase gc*s
                    arainst thsz i: vill t- intsr-stinz.        ; :1 s: saii r: -hsr
                    that ir. t=rr.s of bacy.:rour,i ciiac I thought there wculi =4
                    -uch ,7.cre i-tarsst ir. Liverpool because of hew chir.ri -.sr*
                                       «3--•'-••• »r ’earue run. Ar.c we wera
                    * - - .'i          r — ------    , 3          . .      ,    ...
                     locking and we had a plan anc - - «es ^vcrsinj w5--_c-•
                     S^'c" Kcp because *~e espectec s■rr.d  dt indeei get 1
                                                        .c. did
                     surocr:ers on the Spier, Ka? and had a sesresatac area



                     there was a thin blue Lina and the c m y way Chat was
                     actually scrted cut was vr.en tne officers jot tne-r s.*--s
                     cut. 5o I •..ant to se* it against tr.at background c: t.*e
                     c.1T- » a , i < i     vr.2»-        you*
                      r     C-"efle-'tier. new. - cannot understand, I can’
                      tern-,2 with the fact that there .~ust_have been so cany
                      ceoole that we took cut of there, i cannot coce to cerr.s
                      with the fact Chat there were people that were dead in
                      there pressed against the iV-.cinj. It was net evicent at
                      the first arrival. What was certainly evident on tr.e
                      first arrival was that people were against that fencing



                          t o g a s ’weilT ''they did try and assist us these pecol* as
                          we"1'      Setting this in the arena of, it was total sayhea-
                          Ever, with an ear-piece and I was we a ns o n e , cne c:
                          r.rc hear anythin; it -.as absolutely      mar;as if yc
                          :r.a: sense. V.'ha: vas clear -.'as tha: ;he pressure
                          co-nlr.r froa .the iac^. So th*r* weri !■> c;;icsrs d:
HF S G                                      t i +0151-236-1936           22/07 '99 18:19 0 : 2 0




                                               -   1C   -




                     t,ns           wno                     cv*     .
                     net zee the- cu: the pressure was so tight, it was
                                   f-ar. 'SC /' 3 i . So the only way t:«.could a???' ac:
                     i t ' v w ’ts try and get che- pressure off the back end I
                     'At... _o
                             w ense the fencing, I cli-.ied up cn-.o^ths fsr.oin*
                     a:,-d _ vent tc the™ 'rack ar.o poir.rez ttvn.      _ p:




                     reaction tc that at ail.


 Chief Constable:    ^Qn'the question of putting Liverpool at Leppings Lane, ars
                1     w e ’involved: in that decision? AG?.££D - YES.


 Su"; Murray:         Yes. This v.as discussed wit." Cr.iei supc r.oi.e ce:ore
                      Cuoksnfieid ca^ie and c.~e s a m reasons are obv.icuSi/
                      Live r o o d come frora che north and west and Notting-"*®^
                     •people froia the so-ch ar.d thsy head for these areas cf the
                                     r £3^;6^ v=is if va could, if there was ar.y
                      ®     -• , , ^ ^  ^   ^ — *»       a a » - g ••<■ J J™ *»* ** * ,
                      w r i c o k « 4 " k c " i r a s a I n , * w « ’l3c>-^ very carefully because vs
                      wars geicing pressure not only frcs Liverpool Foeccall
                      C**h but frc“ Britis’                " Rail '•■.■i*o -.vancei to cring spec- 5 -
                      trains fron N’cttinjhani into c.-;S V.a-Zi-ej,. or-o^e s»a.--..
                      rather chan Liverpool because there wsrs core oessar.gers

                       fix our a las: y^ 2.r ar.d las- ysir Livarpco- nad t.'.e k.erpii.*3
                i      Lane and the north st*,^d ana Jfctcingnast Forrest tne c-wne.
                       : v : sices of tha ground- l\«.•'*-* e: tr.e opinion -r.a.:
                       we tried to change i - reur.o. even got over tne ,3 i-S...a-
                       p-obletrs of changing ic round, the people would cor* to
                      ‘ (Xr-:Iy the sane place as last year, park in the sar.e
                        places, head for the same outs. and we would have had toe
                       :nuch...


  Chief Constable:      We were involved in the decision and the reason tha: went
                        behind it is the reason jus: put forward.  AG ? . ~ 0 - ' -3 -


                        Rirht, I think. I've got enough cf a feel cf the tmr.z to
                        b«~abi* to talk it t h r o u g h . Is there anything anybody
                        war.ts to say about ic?


   Ch Supc Nesbit:      I think one ching has to be said sir, I got there, ..r
                        Creenwood was there and it's fair to say Sergeant Cuccner
                        and Sergeant Morton had to physically clia’  o over bodies.
                        Chev were four or five dee? against the fence and the only
                        way*we got che pressure off was because they went to the
                        back ar.d starred c= pull bodies froa che back and then
                        they eventually started to r.ake a chain of people and were
                                    i         <_j>z zc each one and through to get
                            tr.er. o:':'-
HF S G                                       ^ + 0 1 5 1 -2 3 6 -1 9 3 6       22/07 *99 18:20 0 :21



                                                   -   20



  Chief Constable:             How many bodies were in per. four.
 m
 l 14)




  Cl"is f Constable:           Da we ,<r.cv:...


  Sgt Morton:                  ™|se -first five cows in three were dead.


   Sup: Greenwood:             It's clffirult to put this azain intt perspective.
                               Certainly when I cot there             sure there were people who
                               v/ere dead.      I *si sure cf that or. reflection •'but we'd no
                               i.-pact of that at ell. I had no impact, n c . I think ir.
                               terms of that there were clearly potential deaths anc I 'tr
                               satisfied new tha: they -us: have been ceac.            I've seer,
                               chat horrible photograph in che green paper that's been
                           i   crir.ted in one of w..<-’— —nc&y paper's today.        I '~ ccrv/tncec
                               at that stare because the actual recussts, going tr.ere
                               when the** were actus.i«y v-3 rs c s b u t — t was— t u r.“i- anc
                               a 5 air. ci-.escale is difficult but an officer turr.ed round
                           !    tc “ s end s = ic 'these people at the front are dead' and Z
                                Itched a: the,7.. they’d set the ?re;- Itck ar.d they were
                           !    1 3 =.:. star.tinr up.     r"*n sc you still car.'- relate it in
                                ter-s of r.umcers because there must have beer, people who
                                were actually underneath.         Kell they were standing up but
                                there “.ust have beer, people v.'hc were cn the fleer as well
                                but even then the fact that ve'd created a funnel and w e ’d
                                gtt therr, cut I can't relate tc that total ... I saw in the
                                g yr.nas iuci.


    Chief Constable:            .\:cr can 2. Lcokir.-? at the nature an; the site cf the
                                enclosure " jus: can...and $S£ryer‘  e there deaths- in' Tour?


     Insp iullas:               A lot of dead people beins passed tc the back of the
                                terracing.  I was in the stand locking down and I think it
                                ties in what was said at the front.       At the kick-off there
                           v    was definitely a cc,r'<y->lids.ted push z~ che front.  It caste
                                straight down looking at then, 3 aw the crowd, could see
                                the people screaming * 5 the front.      I ran to the back,
                                took sos* officers down the back and when I got to that
                                tunnel...

                           i
         Chief Constable:       Through the tunnel?


         -r.so s u . i ’        Ic the tunnel ac the back, i n 'c b n t e a d l c t i ^ ' o t ' ^ ^ ^ K c j
                                Greenwood has said that tur.ss®S^'*li.g,''packjed and we were
HF S G                               ^ + 0 1 5 1 -2 3 6 -1 9 3 6   22/07 «99 18:20 0 =22




 Chief Cor.s cable:     Was there anybody dead anc injured ir. the tunnel?


 Ins? Sullas:           They were starting tc pass :he dead people cacl-:, thers was
                        a larre r.."':sr cf de«o pec?


 Chief Constable:       Sue really then ve have a position. where the :erratis are
                          ill ar.d there is still s.      full of people trying tc
                          iz out.    AOKZZD - YEc.


 (Chief Constable then refers to plan resarcir.s fer.ee in pens three/four ar.d
 che fact that he recollects fence ceinj same size)


 Chief Constable:         re. there any dead bodies in four? When you ccr.e down
                        the tunnel in the centre cf the passageway there’s an iron
                        fence.vithjt. siailar - U : «att, i t ’s in half. f§|glhe.
                           w^rc~g<nng' I 'gathered up to now is that all the aeed were
                            three' where the barrier went.


                        I car.' t tell you that.     All 1 car. say to ycu is that there
                        was certainly three was where the n a *or problem was.
                        There were officers ac four and clearly there were people
                        ce ins tal-;er. su* of four.   Somehow tney inanag-so co £ - - tr.&c




  Chief Constable:


  Supc Or.eenwcod:       The link fer.ee.


  Supc McKay:            Orys
                         s
                         .•indicate that they were 'the people who, w n t tthrouga^.the ^
                         gatte'and it's unlikely I would have 'thought they ''SZe<5~a.$'~
                                               crtish hsvtny gone in.


       Ch Supc Addis:    Albeit tha: quite s few of the injuries, facial injuries
                         indicate that these people have beer, walked cn.


   (There is general discussion here about Mr Addis’ comment)


   Ch Sup:               Picking up what Mr Greenwood said ar.d people in che
                         control room might add co it, it was not evident that
                         there was a problem in three at the kick-off. There was
                         no evidence a 3 far as I see. when ycu see a situation
                         develop!.-?, any crowd problems. pushir.;, but it wa3r.’t
                         evident from there and I have z recollection of thir.kir.s
                         why hive they l-t t ~zz officer cper.ei these s.a:es cr.'o t:
                         traejw? Why huvvr >»■» 5 0 c-people ^oir.g onto the crocs?
F S G                                           ^ + 0 1 5 1 -2 3 6 -1 9 3 6   22/07 '99 18:20 0 : 2 3
                       t




                                                         22   -




Sgt Gutcher:                   I: v/asn't really a long tir.e before that gate w»* opened
                               onto the crack sir, because Z sir.: ir. through two, the
                               gate in : 3 pen tv/o was c:t- and Z went in through tha: gate
                               into pen t:-.'c and I susz have t£;:en between 1C/2C people
                               *td f-erriJ - -. - -hysitsllv ever :'•* r-ilir.r tcvards -*-3
                               frcr.t cf "i" three and in v*s only      en i: clsi:;: -earing
                               ir. mini I :i taker. tha: xany people cu: ovsr there, pushing
                               thea over dragging chea che cop - by that tir;e whs- it hsi
                               cleared a little bit you could see Z had a vision cf a
                               wcaan's face in & pile of people and she was purple. X
                               could see that v :~e .” s r.d.had t:    t: her and X ’•.■as one
                               or" che first' officers who leapt into per. three.         that
                                ciae the eats still wasn't open.


Ir.sp Delaney.             ,   My iacressicn sir when I get cn the pitch when I heard the
                               request fcr assistance was net 5 prctlea with the pens I
                                thought it was a pitch invasion.


Zr.sp White:                    That's.what I was told when I vent on the pitch,__it tvas a
                               •^’1'tfch’ invasion. that's what we went cr.to the pitch for.


                                Whsn I jos ir."3 per. "'nrss sir a.^.d I vas tryir.j to giv«
                                first aid -..•hat ever I could dc and there was just no way
                                tc ge: people c.:.     There virs officers up cn the fer.ee
                                dragging people over the ttc cut the git* wasn't cter.. yc
                                Just r.x: r.:v*j;5 z r "I.':?


Chief Cons cable:               Well why wasn't the gate open, dees any tody know why th<
                                gate was cpen. -fWhoT.»   the means of opening it?


 Ch Sutc                        The gate ;
 u'Uc5t2 n; ie 1 c :            open, eas;       Maybe it caught cn the hoardings restricting
                                it, I d  o n ’t knew I '.-5 Just throwing tha: ic, I sear, that's
                                        don
                       1
                                Oil i**«3 V’


 Chief Constable:               •Well you''    e hai a terri Sis tia* yesterday end certair.l y
                                 thinking      .bout it ever vi*,5 night to be involved in
                                 acnethins     like that is 5he sairt difficulty y o u ’ve 5 0 c is
                                 the feeii     g of r.ct be in S a tie to co anything about it.
                                 I c ’s jusc


 Suot Greenwood:                 I'd like
                                 afterwards. I think when tha officers who acted there in
                                 clearly extremely harrowing circumstances I was proud of
                                 them. They really worked hard.


 Chief Constable:                £ 0 . where io we go        here new. We've get che ?rir.a
                                 'Ai~is~.iT teaire at lur.chtias together with Douglas Hurd,'
                                 zi'.zz'i ir-.a:ari2 l thst's hcv they" see i:. This i3 the
                                 bijgest viiiu:jr ir. a football ground outside Peru.     Z : 's
F S G                  ^ + 0 1 5 1 -2 3 6 -1 9 3 6       22/07 *99 18:21        Q :24




        - 0 * 1 .- - f--'-;.; there will b« S5.7.2 f3T= cf ’Uditi*!
        •nquiry” '^eV ve'nc:hi-r to f**r sc all in a sense. v:.
        ’
        rave taken decisions, v e ’ve den* tr.ir.rs or. tr.e ceils si
        what vs saw ar.d what cirtu-stances presented themselves to
        **s.           I war." i = , ls* *s h&vs it as - - s jc:" uj w- r.:v,

         it is that the drunken caraudirg far.s, arc - t nou;::: tf
         this last nisrht, "contributed to this 1 st secsecody else say
        *thit. " ’co.Vt" las'* be ir. a position where v«' ars trying ts
         be seer, to be shedding any responsibility.           We carried cur
         „^      1 )•.>'*-v v~ 3 *erdsy■ V.-j cut w.-.at vc saw as essentia-
         In order to’deal with t-“s situation and tr.e krtc.<-on
         effect is face in a sense and we don't need to harrev;
         ourselves over it. At the same tiae we'vs gtt to be
         orofessicnaI in the way that we puli together tr.is
         evidence and again ve'va s=t ta think about that end we're
         here" we ars central te the issues which emerged yesterday
          ana w$ 75 goc *0         vs.; c*-s. —          w — ... ,v- -- <•---•
          to be central in pulling the ctnclusicns of this together.
          New a* the creser.t ti.?.e. ycu've answered the questions
          about the gates and we were te-.<ing atout tr.ree gates t.'s.*

         ^•vel qf ores£~re tr.at was t-—ere anc ^ns na****® <&.«& ®^a—e
         cf -eerie'. It ~a>‘ be that when we get a little closer i s
         recole'vho were in t.-.« a-ess =arkad one to 16 and a. te g.
         w e ’ll set sca« real idea cf the aoven*nt dewr, that tunnel
         inta these tve settitns. I dtn't see that there's rtuth we

         cursus first and t: find cut whetner gate                      a na-a oeen
         opened.          We knew gate ’5 ’ had been opened, we k n e w frea ."r
         '.fr.it* and Mr Sykes that gate 'A' was coer.ed as well, so
          there’s no aystsry aiout it the real issue i 5 the tizing
         and the effect =f those actions.                    We've get the enquiry ut
          to now.         I'.T. just a little bit dcubtful about whether va
          should pursue'it ant that si“ply is a questitr. cf trying
          to stand back fro* it see v-’hat other ceorle might think cf
          it later. We have got the Coroner's enquiry which he has
          got to pursue.           The question cf all the aspects we've
          talked about today are matters for the Coroner ought ::
          know abou; ss a- this stage we will continue wtt.i tr.e
          enquiry as we vcuif be conducting a Coroner's enquiry and
         ■ sixaly*gathering all the evidence tocether instead of
          p u r s u i n g priorities and aspects where che
          respor.sibilitv’’bia-te lies.                It will be with us for a long
           ti.r.e. The nr.est distressing and harrowing cf situaticr.3
           and I could see it on the faces of the officers last night
           end I can still see u presence to an extent taday and
           that's as it should be. We cannot accept these things
           lightly. There’re r.ot easy, they are terribly hard and
           the events which fellow on...                   I think we'rs over the
           worst in publicity terras given the press have had a run
           and we've tried to be as open as possible yet at the same
            title ret give too r.uch away.                I don't think there's auch
            else we can pursue a: this stage but you did a ssod Job
            and I feel for you ih terr.s cf what you have to deal with,
            out i:‘s eve : : : 3 w::i;h ari fcrtsi on us rather than serr
            our.        rporarirr.al i;;i3 ier.£ ar-; taken in ihe light cf
            all r h * " " i n f e r " : a v a i l a b l e ana r|3 HpS^aVfr«aso^COsj»*jftfc
HF S G                             ^   +0151-236-1936            22/07 *99 18:21 0 : 2 5



                                        -   2'4   -




                                                                                              t
                      that those operational decisions are cuestionabl-s. V."-*:
                      we've jst Is a si-uat i " which vru prscsrly res:.;-'!** w .
                      Ths Eiuncjj branch kncw-ecx* oi tvt*i 3 , ys1      --        -5 - ci
                      avs n'ts anc wh*t ha; ;en-.d befcre.       V.Vvt bean cr. :haT
                      Ls^ji-js ler.5 sr.i fzr yasrs a m seer. : : . 5 t.-.i-js ::.i:




                                                                                    Ur H ft
                      sc ds n ’t lets ret t:s _r.tr:: 5 ; 5 = rive abr — it Is: s is
                      v i zr. it as ".e'professi=nsl people v« ar« and jivs cu
                      response in the professional vay “ h a t is exreciei ~ ? m s .
                      That's r.oc ts say that we c:r.’t ^ i v 4 a true isprsisicr. c:'
                      whar v.'; saw chsre that it *:;s:‘a': vj'vj 5 3 5 z ' ~ z .
                             sav     v« «-» v-               --k* -a.-—
                       ressensibis' way, no; r.i's it, o^“ in taras of pro'ectini
                       it publicly I don't think that w* would be rijhc :.:w =3
                       ca talking about the ani.-aliswic behaviour of fans, chs
                       level of crink. Whoever is looking at it overall will
                       find that without any pro'ols-.


  Ir.ief Constable:   Anything else ar.ycr.s wer.zs to say-?



                       clear by 2.13          There was sor.e slight/srse tTEfrit
                       c : - 1 ; fr;~ 5 tctksbriiss tnr-'-5 *. Cuj*tioriose ;u: tr.at v
                       certain!’.' cleared by ~s 1 2 r “y c - -5 1 jus- before —■  z~.-
HF S G                                              W +0151-236-1936                     22/07 >99 18:21 0 :26




HQT-3 0? -MISTING HELD ON }!0>«3AY 17 A?S2w


r- - Va~i to establish how the build-up of spastetcrs occurred outside
U * £ u » .       .*» it o « « r . * .             «*    "•    «■»»           «*"*      0f
caused the b e l l 5
                                                                   Lara to be closed because of tr.e
 Ltg at 2.17 P= shows a request tor                           — a* -*-•*
    bie— s a.-s-tirsr.

 CC - « . » «. . t t K h t o l w i t             - «•» «                       £is fl°* of " = 5ls7
                                                                    title cr.wards.
 Marshall - -»c searcr.-n; civSi-a

 CC - O u r view t o t t o . t i l . t u r n s t i l e s cope w ith t s e volume o f p e o p le .

 Murray's perception - « 2-30    fa « M    f a —-<1• - *•**’
                         - « * * f. » - / ». , / • *
                                                                    a :M ‘
                                                                 twc *
                                                                     psns a i - - r . s , o w
                                                                                             !f | i ? ^ . ' * ° s s ^ \
 -*-»            w4 31 5w8»rX-I W&5 G'i—   tu
 go   ^w **   *                  .    7 __     \{K <«»• r•• *i/ou*       to 5 0 inco u*.5
 cu'rs a bit Of room ac Lappings Lane.          .•!s4 o---.-               e- a_4           -•-»
             . 3 cu~ « : i l « s end tha other 15 service c m «esc S-a^d ana w..e_
  Uopir.gs U h « sarrace.                -IoV o C 'peo?la'.wh° had to ®Q 't‘’r?'t5fl ■«“ "
  north stand through the '8 *tiirns&resf.
                            „■                -,•■ --•---•> = - 3    zz rhs hcider >.'*.ara to gc.?             z£-zz-z*
  CC - ■■'S.Z Z Z i S : - 2          w.C-*-        *3        c-
  . r - j ^ ‘* a - *
  . .            •■» •*----«•
                           ,r'   ^    3 C .
                                      **

  CC - ’What i s W .             t o t a l n u a b er o f p eo p le O r .  „ = u id b e _ a p p r = ^ ^ U p 9 t n Ss
  Lane V t « - . I v o           t! i . V.-estS t w d a.-.i» °rch i . a r c
                                                                    *a rath was the fact that f g a V t b a
                                                                     m w--*' - —~   » V rf  ^ g^ -T^TTfffw#
             z f the arrival
                                     .         • - T               1- 7 IQ «r 't/A a    w» —'i
   rr - •-on’ "i*’*v teocle were in tr»e ground £•>• - ■ ^j «••• •    ~    *#,‘
      -   ..O.V ...--1                                  r-- z*zs there.       Cc any PC1--C3
   zr.zz i s-*- ”'ar- on "-s c'
                              ,yr:in-!:-ai'iva o?-*'-- '
                                                       —                       *—
   offisar kno\i a.iychins about thac"

   McKay
             ,.      ,    . .c                  ir „ a ~— id xaca i .                        Should be sbis c- do
   CC -       We nasa to iisnci ;j poll.a o . ^ . c s . a ----*
    z'-.iz    frotn our caoloyasr.t      plan.

          ,T - 3  a-.^ 10           r-n^ 3 3 r--al3 tha: warssii*?a.                 So«aabody         aaor.*sc thaz
     V "" - / t •   **** * " T * **
    sus: have jinowr. v/hac was             happe.nlr.^ frier..

    c- - T V 3 was enci,iaiv out side police aif«c-.-on but it sivas an indicaci=n
    cha-. tha steward had r s e ^ n i ^ d cha prcblar. chat causea him to car.e acc.c.*.

    McKay - Not caicen scatezancs fro* anyor.a. Ihcarviawad tha PC yesesrday -^ _
    about 2.30 am the seaward was concerned abcuc tha p r ^ s on gate 3          On lu. c,n
    7-c-a-ive i-asteward ooened      the gate- ?C escir-atas aoout 5 O? ?ao?la «...
                !
    through but cue  proolen -was «w„-  chac1* f'-is-
                                  ti;en «.w«   t.»ose<nalde
                                                      .ns*«*wera fpassing »
                                                                          -..tnei?.;ticiet»
                                                                            .,-••
    over cn« wall and under che s=.c«.

     CC - What time was the radio down"?                      Were you receiving spasmodic
     communication?

      Hurray - Several messages car.* in "we cannoc read you breaking up ac
                             wa could ring tha cor.-ur.i car tons officer who was at t *
       ---         ' —         .      ..  *. . .                  -r.e rz-iio and kr.ew tr.are
      gyrsr.as-.ur.. na turv* 1 -? • r.e r.ac
      •was j o " s thing wrrng witr. it,   -_:r.a a-'out          Pn -
HF S G                                   ® +0151-236-1936                 22/07 '9 9 18:22 0 : 2 7


                                            .   2 -


CC - When was r.o?=»I c or ^ n i c a t i c n rasusad?

Murray - t,*.. • % * > «      >'3                          ^       » « r . o » 1 rlii’a '

                                                 *«h                                    *-,} f a -

 c : - Did th s f a i l i r s o f tS« M U B unicM ioM have »                     « ff« "?
                                               .1 ..■=s                   S ee T.i1 -0 CS 8.
 Hurray - 'Not - i:S: U ? i e « « e f f e c t ^                         .,d f3r
 Lar.s-hy delay cafora gsra ' C was opa..a„ a ---

 CC - How did vs gat the sessage over to open taa *»«.«*?

 Murray - rassad ovar personal radio.
                                    „              Q f investigation'as to how a:>d by
 CC - It seams to be an area for a i-aac c—        Ql x-‘     *
 wfcea the gs.tas a: uepoir.gs Ur.e wer«. osar.sc.


  s n .ui a r r « i ^ ,y « s » » « 8 « ^ -s y ‘"
  want through.

  CC - L«: U5 SS! if                >--='<s «!»' “ >s *=i:'* = "

  ScXm - S o rt.* o f                   «W«* .S w « . l « i o !                             « . * * '•
  was under.
                ‘                                              sacf barrier that sarara-tes
  Marshall - Cats not nor.-s.--y v...~3- *----- -
  rates A and
          =J,       -vaz lei to tha gv:a hair.? cjar.ad are vary claa? at _
       * --s1-"---- - t  *•"                        .                cha oroblaa outsics ar.-
   £»fiv-rsta*s’.? There was a caniar.G to ao         -..i-ng a       • .
           .‘I               and a. -ecuire^nt for chat g&ta to 03 ooer.eo.. I, i*
       " If*.                        a ; -aariar.d. How and why does not set.- to raattar,
   ir.~a.2 .-a_ a — v*.                  “ ^_r.          r*r>i has » t to be thought •about.-




    CC - Rtf' gates between pacts */.5 and 2,f3.        Duckanfiaid said the gates were cpar.
    and He'sbit said they were shut.

    Nes'sit* - The gate on .the top of tha ranee that runs right angles c* tha pitch
    was closa’d'whar.' I got tha're;'*

    CC - Whose responsibility is is to open tha gatas:

    Mole - Inspector i/c of tha sector who has a padlock key. and It is checked
     before the r.atch that the gates are open.

     CC - *    a « d to 6,   Ate    w   « y who op.M4.it.
     £aces we re, opened or closed and. be abl« to supply the identity of the,
     individual «,*o had the responsibility.
                         .„     ,       . _ -u- : *r*oifia!a Lar.* terraces.                Convinced he
     Mole - Inspector Wnite;-aLv<ays wor\» th- u*e.pinss uar
    ..wouicl*hav®’
                 ^ Gnlocked it.
HF S G                                                                            ® +0151-2 ? S -1936                                     22/07 *99 18:22 0 : 2 8




r r . GO                -           r - < « « ~ J . i n . 1 4 . « . tu n n e l-                                    W » « re s p o n s ib ility i . i« .
 there to divert: 'paopl* - anybocy?_                                                                                                                —
--------         !                           1 «iViS-and *4.5^Speifific* instruction^
 2 ucic*nfi»-d - Tnsoactor Wa-ya,y.l»a-aa--ai.«       ..... . ----------- .— -----
 q s ^ h f ^ Q S S * - ..at/phase riraawaaw*
  —   .     — ^       « • v * ' * * 2, —ndi v —-iua— *
 CC - inspector v.r„_.e     ----
                                                                   -i *               -     .•>- _____ - -- bsfcrt Mr Whi te
 \T- * ~     .'m
            »*
               ~ ^7*5.2 57 *&s *..3
                  « _                     .< «     m    -   « a                       .     t t . t —              *"




                            ,        _____ .   •       <mJ —m     T — C
                                                                          •*   %r-»j ^ "w »^ r s I r«>.w s»             ♦* •* *
                                                                                                                                  vinsijCtftftA.'C’
                                                                                                                                  «*• "
                                                                                                                                                  ^vi'v
                                                                                                                                                      ^
                                                                                                                                                        **''           ,
         - r,3 ir.ft <—                            v^a- v—                         *
 /an^arits*. >

 ..Top o f ---.= tu n n e l s o l i d w ith h o rs e s - t h a t p r o c u r e h a j p e W i j U . t / e a r .

 'CC      W*» th e r e any . U » n t o f t h a t c o n t r o l p u t In th e O rd e r!
                          a.         -h,t = ti-rages me is thac we have a team
  CC - Uaic.ua situation. The factor thaw •..    5        axoerien« is wide.
 -of officers who have seen ana done it all be^o.e.

   Hole - Selected th* officer* for various duties in th* l»0«l'ds« that they had
   che knowledge.

   CC - Ccr.ar ars* si controversy is plar.n-ng.
                                                                                              •         - wir-. , sarii -final and how would we
   H oi. - A s i.d V t h . l - « n d , can w. c ea                                                                                    ■             a _8d t . tc = s - : c r
                                                                                      " r       a c U n ^ i £ i                       ■-■* r « » r . , i d «
              _c giscios re. traffic, s;a 2 :a:;rs
    - no way. ’



    ,             \             -                                  r      ~       o       o         n         about 2.20 jfci-.-<f ctVeri-n-n*                       - to ^
                                                                            of the U v .V » c o l fans in ac chat scaje but
   . S ^ l T ^ r i - S :                                      The/ usually leave it until the last clnute. t a n . to
    the d i r e c r s r s en^r^nce                                - no s o r e c r s w c t h a n . 1 3 -a -.
                                                                                            ■*-u        >_ 3».                        Whv is i" wi*h. zr.z sstic
    CC - Is it true thac tr.ey coae aw the *a*t B_a-c«.    -                                                                                                    e'-s'-ii
    crowd, chs sane facztrs, what happened tr.is year w3 c^a-**- -w.
    L e r o i n g s Lane'. What i * cne unknown tat-
       .. ..                                                        frc^i a good raatth last year, the
       .'•.t,vay - '•-.ni-Sv. s.? v & 9 w » a c '•■e ‘. a -            T
                    ,                  • .* * 1 * ^               - VU' ^.3 r 2 . 0 l . I - 01 CrtLS     S-.w
       i.‘va *'Zs')ol 3uooo?-3rs r , ^ s.Ijjo ies.ns-               ^     a         ^                f        i---
                          w                        ~ _____ *v ...             hiv* che aaaa situation as las^
                    zo cctuS in i07C - » C<i•.c,—— y »>^                                               ^  „
                        ,         .■                         a- -so d**u"kan cowale 5 carnal up. r,- a
                                                                                                          ^ l . I-«r =!-..« were far =,or« perple.

       CC -      Issue ca
                                  , ^     *r.z~*.’ients. saca
                              acaress our ^in-io- same _ng-
                                                                                                                                               crowd,saaa ciuta,
       3ar-»     fac-ors, saze level of poiicin? - all                                                                       30ur.

                            t               v^^-s azo     cut hack                                                                         15 minutes because              of
        .Male - Coventry v. Leeds mater, t^’o yea - 5 »sJ - a
        cr.e «aae problem.

        M ^ U - Sheer w e « h t of nuobers was extreme in »y vie*.                                                                            Where did U i H « «
        from.
                      , .         . _   „^                                                         r      .      e  e             d       to ka-eo calking about it
        CC ' Purpose cf :r.« --seeing - nc>T                                                                   s.c-v-v                -
HF S G                   ,                         U +0151 -236-1936                  22/07 '99 18:22 0 : 2 9




                                                       j ,-an* f-ari   " t r a v e l l e d Penistor.e Read.'
N'esbit - i dan’t know v.r.o-* »».. c-~*                  ", -1      -0 roas2 0 r supporters-
HaLirax'Road to rarsan Cross end                            2.*, P* -3

C= - S i v i s i o , „       try « 4 . . t r t l i . * « . »   tk . « w d » c « . f r * . < » » * •« « “
build up which flooded dawn.
                . • . . •„....        _••’ .'«,•»                       v;srs s5ssir.s
rr - Cot :o gstasiisn          -a.-.- c. ----
   :*3 Sro--d and hdw sany were cppartunists.




        T7     *   . .          ‘V* e F
 'ocv$-«jin5 throu?n c&s turr.s •«•**. '

 CC - Problem at 2.1* pn - Leppings Lane closed at 2.17 ?»•

 \;,-cr*U - Messase didn’t ir.rr.ediat ely get through.                        Ver.icles st.i. cos-*ft «.?
  the roundabo-, L.d prablen with service buses.                         •

       •          *    «     *_ «. 5 ix Qn*7ar*'^s outsice to ury and a—»evis.we t..»
 Oes - -What was ;oone from aoouw Z--,, on-/a.-.s
 problem.'

  \i2 •_£ _       did ;we decide ta deal vith i” .

               -             Frsa the video it didn't leer. =ao bed when Rcgsr asl-.ad far
  Lejpins* Lane ta be closed.   Sense.■:=*? seeing               o.. l ..,,,..*-
  and" a bus bavin? difficulty in getting through.
                         '                r                ='-<«>i a^'tar 2.21     pm, don’t know why.
  ''‘urr^y - R^spor-s-G--             icr cr,4 - ^ 4               &              ^



        i'hsra ..wis: a probiaa anc. wnac -’
                                           -ere we                     -.15 -- a--*.--
   bs adding ta i*t.

   Marshall - The practics is ca git people into the ground as quic<iy as
   passible ta sta? then loitering.

   cc - ? r . . « a r t : « 4 p n U M i « o u n 4 K » w » « t l M            u4 «        • « « l» « " »    »f
    responding : ■t.'           ?.-. .•• •

    N-sb-'c -      told me that the problem w i t h    theturnstiles      was thatfansfrom                      _
    Liverpool- were getting into the area of the turnstiles, *«.ctinS ^,toJhe ■***:£'*
    had no tickets, and'.were then .bar 5 spin? and offering nonejr:to get .la.-. Pol
    officspa-*Wr«-^'crying to get' into 'the cso«Z to pull those blo^ao oa„.

    CC - Can we get hold of that evidence.

    Mole - Same preale* last year.                     Publicity to sav don't come if you haven’t g=-
     * ticket.

     Marshall - Instructions co che Inspectors ^t.the checking points ana
     Tankersley and Oughtibcidga1t o 'be vigrrous aaaut checking the tickets.
     ^il'3r_T.a if half have tickets and half ian't.
H F S G                                                      1?+0151-236-1936                              22/07 '99 18:23 0 :30




     .                             -r. c-'Sirlv h : out in cha p r % « - dsn't cc-a I'
                              Sccke cr. Radio Trent ar.i Racio Merseysios.     letter
 you .»a»e..       a^          , _____                    official prcjri-ae,
              ar.R      •£«£.“ ....... -- - •“     »*
 _e--srs to rasssociv* Chief Gens':a
                           , ___„ ,. ____           s -•'•r3 cf settle in the is.se I,
 Marshall - .  --:•y
                   .y experience -*
                                  i=      v.-- *3 - c r---3 . * * .             ,       ,- ,
                                                            * C S f C T * Z n £ 1 S S « I** £ i .r „ U                        y- 3
 iin.'.ites - ir.zzTZs.~z z o get pecp-3 .r."

  5-*r*v ii y , - ~3.r,-iir.x ire                                                       ^•
                      <

  and c l e g * i n * us ch* s / s - * a .
                       'i
  Nesbit - Vihich gate was the                                         afficar across - pressure on his?

  ,CC -'s-A'Sros's V-. t    'C'-'i:-

  OuckenfieId - What action did we talcs aoouc^the        iz the build          up at the gro'ir.c.
                                                                        build up^at
  Siccilsi^icri o? IcoV-iTfcS at* Cns c?3v*c si"1       «ia.---ori c.. th- ^terracec      ar.d thinking its
     , ..        «    - -    .   .    —  ••*««   — a  <
                                                      V>-~  ' a  s  d Ls   to        :ae.
                                                                              GiSvftTS       Car vich
  ruiidir.g up.   rriu«- :u" «■
                             a         -..5 5 5 ^ * 5
                                       -•                    ;---------— -
  i3udl"&iis-.

   Mars’
                                ,
       :'.2.11 - Message hrcattast tut tecp.e
                                                         .        _ ___'   m—*u—
                                                                              ’**• •>*•"* Vjk'S’^
                                                                                   n-. ----

   CC - v/nat massage -as he sanding cut?

   Marshall - Tanncy about the turnstiles to get pecole « stop pushing. Also
         control to send >-k, S^tonT in the Undrover w,:- a douo.e rA «,«.•»
   wr.i:h va us* a - .t.scch.5 s ,
                                         *♦ r.«               ^
   ■y.tl\ay ■-■ Heard j’assags cutsid'sV

    "srshall - ■.'.’■ant ir.ti? "--j crowd tt 2.5r. 5 ^-?*'                                    s-oo j»-S— n$.

    Juciianfisld - U . ^ 5 sa appro*, consider-d* lay in S tr.« Kici-off cccausa^of th«
    s ' *'•'»“ j q -            ’•»a r            *   5 3 * * 3^ 3*1    "*1^   '••; c    5"C U -s.   §4-                 ■■
    VVhIIsr<;an*'ds?Ins' delaying kit-i-cif ch* teass ca=ia out.                                             If last push ca=« ac
    Z.5O p^i '•■<h«r> r'“* taa.r.a -;j"S o u t . . .

  : :GC^^Waichj';cijie.^ f ir s t ?;'

    Marshall - *!aver sav< ga.e 3 e s « n .

    CC - Sykes? said A.and 5 -vers open.

                            r.C ^          ....

     •-■'Shal- - A:t*rs3t bair.g =ia-i« cc 3t=?a she gata and the sate was ceir.g shaker,
     vigorouslj'. "at' worried because thay cir.*t go ar.y-yhere under eh« -crrh wzol*

     M2.r3 r.alL - Concern about injuries                              C??~» being pressed up against cne gate.
     2>'c'<»rifield - When you sent the -essage Scge.r, I' ~espqndad, -I. thoughc.. c.ii«re ,
     «a3 also a cesiasi /ro.n sozmbody in difficulty - give us permission .to.open,
     th« gate or it's.going in any way Vi--- ; -•

      . •>   ~ n       Tiiit was ,r*c »                           var) p-*cp 1^ c_ir*oir.j o^’^r
F S G                                        9 +0151-236-1936                     22/07 *99 18:23 0 :31




Marshall - Asked for sac* A co be opened.                      Sgt Higgins? opened the gate.
           '.I
Message every 'avail *.'?>' *            zz? sr. to "he concourse cf Che north stajid".-

CC - On gate S is an o f 1 1 sr who say3 it was opened a: 2.3C pm.'                             : zr$»z gzz i I
the officer will rsspond "3 that aspect.

 Me nay - Crh      j**' ~tcrs which are sirnifitar.t.         If the first few pecpls S.IT&
 fttir.g itwn •r#4 V —Tvr.^I* svsr**'bcdv 5 . 3 5 *.vr-c ccuss w". r ^ u j r . 5 * - ^ ^ i ' v L —c*,»5 cr..
 When you gs : tc «hs lunr.el a-d icc?. down you car/ w S55 rr.e piccr*f ysu s* s
       —£ Z'lm Z cf the grass,     rattle ntt aria to gat or*                  -r.a                    Hugs
 numbers of      people   who cannot   see  ever     the  heads.

 Mo is ~*'What did. we do about the tunnel and people seeing it and going for it?

' Murray      Total lack of information, apart from Mr Marshall's inforsation.

 Male - Somebody has agreed cc cpen gats C .                     ',-fnat we have dene to atcorrvticdate
 opening 'C'.

 Murray - A lot of people in the centre pens.

 DCC - Who is opening and closing gate *C’?

 atewarcs cut pej .ce:

 CC - (looking; at photographs ) It was not open at 1-.?;.                          ‘1^.52 clearly''show 3
 the gate shut.- 'Whether it was ccs.n ar.i shut again.




 DOC - After you ha-i she soael gates closed v*3 i-                                ■ou said let's get the
 prsssure sway.*

  Marshall - Cate C vs.* opened and then the .-cunts i clcsed off the perimeter
  gates.  Perimeter gates under attatk ar.a shaken.
  flee
  Ops - That harrier *a* fcroken and-want* loading at.

  Mole - If we opened gate A and expected a rush, r.obilisedofficers                                toneet     it.
  she sa.ue question is going to he asked about gate C.

  Murray - Nobody ever said open gate A, 3, or C - request for "open the gate,
  open the’gace" - n’
                    o 'srecific gate. Gate C ca~e open and the gate was shut
  as»i=i. «

  Dutksnfield - The Order has officers listed. and once shat central tunnel
  becor.es full the officers control thac and it is shut off and people directed
  off "to'the wings.

  CC - Bjr>lt’V f a c t that regardless of the experience they will *s till;Thav"e''the
  proper _z~\ “«       In accordance with the'Ower? T c White when briefing his teirr £
  will aa pars,of the hrieftng say in th« even;' af"etc?                                                             “>

  Ducsenfieli - 3r 1 2 fi r .is were arranged for Friday d o m i n g in the north stand.
  Serials walked around the gangways and lockei at tha problems. Every
  a^perlrte-.ioni took V.s r.*n 2 round the ground ar.i pointed cut and- calked
H F SG                              ® +0151-236-1936                                                22/07 '9 9 18:23 £3 *-32


                                             - 7
  through chs probieas.

  Mels - 3 ijnifleant to l-:ntw •.•;hen the perimeter r&tes were clossi.

  ;r^Ma8^i^St^«Sffggtoa 5.ci.-syfkadEgaS^s at e s.^js^^5s?«^gBw:*

        Understand the business about the log but i t i s a factor that somebody i s
   Stins v.z -.eV.i sczetr.ir.r of Kcz 7;   - w   . v 5 - a - - i *   '.'•“• « ■ ■ « .   >,v   ,’




   contingencies ta ceal with tha"fill*d ecaha, i.e. the shutting off of the"
   tiirWiell"''

   Marshall - Inspector '.vhits was believed in difficulties through the
   turnstiles.   Inspector Bennett clir.bed over the tcp cf the parapic. Inspsctc:
           &£!%3d r<or* i—di-izr.*! s^!ris.ls c&c3»U£3 ri^ cculd 5-5? chs orcb 16n .

   light serials deployed at 2. ;0 pr..




   Mo Is - Value cf stewards being .sse.-,...

   McKay ’ -Need cc be -icing house-to-house enquiries, cubs, ambulance iter. etc.
   Should get early contact with whoever'is running the enquiry.
                                                                                                    ♦«*

   CJ - Identify'the persons who were on chat turnstile and ask the question wha
   were your perceptions of it, capture that, and direct the attention of the
   enquiry team.

    XcXay - Should we be circulating Merseyside asxir.g for officers who were ac
    tr.e club?

    CC - The enquiry tea,^ will clearly da'that (see the injured persons). Rather
    let c : vj enquiry t2 a.~ s a the injured people. Need to pull out tha evidence
F S G                                                I ? +0151-236-1936                  22/07 ' 99 18:24 0 : 3 3


 •    <                    *                                  - 3 -

knd atticuda o f people in '.vadsley and Leppinjs Lane.

 McHa;- - ‘•.'s do r.sad to sanure tha aviianca o f th* stewards.
'Coug Loci: and Basil Jena* should have zhe nar^e* of stewards.

 CC - On cha Lappings Lana tarrace, you can go in ar.y pan can'? you:



 CC ™ No cc.i.rol                   zsccls gtj irts^ds                5 t*^?*wr,i.

 Adii3 - What n» would li>e to dc buz                          don't fee 1 it        prudent until scns'cody in
 '•'•"asz Midlands decided, i . e . set up a s a t e l l i t e in c iie n t roo?. in         *’
 Xsrssysida - aost i-.pert ant. :r!ad an o f f e r frcr, : ; . i : - : : : 5 zo use c h e ir KCLMIo
 ecuipsient, and so use chair indexes. We should            be getting1on with that.

 Duc'-canfield - (Computer printout s i t u a t i o n . .„. I s i t .right and p r o p e r thae.we^
 seek the information before the enquiry t e a s comes. r.t would help us to lcno'-f
 .Vi.S. U L uS printouts say at 2 . -5 s z z J


 Mole - ? has than locked in his safe*.

 CC - How many people ir. pen nuaber 3?

 .-ic.c.3 - Healtn a m safety i x e w c i v e nave go;: erscr.ing cn wna- cney ns=: ;o os.
 Don’t want H i S to dig up the barriers and z a s . z then away. They have carried
 cut «o,Ti2 stress casts and one barrier removed.

 CC - Has no indication of wciere the death*; and injuries occurred.

 ..sS-it   ■   - i7,   j   , us s j n p 11 jr. c f   szir.s    -   zzzLzs   - i--?    ett. .

                     ithinj in che tur.r.sl co indicate which way che spectators
 s.touid go, it is a ,?.acter of choice.    Clear fro.7. che ca.r.aged barrier in pen 3
 indicates          the .tain area a n d ;asra« with Mr ’A t i ' o L z thac it was r.cc a
 sudden surge from the cack

 CC - ’ve are in no way seeking to interfere in any way with the snouirv but
 sinpiy the problem of running SV? and policing events in ;he future.     We need
 this type of discussion and to .-enow what actually happened.   The focusing of
 e .„_ence .ha. wii_ assist tn c.*is is our procis.n anc we cannot ignore ic.
 Identify and feed into the system.

 McKay - Report to tha Coroner has to be done by us.

 Adiis - It is a suiien death 9- cir.es.

 McKay - Had assumed responsibility for Coroner's enquiry but due c- aspacss
 arising fro.r. the seating will leave that to 'Mr- Slaae#'

 CC - What is :hs nature of the enquiry? ,The enquiry is thagathering of
 evidence.     The Judicial review which-is going to baannounced t o d a y is goin g
 to review the evidence chat is gathered and if we leave‘it to West Midlands to
 provide the evidence we r.ighc r.oc %*z tne broad scope of evidence flowing in.
 • •e have to be the authors of most of the information fed in. We hove cc be
 ac»_\a a r .u •;m.d che areas where ch*» s v i c i a i i c e c s n be found.
HF S G                              1^+0151-236-1936             2 2/07 '9 9 18:24 0 :34


  •   .•                                  - 9 -

  CC - How ars wi joir.j zz crsanisa t h i s . Id en tify che cu rn scile people ar.d
  when we have na-.es see Vr.e people c o n c e r n -i.

                                                         icsr; s-ffsri.-vj iis;r^*5
HF S G                                      I f +0151-<46-1936        22 /07 «99 18:24 0 :35




                        i
                                    DE-iP.ISF WITH SUPERVISORY OFFICERS
                                DEPLOYED AT LE??INGS LANE ON 15 APRIL 1939

                              HELD I S LECTURE THEATRE, POLICE HEADQUARTERS
                            BETWEEN ^,CC FM/S.tfO ?M WEDNESDAY 19 APRIL 1929




  Deputy Chief Conszabia (Cha.irr.a-)
  Superi.-.casder.c Greenwcod
  Chiaf Inspectors Creasar end '^ari-;
  Inspectors Sar.net:, Sullas, D a r l l n ? , Delaney, Har.d-Davis, Purdv *-r >y'~s
               Ecc';1 ’ Sviraen, S u m s , Crawford, K i ^ i n s , Morjan, Payne, Pro c c -
     inor.as a.-vc wmc^ani                                                                '




  The below is a precis of the notes taken.



  TUNNEL CONTROL

  J.C is POS312IS char
                   o.-s.. a spectators
                                  — -«.« * *
                                           rush
                                            '*•*•• through
                                                   I..i--wws;i che
                                                               w.-»* tunr.ei
                                                                     tunr.fi impacted into the
  •     o. densely      cites sr.tnfl-*"?
                              acindir.s spectators and caused —£^ surge       .. which
                                                                                  ,.   resulted




  ^ o f f i c e r (5ns? ! u l l « ) in the    S e w d ‘l o o M a * down over pens three and
  4 V.U. *-.< a crowc surging in cotn pens which wer.r forward but didn't corns ba.~>
  *r.« .enwaaera hearing aoout this cise tha whistle blown and a roar of sh-
      owe      ir.aiCjSte the start of the gas*.


  'found'                      t?aS*d5' t:“a C-r;'nai was d e a r .                            ’
           ,*?! !u n n e l . 2U5 ca3uaitiss were evacuated this way.            The saa* colics
          e(* ;:                                :ra-3«y *ova'     i rrom     track through
    .....      ^               -'-‘*3~s t.-.ere, i n d u c i n g police officers, were como>•>;«’y
  ur.iuars c: wnat r.aa occurred.                                                          '”
                                                                                                  can

  ^IL'                      •   ” -------        i.w^wwitp.t-ticniariy wnie: £uso Cre«er) Chat
  J o U - I°^
  "°-lvv      a y(il^«reda-°V*
          i*a**                   Supt* T
                 Ufierped ..o »s h?3       donQ,by
                                        Fr«*u»an    th* uf °r
                                                 s policy).                    and .static


  C0M.MUNIC AT 10 N S


  !V.1‘5    general comment thac b«eause of crowd noise on occasions it was
  impossible to use the radio e v e n ^ t l T e a r pieces; ' cc-sicns ^ was


  -s^Ls^^.l,^ ^ ht ^-C3:a^!en^ Ch? : C"* "or"al nictie cn thes« occasions is •talk
         '"..-c.. v.i., seer. cv*rioad the systera, ■.
F S G                                f * +0151-236-1936        22/07 '99 18:25 0 : 3 6




Officers ars outside the turnstiles checking re. offensive weapons,
drunkenness, etc., but their duties never interrupted the .aaxiaua throughput
f**   t

Secondary Searchir.z Inside

This operation beearas impossible circa 2.15 pis cue to crowd density.

Throughput Problems

s.     Non-ticket holders;
s.    Wrong tickets;
c.    Aeteapted unlawful entry - ciiabing ever etc.;
d.     Crowd coapaction;
a.    At seme point turnstile 1G' becomes jeawied due to physical distortion
        .-caused by pressure (Sgc Crawford) (unique);
f.     Attesoted corruption a & turnstiles.
g.     A point -!/ have teen reached towards the end with turnsziies being
         freed.



HATCH DELAY

If spectators had been inforaed that the match was to fee delayed this nay have
reduced their frustration.

One officer (Chief Insp Creaser)"losing police Land Rover radio requested tha:
consideration be given to delaying start of the match.



MAN7CWZR (FCCT)
              3                           {
Manpower deployed at the ground from circa 11.CO aa:-

          a.   outside the turnstiles ar.d ir.ro Lappings Lane - four
               serials ar.d supervisors;

          b.   -insi'fa the turnstiles - 2 : serials initially, reinforced
                by s'further serial (Insp Delar.ey/Sgt Higgins) circa
                2.^5     at C-ate 'A'.

          • 3 aour.tad officers Csae ’Mounted’ section).



 CROWS SEHAVICUa
                                                                                  4t <U




 Ths crswd scarced entering tha ground at 11.00 aa.        By 12.30 pm queues wer
 farming but were orderly.      The queues ever ti.r.e extended all the way rack
 Leppings Lir.e bur r.o pro'cle.-ns experienced.

 Sy --15 pa che queues were last and spectators were new packed outside the
 turnstiles in large r.ua'rers extending back to the periaater gates in a solid
 .T.3 S 3 . The train contingent arrived and spectators were entering the ground
 in an injured and distressed condition.
HF S G                                  ^ + 0 1 5 1 -2 3 6 -1 9 3 6    22/07 '9 9 18:25 0 :37




                                                - 5



  Sgt Higgins was the sergeant in chary* of Ins? Delaney's serial deployed
  inside gate 'A* and ic was definitely 2.U0 pm whan he get there.    Insp Bennett
  w»s not cn the turnstiles roof. JRf?f-!Higgins was at gate 'A' about 10/1=
  minutes taking abuse from people about the crowd outside.    He        'into th#
  turnstiles and three people wars stuck in the area whe^re on* should pkss
  e’
   hf'augh. Thac was lil<« that for ssss ccnjidsrahl* tim* end this was
  the pressure was so great one pars sr. could not ent®r che turnstile alon#.

  Ins? Sykes s^_L it was about 2.50/2.55 pra when he was outside and gate 'A'
  opened and hundreds went through.

  Chief ,Insp ,Waring .said ha was -.there about .Z . 50/2.55.. and ,tfa.at,, £&§i.,op«r4n* of
  t h ^ ’igarte’•'’
                  •('•*.A*-> appeared' to 'make a'terrific difference in releasing the
  pressure outside.

  Sgt Higgins s a i d that   at 2 .5 0 /2 .5 5 P<« he radioed and said "if t h e - gate isn't
  o^ened^there is going to be serious injuries and possibly los<~'rtMW'-ff*" and
  r/ceTvecTa reply'-€0 * th e , effect't h a t ' ^ i f t h a t ” i s 'V h V c M e * o p e n th e
  First of all ch.* steward would not oper. the gate and after a few mere air.utSi
  his officers assisted in opening that g a t e .                Ks»           thar curing the
  "seeding 10/15 minutes the gate had bean bouncing and in looked as it if was
  gsing to coir.e off the wail.

  Insp Sykes went through that gate.
                 f                          «
  I: was agreed that it was a negative rush through gate              'A' in terms cf the
  hspperiinys on the West Stand terracing.

  Sgc Thocas was at -he perimeter fence further up Lappings Lane. He did net
  sea gate 'A' open and there were still many sucocrters outside turnstiles 'A'
  " 'C.

  Ins? Purdy said that gate ’C ’ was opened a second time but was unable to
  supply an exact tine cr sequence in relacicn to the opening of the other
  gates.

  §fS;'ftergsn. Believes that the numbers '|oing through gate *C' were-not m*ssivs.

  Towards the ^ d it s*«sts f&ghljr likely all th?e« gateis ;wei*e 'opened. This B»yT'-
  have resulttadrftom the message- from force canero^a£S^3gg^^mlr7fg^g-fnjs, - .



  SSCCMM&XDATION'S RE. rl'SLIC SAFETY

   1.    Consideration should he given to f e s t e r us«-of lo\id-.'Uillers'. ■

   2.    Suggestion made thac ail the                                replaced with
         a semi-circle of new ones. There are gapsT'in the area where the
         turnstiles are currently and this is where people are getting crushed ar.i
         trapped.

   *'        l’P*!aut* ' watches entry to the North StazTd^iar^ gi^ feia^^^rtugTiirtl
         six                access' via ‘S'enistane'Road. 3RR^??5laV''geni^:qn¥^Ro«r^              "
         Vurnstii.es~ were closcct tod.ohiy’turnstiles one to nine-used,
         ii&5rrici*nt".                  '
                                    W +0151-236-1936
HF S G
                  /
                  jjf                                           2 2 /07 ' 99 18:25 0 : 3 8




                                          - o -


     At normal r.atches entry ta the Wes: Stand i s by way of turnstiles saver,
     to 16 and 'A' to 'G ' . Or. 15.“ .59 only turr.stilas -0/16 and 'A'   'O'
     used. Again this is insufficisnt.

     Poor siting and insufficient numbers of indicator boards showing tha
     routes to the stands and terraces.

     Design of tickets varv peer - they were all tha sar.e type-o             arc
     would havs benefited frc-ti being coIo-^V coded to rcatch. the indicator
     boards {at 3- abtv s).

     Many of tr.e supporters sn-routs to tha '.Css: Stine tended ta go via tha
     tunnel.  Suggestion was mads that as ar. alternative in future the tunnsi
     be closed thereby Baking supporters go-round to the Stand vie bcth sides
     and easiri -oajescicn in tha tunnel.

     N’o i n c enti ve for crowd to get to ground early - pra-.-atch an tar: ain.ter.:
     could be provided.

     More horsas to be deployed at bis capacity gases than on

     ?.a. t'iaiing of the match - -.voirld- have beer, good idea to hold game on
     Sunday morning thsraby pubs/off licences being used les 3 bv su"3oc",te"'s
     before a'ar: of game.

     Suggestion :~ada era: pubs near to tha ground should have bean closed
     trier to tr.e iiiattr cn       but gsr.eral feeling rs. this was that if
     near-by pubs had baen closed supporters would sir.ply visit licenced
     premises further afield.

     Suggestion cade thac there is no need, for the fencing cn the terracing
     vhich forms the actual pens.

         suggestion. made re. the removal of the wail which leads froo the r»»r"’of
         the West Stand to the rear of the turnstiles ailravfhg greater freedoro in
         the area cf the West Stand terracing,

                    .-r.ace tha: ir, future *fbraatic« of queues would benefit frcr.
                    these used in r? 3 t Cffi-tes.

         Suggestion aade that lay-out of the ground i s not conducive to a large
         crowd, tr.arJio'; ws have always had problems with tecs la securinz ant"".
         i~~3 tr.e grtunc. Secause of this tha police have had to do too such
                        . which turnstiles 5 corners go through.
                                                               Discipline & Complaints Department
               S o u th Yorkshire                              50 Windsor Road
                                                                                      S f^ c
               P O L IC E                                      Heeley
                                                               SHEFFIELD S8 8 U8        c#>
              JUSTICE        wi t h C O U R A G E


 TELEPHONE: 0114 296 3094

 FAX’ 0114 296 3020

 INTERNAL FAX: 3020


                                Facsimile Transmission
Date:
To:                             C.P.S.
For the attention of:       ^                                                                  /5
Comments:
                                                         i/                          /U ^   h u fiM V




           /5 r 9 9                                                                          * rrf

                                  4 4 J z d z.          U       * £ * t        2 5            ' / 9 ? / 4

                '^ C o u ^ ltc ^ f-c ^ L s .                                                 jH & d r




From:

Telephone Number:                       < 9 if f y .   2 3 &      Z & 8 ij -


Number of Pages (including this page)                               £

la th e event of a poor copy, please contact:-
? ? u^ 1Yorksh,re Po,ice - Discipline & Complaints Department
   PH00® Number - Direct Line 0114 296 3094 - Internal Extension 3094
,)6-m.'99(TUE) 16:25                                                               TEI:0114 2963020                      P. 006

                       South Yorkshire
                       P O L IC E
                       JUSTICE wi t h           COURAGE




          Mr George R Croston                                                  Our Ref:           D&G/AMH/UO
          Prosecution Team Leader
          Casework Directorate                                                 Date:              6 Jul'y 1999
          United House :
          Piccadilly                                                           Recorded
          YORK                                                                 Delivery               RT 0793 3496 6GB
          Y01 9PQ




         ADLINGTON V DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

         I refer to your letter of 25 June 1999 addressed to Mr P eter Me balf, Solicitor of Hammond
         Suddards, Leeds, relating to the above prosecution and in particular to a witness statem ent m ade
         by former Police Inspector White on either 25 February 1990 or 1991

         On the instructions of the Chief Constable I have today carried out an extensive manual search of
         the Hillsborough Archive and in a part of tha archive dedicated to the liIrequests I have found a hand
         written original and typed copy of a statem ent taken by W est M dlands Police from former
         inspector White on 25 February 1991. I enclose a copy of both for you r information.

         I would like to em phasise that until today I was not aware of the  t e n .ice of this statem ent, nor is
         there any record of it on the HOLMES database relating to the Hillsbor y>ugh Disaster.

         I am responding to your correspondence with the agreem ent of Assistant Chief Constable
         lan Daines and Mr P eter Metcalf of Hammond Suddards in order to sxpedite your receipt of the
         copy statement.

         Yours sincerely




         Mr A M Hepworth
         Hillsborough Archivist

         Copy to: Mr Peter Metcalf, Hammond Suddards
                  ACC lan Daines



                                  and CompUiacj Ovpartnumt
                       Windsor Ro«d, Sh-«.w 38 8UB                          The oerson dealinn with this correspondence is
                                                                               A m M
                       Oflfa* H ours 8 .3 0 am lo 5 .0 0 pm M onday to F r itW .          _ ®
                       Aa«w.rphou. o iu 296 3094 (Outo l offio. hourl)             M   H e P W° rth
                       F“               «“ — » »                            (0114) 296 3084
36-JUL. ’ 99(TUE) 16:23                                                             TEL:01 14 2963020                                       P. 002
                                                                                                        «£$>— >             efts(3S.4.41)
              <U.^ o6.'-& , '~£m. C 0^C4M^J^JI                              ^ £ ? ^ £ C s >2cL a4?                                   WC 414
              * * & £ > * /p r * ^ t u *    ca 1        WestM idlandspolice                                                          (Aaaadsd 8.90)
              f-t-f* -tin if /2^**^!}
                                                    7 STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                           (C.J. Acc 1967,*.9; tt.C. Ace 1980. 3.102; M.C. R«l«« 1 9 8 1 , e . T o j


                  Name     Harry WHITE
                                                                                                                  3 . / o      .     x d s
                 Age       Over 21            (Yes)       Date of Birth
                 Occupation Retired Police Inspector

                  This statement, consistingof 4        page (s) each * signedby me, is (rue to tie best of my knowledge and belief
                 and I make it knowingthat, if it is tenderedin evidence, Tshall be liable to prosecution if I have wilfully stated
                 in it anything which /know to befalse or do not believe to be true.
                 Dated the         Z5th            day of      February,                1991 .

                 Signed     H. White                                            Signature witnessedby      S.G. Brown
                                                                               Officers Name               S.G. BROWN
                                                       Rank PC                No 9032
                 I retired as a Police Inspector from South Yorkshire Police Force on the

                 10th of December 1909. having served 27% years.

                 I came to Sheffield as a Police Inspector in February 1982. and first

                worked at Hillsborough Football ground in chat season, up until the

                1934-85 season.               I worked outside of the ground, generally in close

                proximity to the ground but at various locations.

                At che start of the 1984-35 season, I generally was posted to the West

                Side of the ground.                 I worked on this position for moat matches,

                circumstances permitting, ie, if it was a low category fixture and I was

                noc on duty, then I would not work the match.

                At normal league matches with a 3 pm kick-off. myself and the Serials

               which came under my command, would take up position a: the West Side at

                becween 1 pm - 1.30 pm.                   The Serials under my command would normally

                consist of 4 Serials, upto kick-off, and a further 2 ~ i Serials from

                outside &'«;cer. kick-off, depending on the fixture.

               The duties of my Serials were to search for offensive weapons, to make

                sure the supporters had paid to come in, to check for drunkenness and to

               distribute the supporters onto the terraces and into uhe West: Stand.

               With regards to distributing the supporters, my norma:, way. depending on

               the anticipated numbers, would be to fill the centre jwo enclosures first

               Signed H. White                                            Signature witnessed by S. 3 . Brown

               * Delete as applicable
06-JUL. ’99(TUE) 16 =24                                               TEL:0114 2963020                           P. 003


                                             West Midlands Police                                    W   415   (SO SZ2)
                                                                                                     (Aaandad 9.«1)

                                             STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                  (C.J. Acc 1947,«.9; M.C. Ace 1980, ».102; M.C. &uJU* 1MX, r. 70)


                Continuation orstatemento< Harry WHITE



                and if necessary the enclosures nearer co the South Stand next.

                I would do this by placing barriers across the build...ng line of the West

                Stand at its ends giving access to Peas 1 and 2 and at the other end

                leading to Pens S and 7.         These barriers would be mainned by a Police

                Officer who would direct supporters to whichever dir<iction they were

                supposed to go.     At the same time, I would have Polxc ;« Officers on the

                gates at the rear of the enclosures on the radial fes*ces, they would have

                these gates closed and bolted but not locked and they were there for

                evacuation purposes.

               When tha central enclosures were full, I would close the blue gates

               leading from the concourse onto the tunnel, co show t•tie incoming fans that

               the central enclosures were full.             These gates would se manned by a Police

               Officer, who would then re-direct the incoming fans,                     These gates could
               not be kept closed for more than a few minutes, and i . any case whilst

               they were closed they were always manned by a Police Officer.

               ^r^or to tk* semi-final on the 15th of April 1989, I Ilad worked two

               previous 8 emi-finals. the Leeds Otd V Coventry City s<s#i-final in 1987,

               where I was posted outside the ground, but I cannot r<member where. and

               the Liverpool V Nottingham Forest semi-final in 1988 uhen I was posted

               again outside the ground in Penistone Road at Neeps E9d.                      In neither year
               did I enter the ground or the West Side of the ground

               On che 15th of April 1989, I worked the semi-final at
                                                                                        Hillsborough between
              Liverpool and Nottingham Forest, I was posted to the West Side of the

              ground with two Serials.

               I took up post at about 10.45 am.            At about 11.25 am, for the first time I

              briefed Stewards as to their duties.               At about twelve noon, the turnstiles

              were opened and I saw that the Serials under my comma rd
                                                                                          were in position.


              Signed   H. White
                                                           Signaturewitnassad by   S .G . Brown
96-JUl.'99(TUE) 16:24                                                   TEL:0114 2963020                              P. 004

                                                                                                       PBstWiail
                                                                                                          WC 413 (SO C22)
                                              W est Midlands Police                                        (Aaaod«4 9.SI)

                                              STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                   (C.J. Acc 1967,a.9; M.C. Acc I960, a.IOZ; M.C. Rulaa 1961, e.70)

               Continuationofstatementof   Barry WHITE


              On this occasion, there was no filling of the pens a: I have previously

              described because firstly it was an all ticket match, and secondly at a

              league match in April 1988, Superintendent MURRAY had observed me filling

              the pens as I have described, and he told me that I «as not to do it in

              this way and that the gates of the rear of the terraces in the radial

              fences were to remain open bolted against the wall ani that the fans would

              find their own level on the terraces.

              Once supporters started to enter the ground, I monitor*ad them as they

              entered by walking along the concourse area behind tu;ri
                                                                     as tiles A-G, and

              10-16.     I would also have gone around the side of the West Stand and I

              climbed onto the steps of the Police Control box to got an elevated view

              of the v-i t terraces as they began to fill.                    The central enclosures were

             filling quicker than the outer enclosures, this was qt.i
                                                                    ite normal and I
             could see no problems.

             Throughout the afternoon, I continued to do a circuit of checking the

             turnstile areas, the terraces, and also the refreshmemt bars, because at

             the semi-final the previous year, there had been a casth snatch from one of

             the refreshment bars.

             During the course of one of my circuits, I saw a young Policeman having

             difficulty with a drunk, and as a result I assisted the Officer to take
             him to the Police Room.

             At 2.45 pm, I left the Police Room, I know this because I remember
             checking my watch.

             There was some radio traffic at this time, concerning Lncidents outside

             the L*ppmgs Lane turnstiles, so I returned to the con:ourse area behind

             turnstiles 10-16 via a route under the North Stand.




            Signed   H. W h ite
                                                            Signature witnessed by   S . G . B row n
06-JUL. ’99(TUE) 16 =25                                                     TEL:0114 2963020                                P. 005

                                                                                                             •rce.2.81!
                                                    West Midlands Police                                       WG 413 C$0 022)
                                                                                                               ( M n M 9-SI)

                                                    STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                       (C.J. Act 1967,s.9; M.C. Acc I960, *.102; M.C. ftulaa 1981. r . 70)

                Continuation of statement of   H a r r y WHITE



                Upon my arrival, the situation was as I described it in my previous

                statement.         It would have taken me a matter of minutns to come from the

                Police Room to behind these turnstiles.                      Whilst at this location, people

                were cooing to me complaining about the situation outside the turnstiles

                and as a result, I attempted to convey a message to the Police Control

                outlining the difficulties, I was still in the concourse behind the

                turnstiles 10-16.              I got no response from Control.                I then became aware of
                            I
                a determined movement of people from the A-G turnstile area towards the

                South side of the West terrace.                  As a result. I entered the concourse area

               behind the turnstiles A-G, because it appeared abnormal to me.                                Having

               entered this area. I saw that Gate *C' was open and tie situation was as I

               have described in my previous statement.

               I have been asked about the deployment of Police Offio«ers to the tunnel

               area and the gates at the rear of the radial fences on the terraces.                                       The
               situation was such that although Police Officers had been identified to

               take up these posts they never did because circumstant: es did not allow it.

               I have also been asked about the gate in the dividing wall between the two

               concourses, to the best of my recollection, there was no Police Officer

               allocated duty to this area but it was quite possible that a Steward was

               present.         However, his duty was to assist and direct tjhe crowd and not to
               prevent movement.

              As for the direction for the opening of Gate ’C ’, I di d not give an order

              for it to be opened and I did not hear an order given for it to be opened.

              I just saw it open.

              All my recollections from then are as per my previous statement.




              Signed   H. W h i t e
                                                                 Signature witnwsod by   S . G.   Brown
 HF i Q           ,                   ^ + 0 1 5 1 -2 3 6 -1 9 3 6         28/07 '99 08:51 0 :02



      And th is D eponent, the said                     c o l in m o n e y p e n n y


      upon his Oath saith as follows, that is to say>


      y v nrr.unatinn is incal government officer. My address is

                              I travelled to Hillsborough on the 15th April 1989
c m
      to see the football match. I was with four friends. I had a ticket for
      the Leppings Lane terrace.          I had been to the ground on four or
                  i
      five occasions before.        I arrived in Sheffield about Ipm to avoid
      traffic. W e went to the ground                          to a public house for a
      drink. W e returned to the ground at about 2.50p m or 2.55pm, I am
      referred to plan DPP107 (Div I3).l >iave been able to familiarise
      myself wifa the pjan and remember going to the Leppings Lane
      end. Conditions were chaotic and completely disorganised,. There
      was no qdeuing system. There was a huge crowd of people milling
      about trying to get into the ground, and as far as I could see very
      few police or stewards outside. When I arrived, there was only one
                  ;

      way to get into the ground and that was through the turnstiles. W e
      initially thought we would have to stand and wait and that it may
      take aboijt half an hour but things rapidly changed. To the right
                  i
      hand side! of the turnstiles we noticed movement. People were not
      going in through a turnstile but through a gate. I refer to the plan, it
      was gate C . There was no stampede, it was an easier way to get
      into the cjround. W e went in, no one was checking the tickets.
      Because p f the problems outside by the turnstiles, I had lost track
      of my friends.      Later I discovered that they went into the West
                  i
      Stand. I was on my own and it was a couple of years since I had
      been in that part of the ground, but I hoped to meet up later with
      my friends at the car. I was present at the ground at the 1988 semi
      final, but not at that part of the ground. I was in the press box the
      previous year and used a completely different entrance. I had an
HF S G                          9   +0151-236-1936       28/07 *99 08:52 0 :03


    The Examination of
                                                                 continued

    idea that the best place to go was Pen 7. 1 specifically did not want
    to be behind the goal. Because of my age, I wanted to be where I
    thought ttjere would be more room and believed that there would
     be more room in Pen 7 rather than behind the goal where the
    younger ones usually went.       Because I had forgotten the layout
     and in particular the radial fences at the side and because there
    was not a single policeman or steward in the concourse area, nor
     any other signs towards any other part of the terrace, I took the
     only entrance available down the tunnel which is depicted on the
                                          *
     plan. Even as I started down the tunnel my plan was to turn left at
     the bottorh and head towards the north west comer. Matters were
     then taken completely out of my own hands within a few yards of
     entering the tunnel, which had a very steep gradient (see plan
     divider 8). There were an enormous number of people heading
     down the! tunnel, and I was carried off my feet for maybe forty or
     fifty feet, maybe more.   I then ended up near the front of Pen 3
     near the barrier that I later believed had collapsed.    I came to a
     stop wheh 1 had my toes faintly touching the ground.        This was
     almost exactly kick off time.     The conditions around me were
     terrifying . and I immediately realised I was in a life or death
     situation. With one of my toes on the ground I could feel a body.
     The only thing I could do was to shout and scream and to wait for a
     chance tp get out.   People seemed to be disillusioned about the
     lack of response from people on the other side of the fence,
     primarily the police and some of the people including me, turned
     our attentions to the supporters at t b a c k of the terrace, to shout
     at them to move back. Something must have happened because
     after not being able to move a centimetre for ten to fifteen minutes,
     a few of ^s were able to eventually move back towards the tunnel.
HF S G                          9 + 0 1 5 1 -2 3 6 -1 9 3 6   28/07 '9 9 08:52 0 :04


    The Examination of
                                                                     continued

    Eventually I was able to get out through the tunnel going the way I
    had come.     I have been shown the photograph (exhibit number
    RHHI/6I) which shows pens 3 and 4 I consider my position to have
    been abogt ten to fifteen feet behind the perimeter fence in front of
    the collapsed barrier.


    CRO SS EXAMINATION BY MR. CLEGG Q.C. ON BEHALF OF
    DAVID DlifCKENFIELD


    Before I989 the area behind the goal was a popular place to stand.
    When perimeter fences were introduced they obstructed the fans’
    view of the ground and I therefore agree that some supporters
    would prefer to stand back to have a view over the perimeter
    fence. That would include me and that is part of the reason why I
    wanted to go to pen 7 and stand at the back.


    On the day of the match, I had a spare ticket which I sold to a
    supporter at about Ipm outside the Leppings Lane end.             When I
    returned tp the Leppings Lane end ?t about ten to three I do not
    remember seeing any mounted police officers. I have been shown
    D PPIQ 7 again.   My attention has been drawn to the metal fencing
    and gates .between the road and the turnstiles. When I first arrived
    at ten to three, I think I joined the crowd and this was outside the
    metal fencing and gate. I do not actually remember the metal
    fencing ar\d gates because of the crowd. I was not one of the first
    to go through Gate C. but believe that I went through a minute or
    two after it must have been opened. I was able to walk through the
    gate quite freely. I am sure there were no policemen or stewards
    in the concourse area. If there had been anyone in authority telling
G          :                   9 + 0 1 5 1 -2 3 6 -1 9 3 6   28/07 '9 9 08:52 0 =05
           i
The Examination of
                                                                    continued

me not to go down the tunnel, I would not have gone down it.
There was no difficulty in me walking across the concourse and
going the first few feet down the tunnel. Then the sheer volume of
people and the gradient of the tunnel combined to take me off my
feet.   People entered the tunnel in an orderly fashion, they just
wanted to see the match. I was swept off my feet to a position not
far from the front of pen 3.


CRO SS EXAM INATION BY MR. HARRISON Q .C . ON BEHALF
OF BERNARD MURRAY.
          f■



At the moment of entering the tunnel I believed it was feasible to
go down the tunnel, turn left and make my way to pen 7.


RE EXAMINATION BY MR. JONES


There wejre no radial fences at ttw Kop at Anfield. The terraces
were completely different.            There weren’t many first division
grounds which had radial fences of this kind. I had forgotten that
there we.;e radial fences in this part of the ground as I had not
been in this part of the ground for about three years.
HF S G                               I f +0151-236-1936              28/07 *99 08:53 0 :06


    And this Deponenty the said                    a o r ia n   jo h n b r a ze n e r


    upon his Oath saith as follows, that is to say:-


    EXAMINATION IN CHIEF


    I am Adriarj John Brazener of the force headquarters Nottingham. I was on
    duty in uniform at the semi-final football match on 15th April 1989 with two
    uniformed colleagues.    I was part of the overall police operation with South
    Yorkshire pplice.   I attended a pre-match briefing during the course of the
    morning attended by Nottingham and South Yorkshire officers. It took place in
    the North Stand. There were hundreds of us present.             That was the only
    briefing I attended and Mr Duckenfield was In charge. I recall that officers that
    were policing at the Leppings Lane end were asked to collect a meal ticket
                ;
    and that was for a hot meal at a quarter to three. It was during the course of
    the briefing p a t this was said. I don’t recall who said this. To the best of my
    recollection ’Mr Duckenfield was present throughout the briefing.           I do not
    know the names of any of the other senior officers present at the briefing.


    I was on cfuty outside the ground in the area of the Pennistone Road
    turnstiles. I had a radio and I could hear messages going to and from the
    control room.   I do not recall being tuned to a particular channel.         I recall
    shortly before kick-off time that there were problems at the Leppings Lane
    end. I do not recall one way or the other whether there were any interruptions
    or whether It was a steady stream of conversation. There was a build-up of
    supporters at the Leppings Lane end and I recall hearing people asking for
    the gates to be opened In a very concerned manner.             I cannot recall any
    specific orders but, because of the radio transmissions I could hear, I decided
    l would enter the ground with my colleagues. It was the tone of the voice in
    the messages that made me go into the ground and there was a specific
    message requesting all available officers to go into the ground. I can't recall
   the time of the specific message other than to say that when I entered the
   ground the j, players were still on the pitch.        I have been referred to
   photographs In order to familiarise myself with the ground.             I rem em ber
   walking from the Spion Kop end towards the Leppings Lane end. Once I had
     HF S G                                        f ? +0151-236-1936           2 8/07 '99 08:53 Q :07

         •   .             .   ,


                 The Examination of
                                                                                         continued
                 got to an area between the penalty area and the cinder track I realised that
                 there were people in pens 3 and 4 in distress.
                               t


                 CROSS-EXAMINATION BY MR CLEGG QC ON BEHALF OF DAVID
                 DUCKENFIELD

                               »
                 I do not recall whether David Duckenfieid read from a prepared script during
                 the briefing’ I have been referred to DPP DOCl94(Div 17 at page 1148).
                 Serial 1 containing a number of police officers would be facing the Leppings
 ^               Lane terrace, amongst others, from the perirjejenrack. The document says

at
 ’   £           that this serial was to take its meal, staggered le f the match, in the gym. I am
                 referred to page 1157. Serials 14 and 15 were to police the Leppings Lane
                 terrace and rear enclosure south and north, and, according to the document
                 serial 14 was to take its meal after kick-off in the gym, with serial 15 taking its
                 meal in the gym after half-time. I cannot say that it was to be serial 1 and not
                 14 or 15 which was to have its meal before, kick-off. I thought jt strange at the
                 time that any serial would have its meal before kick-off, but what I heard might
                 have been a reference to serial 1.


                 Dealing witit the radio transmissions requesting the opening of the gates, I
                 cannot recall whether the request was to open the gate or the gates. I have
                 no recollection of any particular gate or gates at the Leppings Lane end being
                 identified by letter or number.




                 NO CROSS EXAMINATION BY MR HARRISON QC ON BEHALF OF
                 BERNARD MURRAY




                 NO RE-EXAMINATION BY MR JONES




                                                   I   \                    tts\
Mr. C. W. P. Newell
Director, Casework
CPS HQ
DX 300850
LUDGATE EC4


CC    Mr. G. Croston (without enclosure)



RE:   THE HILLSBOROUGH CASE

1     I enclose a copy of George Croston’s briefing note together with accompanying
      documentation.

2     As you made the decision that we should not intervene in the private prosecution I
      think you should have the opportunity to consider where the decision needs to be
      made on the outstanding issues outlined by George.

3     I am more than happy to take these decisions. I recognise, that as you were involved
       earlier, you may wish to maintain involvement for the purposes of continuity.

4     Please would you let me know whether you wish me to take the decisions as soon as
      possible.




Christopher H. Enzor
Head of York Division
Casework Directorate
30 July, 1999
Tel-.p
Fax:
DX: 65204 - YORK 6
2   ° hlv*.


     Op«K(AM        -




               CUO^'aM          \*      ^     Wv^JjL                 CAJ      C£ .


                 ( o Kf^K   O hkpbJ         H dsxxcU        C          I G g m         ^     clw *   <>(^lk

                 Lj^ ,               ( tuii A^ o a a V   }« C^MCdih t*\.   UiC^j[}>a^3 .



      .■                ie^Ji 4 1           *° O j   < " & O',             ««*'*»■ -   ' ^ ^ * 1

           JB.    <Uj v ^ < m         W b ^     t* < w    *~di .     Is * * M    I*u*l     u ta b U ?

            Uktoix          (JU> ( X                         +«1* -tt^cUo^OA.    .


               I IhOudkJ •

                  (poji w A             ( W^vc^o!           ^    KUMmJ j .
                                                                                                  1




5.   KEY CONSIDERATIONS

     5.1   Was there any unjustifiable delay in committing the case to the Crown Court?
     5.2   If there was such a delay, was it on the part of the Police in collecting the
           necessary evidence, or on the part of the CPS in deciding whether to prosecute?
     5.3 What can be done to avoid any such delay in future cases?
     5.4 Is one expert sufficient to prove a case of medical negligence?
6.   CONCLUSIONS

     6.1   In view of the serious and unusual nature of the case, which involved a thorough
           review of the evidence at several levels, the delay does not seem unnecessarily
           lengthy. In replying to His Lordship, the view was taken that the Crown should
           refer to both the Police and the CPS. The Police took just over 5 months to
           submit a file to the Burnley CPS office. Two months later the file had been
           reviewed by the Branch Crown Prosecutor at Burnley, and then a senior lawyer in
           the York Central Casework office, and finally the Assistant Chief Crown
           Prosecutor at Central Casework in London.Three months later the case was
           committed to the Crown Court. His Lordship did not make it clear in his letter to
           the Director whether his criticism was directed principally at the delay in
           gathering the evidence or in the review and preparation of the committal file.
     6.2 The force of the evidence of experts in Crown Court cases is not necessarily a
         matter of how many witnesses give the same evidence. In most cases at the
         Crown Court it is likely that no matter how many witnesses of one opinion the
         Crown choose to call, the defence will find an equal number of witnesses
         prepared to give a different opinion. It should be for the jury to decide, having
         first heard the evidence from both sides, and then applying their common sense
         and experience of life, which opinion they find most appealing.
     6.3   In this particular case, there was the added problem of the Police having difficulty
           in finding any medical body or practitioner who was willing to assist them in any
           way. Any further efforts by the Police to find further expert evidence in the case
           would no doubt have lead to a much longer delay in the bringing the case to trial.
7.   RECOMMENDATIONS

     7.1
30 November 1998      C H Enzor
           BRIEFING NOTE ON HILLSBOROUGH

                                YBF/3341/89


1.    ISSUE

1.1   Following the recent committal of Duckenfield and Murray to the Crown
       Court on counts of manslaughter and misconduct in a public office, ACC
      Daines of the South Yorkshire Police has written to the Casework Directorate
      at York to ask if the Director will be reviewing the case to determine whether
      the CPS should now take over the proceedings and conduct the prosecution.

1.2   He expects that the HFSG will make further requests for material from the
      archives under SYP control and he considers it inappropriate to give this
      disclosure if it was our intention to take over the case.

1.3   In the event that we do not intervene, the police wish our advice on how to
       respond to HFSG requests for further disclosure. See letter of 21 July 1999
       attached at Annex A.

1.4   The HFSG have written to York and requested our views on the custody of the
      archive held by the SYP now that the case has been committed. They invite us
      to advise the SYP to surrender the possession of the archive, and to inform
      them of any disagreement we may have with their legal arguments. They
      enclose a copy of their letter to the solicitors acting for the Chief Constable
      where they repeat their views that the archive should not be held by the SYP.
      Their letter of 22 July 1999 is attached at Annex B.

2.    ACTION REQUIRED

2.1    A substantive response is required to the linked requests of ACC Daines and
      of the HFSG. As the decision on non intervention in the private prosecution
      was taken by the Director Casework, he should have the opportunity to
      consider the level at which this decision should be taken.

2.2   Holding letters were sent to the police and the HFSG on 23 July.

3.    TIMING

3.1   We have been informed that Mr Justice Hooper, the trial judge, has a PDH
      listed for 3 September 1999. He has had the trial listed for 8 weeks in June
      and July 2000.

3.2   The HFSG expect a comprehensive reply from the police by 6 August 1999
      and have asked us to deal with their requests swiftly so that their preparation
      for the trial can begin.




                                                                                    1
n
i



    4.    BACKGROUND

    4.1   The Director Casework is well aware of the detail of this case up to and
           including the Divisional Court's decision in the application for judicial review
          by the two defendants. In particular his decision that we should not intervene
           at the request of the defendants in order to take over the private prosecution
           and then discontinue it.

    4.2   The CPS has previously considered requests by the HFSG to advise the Chief
          Constable of SYP that he should not hold the Hillsborough Archive. These
          requests have been refused. It has been considered that the CPS does not have
          the authority to advise the police on this point. The Hillsborough chronology
          schedule at items 34, 40, 56, 68, 73 and 81 refers.

    4.3   On 20 July 1999 Mr N Cadbury, the stipendiary magistrate sitting at Leeds
          Magistrates' Court, committed Duckenfield and Murray to the Crown Court on
          charges of manslaughter and misconduct in a public office. The previous
          week he had rejected the defence submission that the proceedings were an
          abuse of the process of the court.

    5.    KEY CONSIDERATIONS

          S Y P R equ est re Intervention

    5.1   On 18 December 1998 the Director Casework informed all the parties to the
          private prosecution of his decision not to intervene. This decision was based
          on the policy which appears in the CPS Prosecution Manual at chapter 7 of
          volume 1.

    5.2   Paragraph 7.18 of the chapter Private Prosecutions shows the change in
          circumstances that may occur following a committal and the acceptance by the
          court that a prima facie case exists. It is also said that the public expectation
          of a case being pursued has been raised. The guidance is that, if requested to
          do so by the private prosecutor, we should take over the case and continue
          with the prosecution unless it is clear that there is no realistic prospect of
          conviction or the public interest factors tending against prosecution clearly
          outweigh those factors tending in favour. We are exhorted to consider the
          evidence very carefully before concluding that there is not a realistic prospect
          of conviction.

    5.3   My understanding of the CPS deliberations on the case is that we were
          satisfied that there was no realistic prospect of conviction on any of the
          charges, but, except for the allegation of perverting the course of justice - the
          'disgraceful lie', we could not say that there was clearly no case to answer.
          That was based on all the evidence which had been brought to our attention for
          the purposes of the original case decision of 1990 and of the subsequent CPS
          reviews in 1997 and 1998. The 1997 review decision as to the sufficiency of
          evidence was endorsed by the report of the scrutiny conducted by Lord Justice
          Stuart-Smith, and that of 1998 by the judgement of the Divisional Court on the
          judicial review application. In giving the judgement of the court Lord Justice


                                                                                          2
      Laws said "The DPP might, in my judgement, lawfully have decided to
      discontinue". This could be considered to be a judicial recognition that a CPS
      decision to intervene and then to discontinue all the charges would not have
      been unreasonable.

5.4   Since the Director of Casework reviewed this case further material evidence
      has come to light. This is noted in the Hillsborough Chronology as items 210,
      215, 219, 220, and 231. The SYP were forced to disclose notes of three
      briefings given to senior and other police officers shortly after the disaster.
      These are attached at Annex C.

5.5   Prior to the commencement of the abuse of process hearing I had received
      information from the Hillsborough Coroner (now retired) concerning a
      statement that had purportedly not been seen since the inquest. It was the
      statement of an Inspector White dated 25 February 1991. In April 1997 Dr
      Popper contacted the BCP of the Police Complaints Division at York about his
      concern re the differences between the evidence of Inspector White and that of
      Supr Murray as to when the latter became aware that the gates to the tunnel
      entrance had been closed in 1988. The Taylor Enquiry had found that in 1988
      entry to the tunnel had been blocked offby police shortly before kick-off
      because the pens were deemed to be full. It was said that this closure seemed
      to have been unknown to the senior officers on duty at the time, it did not
      figure in the de-briefing notes and therefore had no influence on the planning
      for 1989. However, the coroner's recollection was that White had told Murray
      of that closure prior to the 1989 disaster. This would be in complete
      contradiction of Murray's evidence that he did not learn of the earlier tunnel
      closure until after the disaster. At that time in 1997 the police instituted a
      search of the database on my advice. The statement which the coroner
      remembered was not found and it was presumed that his recollection was
      wrong.

5.6   It was only on 21 June 1999 that the coroner gave me further information
      about the statement, that is, the date that it was made and the existence of a file
      note that he had written at the time. I then advised the police to conduct
      another search of the archive. This they promptly agreed to and although there
      was no record of the statement on the Holmes database, a manual search of the
      archive papers unearthed it in a file dedicated to the inquest. The statement
      was received by the CPS on 6 July , the second day of the abuse hearing. It
      was immediately disclosed to all parties. It was apparent that the HFSG,
      myself and the present archivist had not seen this evidence before. The
      statement is attached as Annex D.

5.7   The prosecution made use of the contents of the statement in order to show
      that Murray knew about the 1988 tunnel closure before the disaster. Counsel
      for Murray argued that the new statement proved no such thing. On
      examining the document I am satisfied that Inspector White's evidence is of
      his personal knowledge of a procedure at league matches that he would follow
      in order to close off temporarily the gates to the tunnel when the central pen
      was full. Although this officer discussed the above procedure with Murray in
      April 1988, he does not say that he told Murray about the 1988 problem that


                                                                                       3
       required the closure of the tunnel. The statement is evidence of the senior
       officer's policy that the fans should be left to find their own level.

5.8    The notes of the briefings of police officers after the disaster are also new
       evidence that had not been seen by the HFSG or, to my knowledge, the CPS.
       While these notes bring up interesting points about the tactical procedures and
       policies, it does not in my estimation provide the basis for the submission that
       either Duckenfield and/or Murray must have known that there had been a
       requirement to close off the tunnel in 1988 because the central pens were full.

5.9    The note of the first briefing shows the discussion between senior officers,
       including the two defendants and Inspector White, concerning the opening of
       gate C and what went through the minds of officers as the disaster unfolded.
       There is nothing in that note that supports the allegation that the defendants,
       especially Murray, knew of the 1988 tunnel closure which was done in order
       to alleviate the crush in the pens. If there had been such knowledge the HFSG
       would have stronger evidence for the assertion of gross negligence.

5.10   The second note again concerns a discussion between the senior officers,
       including the two defendants. There is a comment that "Top of the tunnel
       solid with horses - that procedure happened last year". The comment may
       refer to the 1988 tunnel closure mentioned by Inspector White , although he
       did not speak of the use of horses but of officers. Again it does not show that
       either Murray or Duckenfield knew of the previous year's closure so that it
       should have been to the forefront of their minds when Gate C was opened.
       The general discussion touches upon a contingency plan to shut off the tunnel
       when it became full. There is contradictory evidence from officers about
       whether the tunnel was full or not in 1989 after Gate C was opened.

5.11   The third briefing was attended by some of the more junior management
       officers and the note shows a discussion of tunnel control. The second
       paragraph refers to a Sergeant Burman stating that pens 3 & 4 were filled by
       2.00pm. His exact words were "The area that filled the quickest was Pen 3 of
       the Leppings Lane terraces and I saw that by 2.00pm (1400) the fans were
        cramped in this section of the terraces". Further on it is said that there was
       nothing in either the operational order or at the briefings re police protection
        of the tunnel to restrict or prevent spectator entry. However officers
        remembered that in previous years this had been done by the use of horses and
        static police lines. This was known as Superintendent Freeman's policy.
        There is no evidence that either of the defendants knew of this policy which
        appears to have been disseminated by word of mouth only.

5.12 The HFSG have provided me with copies of the following documents:-

       •   Depositions taken at the committal hearing
       •   Witness statements read out at the committal

5.13 The deposition of Moneypenny describes his entry through Gate C and then
      down a crowded tunnel. It may be the prosecution argument that as the tunnel



                                                                                      4
       was crowded Supr Freeman's policy noted above should have been brought
       into play. Both depositions are copied at Annex E.

5.14. The statements read out during the committal proceedings tell the story of the
       crush outside the turnstiles, the opening of the gate and the rush through the
      tunnel into the stands and the eventual disaster. Except for that of Mr
      Moneypenny, all the statements featured on the Master Witness list of the
       Taylor Inquiry and have therefore been reviewed before.

       The Hillsborough Archive

5.11   The possession of this archive has been considered previously at Senior Civil
       Service level. Mr M Kennedy had written to the HFSG on 27 August 1998 in
       answer to their concern about the SYP continuing to hold the archive. In the
       absence of any impropriety he did not feel it was appropriate to request the
       SYP to make alternative arrangements for the safekeeping of the papers.

5.12 While the HFSG have made many allegations about the suppression of
     material evidence by the SYP from 1989 to the present day, my 1997 review
     and the later scrutiny found no support for their submissions of suppression of
     evidence by the police. They are now saying that the police have misled the
     DPP from day one and that the scrutiny was not shown all the evidence in
     police possession. For that reason the archive should be taken away from the
     SYP. Although new material is coming to light, I am still not persuaded that
     we have the authority or reasonable cause to advise the Chief Constable that it
     is in the interests of justice that at this late stage of the proceedings he should
     surrender up the archive. Neither the late Lord Taylor or Lord Justice Stuart-
     Smith expressed concern at the SYP being in control of all the papers.
     Without evidence of impropriety I would find it difficult to support a change
     of our view.

5.13   The police are concerned at the amount of work and time involved in giving
       full disclosure of the archive to the HFSG. The CPS policy on disclosure in
       private prosecutions was made clear to the police in our letter of 15 July 1998
       (see item 17 in the chronology). Our guidance to them was based on that
       contained in paragraphs 7.29 to 7.41 of the chapter on private prosecutions.
       We have given full voluntary disclosure of all non sensitive documents in our
       possession to all parties. It was suggested to the police that they should
       consider doing the same. We are now at the stage where the duty of
       disclosure can be forced upon the police by way of the Crown Court granting
       the private prosecutor a witness summons to secure the production of relevant
       material.

5.14   There is some force to the argument that the SYP have been less than
       forthcoming in the giving of voluntary disclosure. When the HFSG learnt of
       the existence of the briefing notes made following the disaster, the SYP
       strongly contested their production until ordered to disclose by the
       Magistrates' Court. In 1997 the SYP had difficulty in finding the missing
       statement of Inspector White, and it could be surmised that the archive
       harbours any number of previously undisclosed but material documents.


                                                                                       5
6.    RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1   I am satisfied that this new evidence, comprised of the briefing notes, the
      statement of Inspector White and the depositions, is not so material as might
      have affected our decisions in 1990 and 1997, or the decision of 1998 for non
      intervention. Except for the fact of the case having been committed to the
      Crown Court, the evidential and public interest considerations remain the
      same as they were in December 1998. In which case my careful consideration
      of the evidence still leads to the conclusion that there is no realistic prospect of
      a conviction. I therefore recommend that we inform the Chief Constable that
      having considered the circumstances of the committal we have decided that
      there are no grounds for us intervene.

6.2   If the above is accepted then I recommend that we can advise the Chief
      Constable that it would be in the interests of justice for him to make available
      all the non sensitive documents in the archive to both defence and prosecution.
      This should be done without regard to applying the Keane test of materiality
      under the common law. The police would have more problems in trying to
      divide the papers into relevant and non relevant piles than in supervising
      unfettered access to non sensitive material. While access to sensitive material
      subject to PII considerations can be initially restricted, a schedule of those
      documents could be provided to the parties so that they can, if they wish, make
      an application to the court. This is preferableto using the old common law
      procedure of ex parte applications to the judge. However I do not believe that
      there is any large amount of such documents. Otherwise it might be
      acceptable to all parties that I be allowed to examine sensitive documents as to
      materiality and make recommendations to the police for disclosure where
      necessary.

6.2   I also recommend that we decline to advise the Chief Constable on the hand
      over of the Hillsborough Archive to any other party. It is not for us to enter
      into a contentious discussion as to the ownership of the property rights in the
      archive papers.

7.    CONCLUSION

7.1   That the above recommendations be considered to enable a swift response to
       the police and HFSG.

George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
29 July 99




                                                                                        6
M ’6 o &   >

Co m m it t a l

& I0 & IC C
POST & / CARD   AFFIX
                STAMP
                 HERE
HFSG                                      ® +0151-236-1936        28/07 '99 08:51 0 :01




     * # , .    *                                                              A > ^ W 0%
                                                                               *   ,    , *



       Sup?^
                                                                                   SUppCiv*
                          Hillsborough Family Support Group




     FAX NO:
                    i

     FROM:          1              Ann Adlington
                    I
     DATE:          I
                    i


                    /

     FAX NO: '                    0151 236 1936
     TELEPHONE NO: 0151 236 1919
  NO OF PARSES TO FOLLOW:                         <£
 MESSAGE1:                                               .uaf




 \ i t r J C S S ££?"?arano'to69
 rBClptont, a„                                          «**»«“
                                                                          ,o«w»
                                                                   Unauthorised
 ^      er t y lelef>hDm/fex of any error or                           "**” " *




               ^ Z : ^ 1 23^ , 1919' F“ o m 336 1936.1 Man
                   .Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool t 2 6RR
HFSG                                 f t +0151-236-1936              28/07 '99 08:51 0 :02



   And th is Deponent, the said                    c o l in m o n e y p e n n y


   upon his Oalth saith as follows, that is to say;-


   Mv occupation is local government officer. My address is
                            I travelled to Hillsborough on the 15th April 1989
   to see the football match. I was with four friends. I had a ticket for
   the Leppings Lane terrace.           I had been to the ground on four or
               i
   five occasions before.         I arrived in Sheffield about Ipm to avoid
   traffic. W e went to the ground a nd                on to a public house for a
   drink. W e Returned to the ground at about 2.50pm or 2.55pm. I am
   referred t<p plan DPPI07 (Div 13).I have been able to familiarise
   myself w ifi the plan and remember going to the Leppings Lane
               t
   end. Conditions were chaotic and completely disorganised,. There
   was no qiieuing system. There was a huge crowd of people milling
   about tryirjig to get into the ground, and as far as I could see very
   few police or stewards outside. When I arrived, there was only one
               I
   way to get into the ground and that was through the turnstiles. W e
   initially thought we would have to stand and wait and that it may
   take aboijt half an hour but things rapidly changed. To the right
               i

   hand sidejof the turnstiles we noticed movement. People were not
   going in through a turnstile but through a gate. I refer to the plan, it
   was gate jC. There was no stampede, it was an easier way to get
   into the qround, W e went In, no one was checking the tickets.
   Because <j>f the problems outside by the turnstiles, I had lost track
   of my friends.       Later I discovered that they went into the West
   Stand. I \jvas on my own and it was a couple of years since I had
   been in tliat part of the ground, but I hoped to meet up later with
               \


   my friend^ at the car. I was present at the ground at the 1988 semi
               i
   final, but riot at that part of the ground. I was in the press box the
   previous ^ear and used a completely different entrance. I had an




                                                                          L
HFSG            |                ^ + 0 1 5 1 -2 3 6 -1 9 3 6   28/07 '99 08:52 0 : 0 3

  1             f
      The Examination of
                                                                       continued
                i

      idea that the best place to go was Pen 7. I specifically did not want
      to be behind the goal. Because of my age, 1 wanted to be where I
      thought tljere would be more room and believed that there would
      be more room in Pen 7 rather than behind the goal where the
      younger <|>nes usually went.      Because I had forgotten the layout
      and in particular the radial fences at the side and because there
                i
      was not a single policeman or steward in the concourse area, nor
      any other signs towards any other part of the terrace, I took the
      only entrance available down the tunnel which is depicted on the
      plan. Evdn as I started down the tunnel my plan was to turn left at
      the bottorfi and head towards the north west corner. Matters were
      then taken completely out of my own hands within a few yards of
      entering ihe tunnel, which had a very steep gradient (see plan
      divider 8)|. There were an enormous number of people heading
      down the! tunnel, and I was carried 'off my feet for maybe forty or
      fifty feet, maybe more.    I then ended up near the front of Pen 3
       near the barrier that I later believed had collapsed.       I came to a
       stop wheh I had my toes faintly touching the ground.           This was
       almost exactly kick off time.        The conditions around me were
       terrifying | and I immediately realised I was in a life or death
       situation. With one of my toes on the ground I could feel a body.
       The only fhing I could do was to shout and scream and to wait for a
                i
       chance tQ get out.   People seemed to be disillusioned about the
       lack of response from people on the other side of the fence,
       primarily jthe police and some of the people including me, turned
       our attentions to the supporters at the back of the terrace, to shout
       at them t6 move back. Something must have happened because
       after not being able to move a centimetre for ten to fifteen minutes,
                    f
       a few of i|s were able to eventually move back towards the tunnel.
                    |
HFSG         \                ^ + 0 1 5 1 -2 3 6 -1 9 3 6   28/07 '99 08:52 0 : 0 4

             i
   The Examination of
                                                                    continued

   Eventually I was able to get out through the tunnel going the way I
   had come.     I have been shown the photograph (exhibit number
             i
   RHH1/6I) which shows pens 3 and 4 I consider my position to have
   been abogt ten to fifteen feet behind the perimeter fence in front of
   the collapsed barrier


   CROSS EXAMINATION BY MR. CLEGG Q.C. ON BEHALF OF
   DAVID DlilCKENFIELD


   Before 19^9 the area behind the goal was a popular place to stand.
   When perimeter fences were introduced they obstructed the fans'
   view of the ground and I therefore agree that some supporters
   would prefer to stand back to have a view over the perimeter
   fence. Tt^at would include me and that is part of the reason why I
   wanted toigo to pen 7 and stand at the back.
             f


   On the day of the match, I had a spare ticket which I sold to a
   supporter at about Ipm outside the Leppings Lane end.             When I
   returned tp the Leppings Lane end *-»t about ten to three I do not
             !
             >
   rememberj seeing any mounted police officers. I have been shown
             i
   DPPIQ 7 again.   My attention has been drawn to the metal fencing
   and gates jbetween the road and the turnstiles. When I first arrived
   at ten to tfiree, I think I joined the crowd and this was outside the
   metal fencing and gate. I do not actually remember the metal
   fencing ar^d gates because of the crowd. I was not one of the first
   to go through Gate C. but believe that I went through a minute or
   two after itf must have been opened. I was able to walk through the
   gate quite freely. I am sure there were no policemen or stewards
   in the concourse area. If there had been anyone in authority telling
HFSG            ;                      ^ + 0 1 5 1 -2 3 6 -1 9 3 6     28/07 '99 08:52 0 : 0 5


   The Examination of
                                                                                     continued

   me not to go down the tunnel, I would not have gone down it.
   There was no difficulty in me walking across the concourse and
   going the first few feet down the tunnel. Then the sheer volume of
   people arid the gradient of the tunnel combined to take me off my
   feet.     People entered the tunnel in an orderly fashion, they just
   wanted toj see the match. I was swept off my feet to a position not

   far from the front of pen 3.


   cross        Ex a m i n a t i o n   b y m r . h a r r is o n      q .c   .   on   behalf
                i

   OF BERNARD MURRAY.
                I
                I

   At the moment of entering the tunnel I believed it was feasible to
   go down the tunnel, turn left and make my way to pen 7.
                I

       RE EXAMINATION BY MR. JONES


   There w^re no radial fences at the>! Kop at Anfield. The terraces
   were completely different.                 There weren’t many first division
       grounds \jvhich had radial fences of this kind. I had forgotten that
       there weije radial fences in this part of the ground as I had not
       been in this part of the ground for about three years.


                (
                ►
HFSG               -                   © +0151-236-1936                28/07 ' 99 08:53 0 : 06

  t,               i
       And tl|is Deponent, the said                   a d r ia n jo h n b r a z e n e r

       upon his O^th saith as follows, that is to say:-


       EXAMINATION IN CHIEF
                   i

                   i
       I am Adrian! John Brazener of the force headquarters Nottingham. I was on
       duty in unifprm at the semi-final football match on 15th April 1989 with two
       uniformed colleagues.    I was part of the overall police operation with South
       Yorkshire pplice.   I attended a pre-match briefing during the course of the
                   r
       morning attended by Nottingham and South Yorkshire officers. It took place in
       the North Stand. There were hundreds of us present.            That was the only
       briefing I attended and Mr Duckenfield was In charge. I recall that officers that
       were policing at the Leppings Lane end were asked to collect a meal ticket
                   f
       and that was for a hot meal at a quarter to three. It was during the course of
       the briefing jthat this was said. I don’t recall who said this. To the best of my
       recollection [Mr Duckenfield was present throughout the briefing.          I do not
       know the names of any of the other senior officers present at the briefing.


       I was on cjuty outside the ground in the area of the Pennistone Road
       turnstiles, i!, had a radio and I could hear messages going to and from the
       control room.   I do not recall being tuned to a particular channel.         I recall
       shortly before kick-off time that there were problems at the Leppings Lane
       end. I do nqt recall one way or the other whether there were any interruptions
       or whether | was a steady stream of conversation. There was a build-up of
       supporters at the Leppings Lane end and I recall hearing people asking for
   the gates to be opened In a very concerned manner.                I cannot recall any
   specific orders but, because of the radio transmissions I could hear, I decided
       I would entep the ground with my colleagues. It was the tone of the voice in
   the messages that made me go into the ground and there was a specific
   message requesting all available officers to go Into the ground. I can’t recall
   the time of the specific message other than to say that when I entered the
   ground the j players were still on the pitch.            I have been referred to
   photographs! in order to familiarise myself with the ground.              I rem em ber
   walking from the Spion Kop end towards the Leppings Lane end. Once I had
        HFSG                     j                   ^ + 0 1 5 1 -2 3 6 - 1 9 3 6   28/07 ' 99 08:53 0 : 07

         -   * .

                   T h e E x am in atio n of
                                                                                            continued
                   got to an area between the penalty area and the cinder track I realised that
                                 j
                                 l
                   there were people in pens 3 and 4 In distress.
                                 .i
                                 ?              1
                   CROSS-EXAMINATION BY MR CLEGG QC ON BEHALF OF DAVID
                    DUCKENFIELD


                    I do not recfall whether David Duckenfield read from a prepared script during
                   the briefing^      1 have been referred to DPP DOCl94(Div 17 at page 1148).
                   Serial 1 containing a number of police officers would be facing the Leppings
  ^                Lane terracfe, amongst others, from the perii]ie|eMrack. The document says

Jtf £              that this seriial was to take its meal, staggered let the match, in the gym. I am
                   referred to page 1157. Serials 14 and 15 were to police the Leppings Lane
                   terrace and rear enclosure south and north, and, according to the document
                   serial 14 wdis to take its meal after kick-off in the gym, with serial 15 taking its
                   meal in the jgym after half-time. I cannot say that it was to be serial 1 and not
                    14 or 15 wHich was to have its meal before, kick-off. I thought it strange at the
                   time that any serial would have its meal before kick-off, but what I heard might
                   have been 3 reference to serial 1.


                   Dealing witli the radio transmissions requesting the opening of the gates, I
                   cannot recall whether the request was to open the gate or the gates. I have
                   no recollection of any particular gate or gates at the Leppings Lane end being
                   identified by letter or number.




                   NO CROSS EXAMINATION BY MR HARRISON QC ON BEHALF OF
                   BERNARD MURRAY




                   NO RE-EXAMINATION BY MR JONES




                                 !
                                  HILLSBOROUGH FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP
                                                      Central Buildings
                                                    41 North John Street
               RECEiVED                              Liverpool L2 6RR
           CASEWORK DIRECTORAT
                                                     Tel: 0151 236 1919
                28 JU1                              Fax: 0151 236 1936


              YORK DIVISION                         With compliments          ^4c77K                      ficL U n ^ fe,
                                                              '    a
     C jV s v ly z ,                                                          oU ^ o j~ A jtu 7 > i j*        °   f
                                   DU/>q
                                                                                               I^sjlc L s -       i'H o ii

                                                     0s\/O(/Q
* 'krOS(L                                                           0 l^
                                                                                                 /CA     fl/W o& eV (sJaJt/XslsS
S io X o s ^ b r X o     of   M            (A /d b m ss& s             '( M
                                                                                                                      L~ l e t .
     ADLINUTON v DUCKENF/EU) 4N1) MIJRRAV
         NAMES AND ADDRESSES O F WITNESSES IN C O M M IT T A L BUNDLE


              name                              no o f          DATE
                                                STATEM ENTS

              C olin M(-vnt:'v-Rf




              Adrian Brazener             ^
              c/o Force Legal Servicas ^
              NoltinghamsliireConstahiilarv
              Sherwood Lodge
              Arnold
             -N-ett-iagham N 0 5~ftPP—\

              Stephen Williams                 |.               l 2 M a v l ‘W‘>




             Brian Anderson                                     15 April IMS')
                                                                2(i Apiil I OX1)




             Norman Langley                    |.               > Mav




             Dr Colin Plenley                  |.              K May I




^   7.                                                         16 April l ‘W>
                                                               4 September l l>X()
        NAME                         NO O F         DATE
                                     STATEM ENTS


       Rt Hon Sir Maurice Kay                       Ifndated
       Royal Court o f Justice
       The Strand
       London

       Karl Mullee                                 .> May I OK1)




10     Carl Andrew Sterritt                        (> Mav I0S<)




                                                   I / Mav r»X‘ »




Exhibited statements

       David Godfrey Duckei'fielci                 Undated




       Bernai d Dean Murray                        .? Mav IW )
                                                                                                                              WG 412
                                                                                                                        (Amended 9.37)

                                                     West Midlands Police
HE
                                               STATEMENT OF WITNESS
22 29
                                   (C.J. Act 1967, s .9; M.C. Act 1980, s. 102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)
23 30
24 31
25      Name
26                                                                            2.3 -
27      Age       . .   3 2. ..    . (yrs)               D ate of Birth
28
        Occupation         . . . .Lj   M
22 29   H om e or business address
23 30   and telephone num ber
24 31
25
26
27
28

        This statem ent, consisting of                        page(s) ea ch * signed by me, is true to the best of my knowledge
22 29   and belief and I m ake it kn o w in g th at, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I
23 30
        have w ilfu lly stated in it anything w hich I kn o w to be false or do not believe to be true.
24 31
25
26
27      Dated the                               day of
28

        Signed                                                                Signature w itnessed b


                                                                              O ffic e r's Name


                                                                              Rank


              1              . .Q-.                         S juUA-C:r& C                                             , *>   M --,- .
        A J?r*dLy                      ...S.                      .cfie.
        Is!                                                                   .>w<^                            ctSt
                                                                                     ..............                     •v ......
                                   .*uy. . f e c A ^ . .ffco
        'fJ C f-d L .c?^. j r . l . H - r P . Q . f s . .“CfVP$. J ^ o f .
        'h.JUU. OKawva,. -<cys. pc                                        .<^Ur.




              ,WX.                     .|W v.                                                     .air. I I:



                 . c%-.                    <?<P. .          fV rW ^ u fe i.                                      A•      ■       n
              .C X s.                                    ,<£*vs>rs-.      I
                                                                        . M              l    A -8A . 0 ^ .                      •%




         J8k            ."C^rvr.                                      /(X               r&<w       .cM                       w   /       .

        Signed                                                              Signature witnessed by
          Delete as applicable.
                                                                                                                                                         WG 41 3
                                                                                                                                                   (Amended 9.87)

                                                   West Midlands Police
                                         S TA TE M E N T OF W ITN ESS
                                (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)



Continuation o f s ta te m e n t o f   . .
                                                                                                                                                        G>..
         #.                      S l r t J t t ,0,.***£*. h r o r f.                                                  r       .......................
         A . * . .a m       . .i | l . < & . .ccw ..-fcj.A & r £ .


                                        -r>.
                                  .§fc.                               J tS riJ k     .




                                                                                                                              .-<3-6. A*X-.
                        / _ S ^ J 2 ^ W 3 ,{-<&-}*-£. j. ^ V & .                                                                             ^ .......
                                                            ..OVvW-e. .C?-^. /OL. .                                                                     ...
                  .^TCX^f.x i^ .             .u-n*J>.                                > - * r^Oyy^fr^TX^oyA. PCd.
            1   n .{^O^Lv^L. i.
                             J. ...o
                                  , ^J-b^oM. ? ........... ................................................
                                                                         ~                              Q '
                                     ^ r> 0 /*)       fl            -/Xf)                               /)
    ^ f X U .e&lB&ir&iuOL. ^VP^>. .“E fteJc. ,£^a^fc ^ ^ V T .> X k ^ .. AVtM}. *QW •^43-

 nb            on r, ju > .                   ..    -        0.   H J./7.                M L 2 .iL 99 l

                                                        0
 ] .Q Q ,k^s£<0?-O. f e i + ^ ^ r ..C^^ZH-t-SrYV .                                   .^J=s?,rV^                                          Pr£. $rCXVr*-+?
,4?~«3'<V'<'<1\..w^/w ..-Cs-. .V. f.>&>^-«?441?-.                                .^W^V-^V. _ .-.... ■_
& U . oevvfee. .0 /                                               .                                        0   ,
 A& SM aJl .a * M . .O h J X sD . .                         .tfijtlc.                                              jf a J h * # # .'. « .^S?W>. .
                             . .tk«. .enooti--. w?-^vs^»..                                             .                  .V . .                ■v^ j ■ ■ ■ ■
 B co& dk .                     .c h b d & e M                              .Q & Jj. 3 3 h . ■'& j$j^<>^~- -cd h ^-
JU js& IL a . f r r x ^ r c ^ . rOxfe. . £ & , .                                                           , .................
      ” ~ jT ^ rV O .   A i^ ^ C .                 .- ^ X ^ O .   .‘- S ^ t V f t - . P r /                           A ^ r'V N . .V .■< V ^ r V ? :

 (^Va 0                                                                                       .   -,


 f-x&SSJL .-&sy\J^. . I!V<?.''.^V^ .                                                                                                              1
 Q ^ & u ^ y s . a J L £ & ..                                                                                                   . Uf^g^kA iL
                 .-CvrO-r'S-.                                .A /£                                                                   j^<<U^.-?0^rfr<fe'

 Cnh .

' r^5M. .d^Aj^U^E.                           J- '^vfere^fcfe. ,x-^V
                                                                  Uv. TqJgj.^ o r^ u A .r
                                                                           .rOrc*-*^.*.............

         K / a .c*<rn**r>#£                                           a A     z&r.       .t^ y ^ r & A ^ . < & ■ yy^pft''- '
         i?V\.                ,<XrpL$Jb. £&0<r*-rv\-..(J. ^                          *’ .<M>                &C ^rvv^v^r'v'v^^
                                                                                                                                         Jlxyti-
                                        ^<CJ W )             .    u    &


                        0       0 eo U i ^ . (fe n * .

          O .j& G ^ .C H rn rW vS j . ,-<^\ .

 Signed                                                                     Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                                                                           WG 41 3
                                                                                                                                                                     (Amended 9.87)

                                                                              West Midlands Police
                                                                       S TA T E M E N T OF W ITN ESS
                                                              (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


                       C ontinuation of s ta te m e n t of

                        %                    >yvC*->SiPrjy                          ,hrp?rs ,tA^rj
                                                         Zia<s<
                                                              c£-                                 ,CrT: ■                    . .+rlS:j£vc&'W“A 4x .i W ^ y < * -fe.

isOCaX.
U S lty fjJ Itl,             ,._    ,v    .<e^c^.                                       .   Vt^PV? .                                                                      t.    .


felC U j           ^         fTThJ%-P-. , - ^ £ y x .                          Jltfjho.                                                                    ,4Vv^.<^*^\

fcoe eo«r                                      ,''fc©T>Jsk ..^VWZ, ..^.0. >V*-VtVV<r-&o/fcp .•Q'C-^T.                                                 i .£-£j                  ..
                                                                                                           .. L&f-jbr*s&&. k & y & T .<S-^rV?*?W<t......
                                                     ,. sj ,+ jJ U je te r..
                       W s £ ..&             r p t^ iu j$ X ±
                       f    e   m        ^     .     . r E v t .                                                                                                       .....
                                               t .^-?4y*> ,-fovcQ .0 U ^ f \ .                                        »^vs-ft... . / .         J^SA-*-VVH1'V‘H^
                       <V^c^'feenfc.'fe                                                                                          ./CX^T.< ^ r & :                                   .


                       fe?VML. Jk , £ 4 & ^ f c 7 t ^ C C « £ .
                       Q -Asjl. J . . :<^ViA                                                                          , ^ < jJ ^ . .....................
                                j                        . ,^W ktrV<^ >fc&.                                              . vVVVM*&C>j                .*vTPr»riMX«\
                                                                                                                             -                             »-•-


                                         . •^vV*-fc^vV'i. .fV^ci .firVlJccQ. ( d .                                                                     .l/NrfSHv*.                  .
                                                         .^       .' ^ r ^ Lrts ^ . .                                  .'odLf>. 'Q -zd l, r v V ^ f v .
                                    'juu&te .© w .<<&. .v W < ^ W >                                                   ..............................                     ...
                       . . . . .vi.                  .   ,a ^ & - . .t b . .& & SL-. CJt~.       J4<vr0<x^yv<-^KV. A -LC ^.-fc>.                 ^ ^ .t ^ r y^ ^ ^ > -
                       <Py<£- ■■& -■


                             5*^>TKV_. m v v . .J .iA \C ^ A                      ,Zm^. •              .          *      .       . •-r.j ■••-^..........- - ••••• •
                             7./>&l .-i<crw^r02- c>~P. J tJ & L . . < ^ n S ^ n M . <-*->9-*^-.                                                  ^                                  .

                       v^w.                                   y   jfca .& 9&                            . '* .   Q |$ ^                                                         ^
                                         .CVy'^y. ^crfeca_              .



                        .........\j.
                        ;4 ^ v v ^ s v v a x ^ .i j ^ f c .J.                 .h < ^ c ^ A .^rfe. .k u ^ ^ J b X sL h .c J h .<M%
                       JjU*\ .                     . ^fco.<*-.                                                    J .-tv^.
                        <fttv .ibi.Or. C h s^ J^ z..                                                                             .1.*. .
                                                                                                                                       ”2-.>-.. .v. . - u ^ A

                                                     ,£6t.                                                                        ,$ J b ..                     t.         —

                           £efr. ,4vcw. .                                                      .'JDu s ^ . ^ l-^-a A^L. .o^xaXfvV^. £fe.
                             n n ,^-fe? .VWVH M ^ g - 0 L .-.1
                        rWQr-R^.                                                            Aj^nXii ,<U>.tvuifl- >cu-va^?^-. fcg.VVV<yi>^-.<:M>
                       Signed                                                                          Signature witnessed
                                                                                                                                                                       WG 4 1 3
                                                                                                                                                                 (Amended 9.87)

                                                West Midlands Police
                                       S TA T E M E N T OF W ITN ESS
                              (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation o f s ta te m e n t of
                                                                                                                                                                            (£>

 S
                                                                                            .kvv#..                                                             ....................




 ts>. &rtrCAJ&Jb'.                                    .£rjSyvs                                                                                                                      .
.KUS^yv.                                                                      ?fe         .1AMJ.
.W ff& k I f e r r * ' -. .ly & p ^ r .                                                                           .
J s tp . . ^ 5                                                            .f e                                                                ••• J
vC'VvfctS
                                      rTO-A
                 •^C^j (^C^rvv. r^ y v p - C
^O^Vy^.-otv^o. r0^2-.           .&?>h3XAr4^rJc.\ . y. .                                         -M^Vf\          .-C^J^. W^f-j
           .   / f e fireu rJ^.                                                                                       .   .   .   .   „   _   ......................... ,A      .



        CU-iC^e. ,-^jQrPr y ^ .. . J ^ k .                                                   .S..^ * d £ x                                                                   s.


                                      W jlr d li.                                                  j . iS ^ P . Z ^ su \
>4*X.   j t k* .                        . . , . . . . , .................................          f ) ......................... f j ........................(9 '
        f n>>rv. .£&&&■. ff-<^U ^Zpyv. d
                    it§ & r. /X^TY\<A-±j£U v*.. . t ^                                                                                                             'r°^L

                    <^y>i^L                                     y .....{                           .•EfiCCriL.                y
                                                                                                                                                                <C*>.



fr?<&^ro.           .j^ar&yw .$£}-&£$. .c&C&rtSrfc- ........                                       ..............


<?fP                    .(~T/fc©. £-.Q .'/V^C^Cje^VSAvS. , .                             .'J^Pr^rTT^.
  ’D'           “                              ». #9           ix -                   JL . no _ D Of)___ n . P . I ..........




                        Arf                                                                  'O
                                                                                             -O ov-'& C O                 i^-nr <^6p<>H5 .»s-p^uv



                                                                                 .s   j     =. .« * * > ..« j &                                                              •t

 £ . V ^ . - ^ L e ^ t f R . ,^^U3. . w s w .                                         A^ce^. ^02-^.                                                                          • ^ )-
 <3^                                                         .^v. .^Pv...                         .,wtx£>.            &-u*-e£b j."&. .^*^TTi^eA|-


                                                                                      .<1^ '-fiClii-J                                                 1ter£dl .'f e • •
                                                        .-                                                                                                                     ^ ■
                teJTCuJy .                                                                  .C*-|<^.                                      .,A^M-Ci.           wr€i-&^-

Signed .                                                                     Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                                       WG 413
                                                                                                                                 (Amended 9.87)

                                           West Midlands Police
                                     S TA TE M E N T OF W ITNESS
                             (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation of statement of




   .. .A •'f'fe                    •. Art-JV.
                                                                                .QpVV<^2_>^^><5<!.. <<£tVvjL .CP^y<Q. .J ..

            -. ;       H<r^vv^r>v5^fl :v^-.                                                            ... 0.                  .‘<*7 dzJt.
 J?                                                                                    .j.J*4^C^viLj.V<^W .OrW.

                                     .c>^_^w.                                        .4%J> sb i>
            j        SHO                                      -     £^3       - -©B.                                                  J "''

^CiQJh^rjreyf^r. t-&&&4£rv\.. ^                                   $3xLfLLk.                      Q   os*4*-. v H ^ V L .-?6<S€_- ..
e^jil& i~ V 4 < ^ L cvi?                                      f p                      .-C.Ovvfe^'!^ .VV^fc^P.-. .^=f-.
■£i^eCC>-t .t'lAJlJ,. .jV*?1. .^VJ'V^rVV-ft/T .c d v ~ . a j o i , .                             .Z o X fU ^ £

         ..<arV<*i?.                                                                               K ......... •/*■■■i\....
       4.                .£ ^ ..
             .~^yS. . .Or.                vV#*OVxk t                                 ’-fe. c£i&.                              . UrM^VfH^
                                        .>vUL ,. .4-.                                                           .jj.-Ar&+~>.             ...


                                                                    /•l&UpiW^rGi. .                               .'Vr^2-■’^         ^ /u~^~.
        . i M r v J i. L t& J k .jsfeiei^*...ML*l .9 ^ t m . .c ^ -h -a § * $ .


                d fe iiL . .<
jk sjLQ QJ b£ . £k>Sk>.    .^ v^ ... *J &
                                        h #* ** -... pe*2^ . . ' W W v t f v t v y                         .* £ /a ^          c tu
■A-O                                                  'C#'S.                                /v<i.
                          &JUZ.. ^ V V .. ^ M w X v . ' ............
                                                                                           <2.                    ^   (          (

 h rx 9 y^ . J & L . & Z * ^ c f e ^ w rs^.                          .fepvV^fe2jL.                                        J   ***#«$
                                cv£^ry^l?j. .<Cs>^fe^.                           r                      A-?&.
                J.                                                    ® i r . . ^ Z w f ^ ^ r T r ^ M u ..
 Ua^A^'.                                                                                                   . OE^Q Jl^s^vic. t^SV-
si. .Wfto ,£b. .feSa .£fc£fc. a                                                             .$ £ k ^ rr. f x d t L . .                          .
                        ,^Ql. rVsr^rQi. c^                    . J<£l&>.'^yysA. .3.
                                                                                           ,i?-+rC^T.< ^ yU -          .X ^ z ^ u if l




                       -. -rWv .
            JdUCtVV. . i«OV-0?JP<-P-. vu«^j w<jL«b^. ,'C^r\^crrdtf>.

Signed                                  ...................          Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                                                              WG 4 1 3
                                                                                                                                                        (Amended 9.87)

                                                           West Midlands Police
                                                  S TA T E M E N T OF W ITNESS
                                     (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s .102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)



Continuation of statement



H*.                                                                       yyf^jr . J.                                       7Jt. .9 * - ^
)          l          j          Q            9          . .C&&xi<L-. r.                                                   i■                        .-^£^0. .
v f\A .l&Q^.. .                                   lr&-.+S£-. .<*dE^V«i-4V<l. 0ri~&& . <0- . IUr% x                                        (


«<*A
          4 .M i a                        m              Aj&cJfcr .QArtQ. . 4jJT2pi .JzMjLQ .                                         *. .sA'^ks-. ..
.cfJV&rb. .JtJzAJU-*1*|                                  2-                          ■>T T h ^ - + ^ ' .              ^                   .&P. n)                               >

 i                                                       X i y L . 'c*iv^.                                                                                r$PWT*
J .                   tc^tcys            ,*>-Pl*r\ ."fc ,^Xm-^JU<L.v >X$JL .Xu<l>.                                                                                   '
               jujrcu^, ^ajQe, £ * £ i<hiUJ>\-. .C-^ -^ J ^ iQ . .(?<^A^r^r J . i.                                                    .
                                                                                                                                      '
                                                                                                                                      V*>.                            r^T
^ ^ € -r»        <$                  .© T u y ^ i^ .                                                 0r~.                    t ...   ._..................................

    . . . s f.                                    . VS^^<4 .<?x .                         £*-. •           e r f • j^rCS’l^jG-




0_QR^jLt-y-iL^J^r'.                           K. -t-J^P. .•<4-r!c?'^.                        r^'fT^r'?^4^ * ». V .WA-^. .»)-£&.                                             ■

,£o c c ^<<!>                          .<^JTTr^c^.|v£c^ . .cv^3^r.                                                                         '^n                              '
Avf2^ .                                                                   .d b tu Q .*.. S^v£_.c
                          .j.   -A*cyvs&.                         /fca+rw . C x £ ^ € ^ > Q . ,                                                                       ''
 KA-6KL^. b^cc^                      £ fi^ urr.fio^C-'-o.                 /!U n s*re& .. 3 . .                            rV*>. £M*^.         fr r td fe * * .
                                 . ^ £ .                                    c J b 'M tJ k . . f e w -                ...................
          >$.                                 .c ^ v h ^ . o                                         .-^ d j& w c h c £ . . - w v K . r ^ s H w


           g^j^vo.                 \jtR&..V^vc<jfc£^ .$««?&                                        .-wfeiv^            . C w Q . .i                                      ..
 U*SJL sH . ^ ^ c a ^ v v . . ^ J l f k . j u j t h .'£&. .^fSM^vcP.                                                                          ■-^ yk'-                      ■
 n _.' w ' I      on    n        -cld.           •/? ^ f     r«D-&-0« s u M ,
                                                                                             '<4\AJr&Asf^erv^.\ ^rW^r^VV.V^r.
                                                                                                                   • 7Y-v ' ..... /)/7 '
                                                                             ...                   .^O-vf^.       .(W


         (\Jt'oJLr&<jJz. 3-/o                      . ^   w ia .     ,a-                                                                .c J lo y ^ M p h .
 jbu sJV L            01} .J     ^ .& J t c i * . .<*+*. f c r o y d r ^ < & . H . v j M . .$% **& .
                 o h . <^Jk                                         .M k**.                                                                                           ..■
                 I. &
                    < 3fa&vJiL                                              ■h z .                  c v ^ f e u ^ rK£^.                                               ■■ ■
                                ,-8l2e- .cr^p+v«^... .& i ^ o \ . o w s                                            .tvv<v«<v.                                    ' '-' ‘



Signed                                                                               Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                                         WG 4 1 3
                                                                                                                                   (Amended 9.87)

                                                    West Midlands Police
                                            S TA T E M E N T OF W ITNESS
                                    (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s .102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation of statement of                                                                                                            :<£>




               . fjb .                                                                .S-T":                                           .Q*r$l
rC*X                   Q *^ Jc+ & . fytC.Or.                                f c v ^                    ..... .•■ •. . .   ■■■■$ ■■{)■■■
. . . . Ar. ^<>r6c<e^yv<^^ .                c ^ y y ^ - r < * ■§ -. t& ^ J Z -d la J L .                            lv ? /T -r

tVdcvyve. .O^VS^.                                                          .'^Opr
                   .   J    2   t   .                                       ^    v    2'   •



p%Z', Uy/ iZ.                           -r^b, ^ T W - < - M V ^ .               .£.            i^v'' •                                    ..
     J& h .. C<Nr .                     .^r*r*»<R   Xjr<r^-^yyrj. .<?VV\«$ .CrKr+TVO- .^VlcMr^ f f V 5 .                                •• •
     J                                          ^                                                      J&>.                                 .



rCO-^VP^s. ,V>                                                     ■■.          .h-^SUY^ .^Jx .**£-.
              AuuM <dciu**-.                i   fc .«>. .fcrW^j.           <*$*£-.
jtAJ?jzS{ . '%*>. .^V#VCc4=VCJ?.
                                                                 <m -<p



     J.
iA^Wc<j2d2.       f^Or^rH.
<k <vne<<*j£fe. isw-^'vv&^rc ct-jy-                                  i>.                            . /6b .                  .tr
C & M r.* .        .       j u ^ a ^ J l.       A s u u u e .. k U c ^ -.   jS y ^ U k ,m ^ \. b o .                                     .. .

          .crvs .< w r r w < ^                                    . 9 ?r c H A * v i ^ < * v ^                                      .«<?&. f
                           J2^y<£f>.,..                                                          i W     -6^5

^    /y^cuy^j. ,&-€£a c . 9a ^ ^                    u j l -. . cJLaJvp .^




Signed                                                                   Signature witnessed by
          THEFO O TBALLASS
                                                                                    mmm.
150489t


                                                                      y                    ;                    ' ^
                                         \U ^ w v u /j-^ sS S ^ 3 ^ ' i v ? ^ ^ ; V ^ J ‘^'V Sfj'>r:*;'\****i^*-‘'*vV*

                                         l t ^ ^ t e o ® i ;#3»iiii



          GANGWAY-;-
          v*...
                                 ’
                                 "rj     '•Vnivt
 14, 00                                itl'll
                                                                                        lilf S t ll
          ■ : ■-   ■-•<■'- :'v
                                          WM
                                          1-U. H-
                                         3, Paper Buildings,
                                         Temple,
                                         London, EC4Y 7EU
                                         Telephone: 01-583 8055
                                         Fax: 01-353 6271
                                         LDE Box No. 1024



                        s<                          ^                        I“1 ? ^ ^ t^-a»v"t                               »----|      i'-'-v* C J C^              1•*


                                                        Jc ,                               ^        > 4 ^ 2 v ^ » v^ - ^ C        £*>         ^


                                                                                  <=.          J                             .iW ^ C .




                                                           ^        icct          ^        ^         tvvrck                       —       A


                                                          —          -*~JL .                         4U-1      -C^.          C        <£*
t
                                                                                      ■^J.           -6^cd
*v

i»e+~-t i     .




                  L.                                                           'I                                                                               J

                                                                                    i-«.       -i-a.^1    ML* ^              «A       ^~~~{



                                                                             vt
• ^ T '

        -✓I                                                        A? *a «                 .   i*
                                                                                                                                          D‘


                                                                                                                                              6
                                                                                                                 <SL=.
                                                                     '3

                                                                                                    . i
    V
                                                 “j                   ^ .3
                                 '
                                 w t <«^j—_   *■'! Vl ■« --•^Jir          *A          I 'C                                            ^       -S-£"-   l   —   w-i.
    <C    y — \
                             j


                       A lso at




                                     DX 7612
                            X \L~i~                                U ^                                                   £                 TT'                           w-f                   —vsr^*
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           'j
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         3 ^               ^


          i*w*-t—i                                                                                                                                                                        r t~“j *                                      r
£■<;...W C b .              X~ ■ L^-»                     i *-           °-^ 'I
                                                                                                                     . ■— l _ A                      ^■e.           <— r**]~             ~          "   i           ^                   J
                                                          u                               b

                                                                                                                                                    L\            L^-r*—
                                                                                                                                                                       -
3       _ ,_ ■            ~ o                                                              — ei*                                               -_                        LJ (J

                                                                                                                                                                                         I          ^              t-
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ^        C v " --!




                                                                                                       — i-*,t-              --—                              '




                                                                                               3                                       _                 Cs          i-L *          /_ -c .^ -p ■-'-s. j




                                                                                                                    K.                «<, -- *(. . ; t‘



t-Cc                                                                               v— -SL.J-                                               wi Sn-                      ^           --U          *-tr-
                                                      t                             —                       J                                                                                               ' '                 d


I C 'V    J        t- ‘—N       w -C -<                            ^ -* 5 i      (~"'* — y ^ , c ^ —                              ^        ^        —8              —» ■*— £ - <    w * ,« — * _•
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                £
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .   5-ClJl^C-3



                                                          ~^9        <Xvo                 oC*^.                                       ^-»                                                                                           I'*~~o L~‘



                                                                                                                                                                   'J
                                                                                                                A-
«_X^ l-c -« ~ . 4 . V ,     A              £-£•>.■<_ <                            « _ t                         J                     _L .                                  WL._£              t4__..
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   -
                     J

*/\./ —»-*                  / >T—^                    t—<                      ^ -                         _-   J.          -L.*. A                         ^ct— —, j                  Cw-ti -«-                                            £.            t.
                                                                                          li
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        J5          *
                      -L -O i.
                                                                               3'                                                                                                                                                   •J
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            -L-,         ki
V                                :^JL            ,a
                                                 1          S'- it                                                                                                                                                1'“
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        .




 U                                                          --->»•<■              ^               -^aovy
                                                                                                                                      .i_*i              j ^-*                                 r G ' t cLj

 ^.._UA                                                       C.        ^>-^C                                         -A                                 *^-r *
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ^—           A             ><£ ^ [ < 'C

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        C ,£L si    £.fa~— ^(^<Il                  ----- -A
  !» »        -^■t. —                     y-e.                4—         tr-t St— *-S-£ ■'— ' <— '-c—a-                                                           -*^*-»
                                                                                                                                                                                                             i            sfc                ^                 .


 A .-                            3                                                i'-
                                                                                                 -          —                     3                                      ^
                                                                                                  -\            ,,_^          r-Ls.                                                                               ) ‘n 1                                               i
                                                                                 ■’' I                 b
                                                                                                                                                -5 <. -
    U * -v                                       . ,C j         i-W           . 'i f e l ^ .           .-ffc                                                            J
                                                             3, Paper Buildings,
                                                             Temple,
                                                             London, EC4Y 7EU
                                                             Telephone: 01-583 8055
                                                             Fax: 01-353 6271
                                                             LDE Box No. 1024
                                                                                           ~^-c "                                 . 14< Jc—£                                         f-C.


Jus_t                         i-S^t              t-£*             *.s..                            -L                        -Ur             -G-*.                   U         ’
                                                                                                                                                                               S.'S".              3f )-L^



                                                                                                                                                    - ,- r



     £<.c                                                                                                                                                        C Lws.^                      *6^
                                                                                                                                                             a


                                                                                                              5    t-v                ..t—               w       ^       **-         O -C   c -         < = -.:•-------- <




                      )     (. <^V*» Lt»                             — .-•I       c •— .«.L'■"'^j                 *~*~s
                                                         'J

ivU                                                                  ^4. Jo             <ro-«i—1                                  -*— — «p/C                             t ? " " ' **— .


3                                 Ul— ^                             ^       ■'dj-c-<—C.£?           e-. J .



                 *1 V -o ^ _          ^   .      " I -£j<_0 I           Co—t--»    ^-Cj^-O         if     ^o             £ ^ * -< -                                                               ■Jf
                 J'

                                                                             -C - w-— L-<


                                                                            •cA.    ,
3

                     0    i-v. v_i?       i-C.         v„^   v'                    —*-i-x           l-<^i              3
                                                             J


a >t\*-LC {-& HIa                                ^**     ^                  4       J-«~«                                         -          "tLx. »<.                         <-<         C L;                 —C




     ^                    ^                           ^ *<-cL'             c.c.^                                                                  -j         i-^ £-X.                              J-


    1 1 --' A.   A              y. i_ f          la                 l_ i^ _ « .    it -                       '7                       iC -                                          !_C
                          <                                                                                       J.

    -i-t'^ ‘-L^J’                              \*.tcA             a <- -c«-i       h       t-Li     ^    i u C',             3        ■<_                                       L x X             -c
                                              j

                              Also at




                                                      DX 7612
                               ^           t                                                                                }-£_£            » _ te . c'L                                                  -t




         A
         -L
          tf                            i~Li                                                                                            ^ £ _             ^    C*       t-SLs



                                                                                                                                                                                    d 1'—              t-{_> t<_^.—           ,




                        /-v-                                  y^C.                                                                                                     .a           *<X-^)        ^


                      i-^ ♦"Lj         -i-£<*_--«—\               «                                             _t          tu          A-e.-'^'lo , >■— — O-Loj-                                     PL-w *.,. ^
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      J



   hb                       * C ’"tC'C                                        ^ ^S ■Gv«-fi|. "*bn— '"Wv-^                                                                    ^_r~r—-<—.C<rl -£-\--<-<_~C ^


                     X^c,




                                                                                                                     i-f 1? ***~ --■ -_ C<L—
                                                                                                                                           <^Jtm                       ~-\           X
                                                                                              v n -o                 *r(.                    .c e- ( .                 j-^— ■*^                       *"0             a.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ..L   wl
                                                                                                                                                                      0



 -U,l                              i
                                                                                  *.j                            -- ■                                               .j . <--    I




•• j -   < -_ 0   L—*-w*^ v*.- C*t J                  C-   ** '** ■■*-’ ''I             ■*“- - ■*' '                                                 '\“ 'k-
                                                                                                                                                      J




                                       - .) - *- i                                                     -r. *t.
                                                                                                        <


                                                                                                                     ^ £"^'Cx^ts — A <-'•£                                            c—   l-i.        ’■- -<Jr<Lt>
  ~ ^ f L t~ -

                                                                    J .           A -5                                                                                3f                      t
                                                              4           <             -Sl ^ uz.                    —      ^       P ^ X >                   ^                     ■w
                                                                                                                                                                                     <t mL» ^^ t-
               ■J
  3‘^-j .6 h£_* r                                                                                           5                               - - t -            J.                          sU               '-'-" i


                                                                                              Hi,                                       ^        ^                                       *Ji          i-U                 — c” ■


                                                                                                                                                                                                        ^i        i-O


                    -i-« <st           t— f                                                                                                                                                       .
   .v ~                                                                                                                                                                                                    b

                                                                              ,           UL            ft-*
                  “il
                                                                                                                                                                          <n»
k                                                                                                                                                                                               r
                                                                                                                                            ^        >t-^. Its            H lL a                  -15* .                          *^/
'lir                                                                               '3                                                                                                                                              v
                                                                                                                                                                                    JU'-'\^~~JL . CstU^
                                                                                                                                                                  Ui^ J
                                                                                                                                        j       ~
                                          k     k   I^,                                                         HI                           ,z)<.        *•
                                                                                                                                                                                                            n r
                                                                                                                                    \        iT 'I-6 A                                 O—— ^          r*w?
                                                                      -U-<5 -C*
                                                       3, Paper Buildings,
                                                       Temple,
                                                       London, EC4Y 7EU
                                                       Telephone: 01-583 8055
                                                       Fax: 01-353 6271
                                                       LDE Box N o. 1024


                                       'h-                       -e   hi—                              h iJ t         3 J-<-co.               <ck               it




                 ^     \r^L-4. liCiA         £'
                                                                                                                                                            T

                                                             D


        0                                                                                                   •"H


                                  (•"Cj?               -t—                 „t                                                     HiL


                        O.                                                                                                              i-    r




I’-'U            ■
                 ) A                                                  \       k;       r i- .%
                                                                      ./
^            j
                                        K-                                                                                 t-L*


                                                                      ,   t     rK^-tl rix>                                             * <*-
                                                                                                 “ ^3       *1)'

                                                                                                                               i.i «_ip .    *3    •i-<-   "K
                                                   -j             r~ r                                                                                               J

.   C^J^cS                                                    i —r




                             .3                   t»    •'I                                       , p .         -'Z
                                                                                                          L .U-<—     _

                                                                                                                       3
                                                                                                                      ;) <:^i



                                                                                *u-
                                                                                       j           D
                                                                                --£p                                  -*.<?A                 hi»
             x       ct~£

                              Also      at




                                             DX 7612
.H x U o                                       ^        ££-=■— .J




                                          Ka

s      • ■ - ,- . <r   ^                ■‘~ " ~ U .         Scu         i       -± -*U c     p * ’— £    £       >—^ C      -—^         s~-u, .     ”U -


 ^                               I         '                                               .            ^ r               ^        <■      t     • ■'    "* '
 tin      L.           w% ^ j    l. .-* -*1^        _~£~w* a      <*_-—i.        *►-*-*   HcL«   <—<-^2Tc_^— >           *-o^              J ^—■'* ^ ^ ^

 a. <_-e_o—                                               _£.       &       /t>2>_.----------                                      ‘
                                                                                                                                   7’_“•‘^ ' t<-°^ ^ ^
                                                                              ^            *0«            - ■K                  -*—»•'»•«<—     ^d.             <~u
                       /J       «— -v •*-          W_* -                                                         -                           d           1
 __ (_                                ,            -J     -t        *       t    KL       c . ^ . Jc                                              CH-— ^ <i

                                ^A io          *-£■£ *— «                                    i-^a                    ^                               ‘




                                                                                                                           a —                       %
                                                                                                    .i t.h

                                                                                       i S ,1;U r u uu <»

                                                                           I;:1:-!-                                         ar?     Liverpool

                                                              U L :!>                ;»e 5 T*S all O C &     X   e Cl tV.*■          1!
                                                                                                                                      — r-.
      on     ti c»:sl h o l d e r s         and,

                                              seal       in   the     N o n . n a isna •=!:>.                    ns    tu r          U n c i ng
far Hi 1 I s b a r o u g h         U 1i

                                                                                      £ !I;U I V ~ - S H t       Q a iTi'5               -■® a -■O 11
the L e p p m g s      Ln     eriu.          U'e         i_-,<-ep«an vo
                                                                     t,Q   thB                                                i3 S -


w h e n we    ha d     both    been          a 1 located           ssa15
                                                                                                                   v ear , w 9           1    e t •»
Because       of     our    experience              of    traffic           conyesvion              iasu           y
                                                                            n round          before          2*00            pui.      t iA-0'J)
n o m e e a r ±v     t.n i ^ t i m e        and    rsachsu          ins     gro

My   5 Q n v,<as s e e n      to    enter          the    ground           as    early        as    he           could
                                                                                                                 c<           and      so we


s e p a r a t e d at    about           a
                                            nn
                                            •— < j-n<.n
                                                      ‘t (
                                                         • -1»t —
                                                                n -n > so that: he c o u l d go to the s ea t                                          in

                                                                    meet        at     the     exit        from             the     North         Stand
the N o r t h      Stand.          We       arranged          to

immediately            after       the       game*         I did        no'      t ry      t o enter              the        ground

                                                                                                                             a      packed        cro wfl
straightaway            because             I did    not       warn-       lo    have        to    s'.anu             *.n
                                                                                                                                                                                     H AtsC.      £
                                                                                                                                                                                     SI 6 2 7

f 0 f What              C0 1 ■
                             .
                             i navO                     isen f:':Ore l h a ;; uhrai                                            -• ■■          -■     -•- - ■           : r • “‘- - p.£ -

a.vsy        f : u ra t he            = ; ;»«            i'si           at       ,..e -•        nos                           n ~ :' ^         '-v-s                   - - - r' h o u r


or      so    vat        H. .•O               :V:* -1-i 1 y      r ..1 0         t if-OC-          -    E . i.O           •              •'         -


Ih0US               i    V;       L       V “ r -■->o , S I- •>P -■ t « :'S                     “ : Or 0 a Oh „ h C              t                  j-'U.                  -t     was

                                      a                        v,o-s         at t e.n ot i no                to       purchase                     tickets,                     In     tns

-jdrtsr             of       a    mile           er      ;io        a o .:r'c         o •-. r-y    tna           srcana              1        saw        no      misbehaviour

v i-.w q s n s r a i             rnooc        of        Che         fans         wa-s        no    a i 1'fa r a n t              from              what          we    would


a      pe ct .

,i(-    P :V i,,“       2 .3 G        (1430)               I    rs'iijr'-sa                to     the        Lappings                    Ln        entrance                  in       oraaf


to      ents r          the       >3 r o u n d      .          1t    was          (*n e n       o &v i o u^           •■<!!•=*’
                                                                                                                              •< *»::               !      :                      ~    3

seeding             admission                      to      the          standing                 area         was         -r      excess                 of      the         capability

of      the      small            number                   of       t u r n s t i i e s aval iaoi a *                                         -.v--             xu    >_i “ ••=.■

the       police             officers                      were          too           ~ e w , t oo      mounted                  or          too        badly             deployed              to

oring          order             to       what             was          already              a chaotic                 situation.                           I     emphasise                 that

this         was        naif          an        n o u ;-' o e f o r e             t n a ;-:i c c        -i   t        a n •-                            ■-;■J-        ■■ ■


■;•:; C v . i t h            1 a t e c o m a - :.                   -     o in a o              t h e _■a c r o f               tha           or ■
                                                                                                                                                 .’o        sasr in g

admission.                       In       a     period              of       5    -     10      minutes                - rr-.ace              no        o r o y i - es s        towards

the          turnstiles.                        Vns        crowd             was        d i s o r g a n i c e d , tna                         attawots                 o'       the

Tiounted            Police                 to      assist               seeded             counterproductive                                    ano           the      effect              of

too          many        pao pie              in      too       srnai i a n                  area        >.■!■■=.-a   u       ‘
                                                                                                                              --rtu-a t            A - •-         r >. >

 dancer.                 I    decided                 to       move          away            fromthe                  area        ana          did          so.

 I walked               away           from           the       entrance                   area,             uo L a p p i n g -                 i_n t o w a r d s                 the      A6'i<3.

 At      about               2.50             (-|450)           I was            s p e a k i n g to              a     policeman                     who          wa s       on toot.

 Ha      had a               walkie-talkie*                               He          told        me that              he       had           just          h e a r d t ha t               the

 kick-off                had          oeen         put         back          to        3.15.            (1515)                   I then went                          back            to    the

 turnstile
 t                           area          where"it                  was         apparent               that              the        method                of        policing               had

    changed.                     Instead                of      th e      huge             melee between                        the           gates              a n d the

    t u r n s t i l e s , there                    w as         now       in e f f e c t               a Police                   c o r d o n w h i c h was

    controlling                   and           limiting                 the          numbers            in tine a r e a                       whicn              haa        previously

    seemed          s o osfe r c r o w d s o                    ano       d i s o r §-s 111 s 9 d *
                                                                                                                                                                          SI 6 2 7


I W-S 2. ■ SC:               '"U f    yi   V   t U f 7i t O     S    5: -OvJvii           U           V       „!h              ’ ::3 i. i ~ -                <’U    a !■
                                                                                                                                                                       : U    ‘
                                                                                                                                                                              *^■l
                                                                                                                                                                                 ~‘

   ,•c y : i ,               7h.Ls         I i“5 i       au-S        tc       do                       d i f ■? i t:u i t y ..                     Iassume             that        by

: - ;s         - : :T: S       U;=         :uucn--puo.. : c i s e a             o j 8 n i n : : u ;)          o'    tne         concertina                         gats      had


a 1 re a dy            c c c u ■ :'e d .

0 V s ■_■      t h :■ ' o - j . o - : n s        turnstiles               I     pur^iiSu                  p r o g r a .Time s - To m a 5 ’ s i :                             to        t : 1 s


riant *                  I     could            see      tns        tunnsl leasing the                              back            or t h e goa_                   sna

.j i t i c i        access             c*o i n t s       1 e a d i ng t o ‘s t a i r s .                  i     i h <„« n d e a                  '-o t Aitu ~ k *«<- *                  •-•

the         rear             or siae             c-f V i s     standing                area       and           I iJpraiched                            the        gated

access               to        the         right.            1 wa s       the.rs         told          by a s t e w a r d                        rna^         this      v**

access               to        tna         s e a La d a r e a       only           and      that          the        access                10        '-n e * •-^“ UAui.j

area            wa s         through             the     tunnel.                I s a w no s t e w a r d s                          or     police              o •' " ^ - • -

d i r e c t i ng               people            away       f rom        t ne      t u n n e j. a c           e =-     u   t        suv     j.   a j. <t-j    k~ - ;-■*• -        ;!
                                                                                                                                                   j.        ■*           . „ — ■*•
 (as        I       discoversd                   later)        there             is    also           access           to                the s t a n d i n g a r e a

 the        sides,                   rather        than       through              the        central               tunnel.                      If I        had       known


 t na "         I    w DUiQ            have        gone       to     tne         s i a.e s .

 I      proceeded                     down       the     central              tunnel           arid,           on    reaching                      tne        hiosous-y


 c r o w a e cl t e r r a c e s ,                     ou na     that          the      match              na u      ai r e a d y            sw:                         1 • 'v “ ~

 now        about               3,02*             ( 1502)           In     the        next       few           minutes               tne            crowd           aro u r . a        me

 Sv. ^ ye d          and             moved        involuntarily.                         I ‘-'.‘a s       pushed               uo        against              a     c-usn

  barrier-                      The         weight       from         behind           me      was            i r r e s is t a b l e                ana        i >* uoor.

  considerable                             effort       to    move            sideways.                   As       this         was          happening                  I was

 aware              a?        the          match       corning        to       a    halt       and            people            down             at      the        front

  getting                    onto          the    pitch        but        I     could         not         see       and         did              not         know     until            mucr

  later-            the         e ;<t e n t       of    the     disaster                 a u tne              r f o n >* *

  Police               officers                  at    the     front            were        gesturing                 for                 us to m o v e             back      Out             at

  f irst            it        was          impossible*                However,                after             moving               to          s ome        railings             at

   the         side            it     soon         became          possible              to     move            pack           tnrougu                  the        vunne**                    A-

   I did            so,          some           police        officers                were      coming               through                     the         tunnel          onto             the

   terrace.                      Ahead           of    me     two        or     three         men         were         carrying                      an       injured

   friend*                     When            they    got     through                the      tunnel               they            asked a                  p e r s o n who
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PAGE                 t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S 627
* * * *■
           s^earsa                 to       Cs       a                             fcr        u ire c                -       -- '■ -■      to          the             fi'i:                       Aid       post             ji.t         the

           r.... .. ,..          .....;•                            .: .... •=e..? at            i5              OQj.nl-                   tnii-                 I U i ::: I V '£•f                     "   C. m i l             it        »!5i

                                                                                                 .   .   .   .   .   -   •       ......    ..   ;   -'• , •.        •••.•;*       tUi         «'              I' •■":   r\             T
                    - j;           V   ;j j n l s f               t !':'= ■.i : fd'lSb           rr '_■:!! -'*-                            - - - --                 ~ - ■■~                   -••■■-"                    -•--•■

           cent-;:.:.              _r ns                      i     :i;       _c    and        by            cnance                        met                 up       witn                  r:obin              rod: . a

           ^ ; i C : lcr               fro:;:        i.liiffisrs                   ~a     t    -hoii                         i^ion                      t : c .-.* t                    a': A n f i e l u                          close

           Co       mine..             From          this             new      position                      we              sossrved                            tne              events                    on          tne       bitch

           V    _    a i ^ u i a n c s s ,               tine         rescue            wsr^:.,              tne                 makeshift                               stretchers,                                     we

           remained                there             until               tne       announcement                                       (wnicn                     had              fc      r        io^s           sse-.rsKC:


           inevitable)                      that              the        match           had     been                        ajanccnea.

           D uring               the       tisrs         when            i    had        been            i n             the              central                         part                 of           the         terrace                 ,

           have           no      coubt           t h a t -the                only        significant                                       csuse                    of            tne             o r o b i e !T:                         , J° ‘~


           rnany          people            m         too           small          a     space.                          I        suspect                        many,                    like               m e,        were              in

            that          s e c t i o n          be c a u s e            they          aid      not                  know                 there                     was            any             choice..                      i c-^w              nu

            one       benave               irresponsibly                            in    that                 section,                              nor             was                there                any             obvious

            drunkenness                          (although                    I had           seen                   a        few               inebriated                                people                    outside,                    net

            c o m a n y                 harm             to        any       otners.)                    1           suspect                          ma^.                    a     lair

                           ;o o 1 e        c:-ah!T:ed.               into       tne       central                              terrace                          were,                    lire               we,         ;-- - - --

            n or m a l , y sit                   el       matcnes               but       were                   competed                                      to      stand                       at       rii . i s oc , ouoh

            b e c a j.s e of               t h e t i c k e t a i i o c -i 1 1 o •-.

            After            the        announcement                           t hat          the            match                        had           been                  abandoned                           1 went               to            tne

            worth            Stand              exit              p o in t         to m e e t            my              son.                       For             more                 t h a n an               hour            ne had

             be en         anxiously                     watching                  events                    unfold                        at           the            L e p p i n g s Ln                          end           and        on

             the        oitch,              fearful                  that          I might                   oe              a       casualty,                                    m s              attempt                   ^     ou<.**«>

               information                      or       advice               from a           steward                               had            drawn                     a negative                                response.

             We met              at        the       arranged                      pla ce       and                  made                  our                 w-*y u - n c k                      >,o the

               o nly       when            we     turned                 on        tne        car            radio                        that                 we      r e a l i s e d the                              extent

               of    tne         tragedy                 and          tne      number                of              fatalities.




                                                                                                                                                                                              M a u rice                K ay SIGN.ED


STATEMENT           <A K E N
                    PL AC E :

                    “* T h r *                                         D ~ “E !
                                                                                         K .;
                                                                                                                                                                                     WG 412
                                                                                                                                                                                     (S.O. G22!
                                                                               W E S T M I D L A N D S POLICE                                                                        (amended 9.8 1 )

                                                                           S T A T E M E N T O F W IT N E S S

                                                    (C.J. A c t , 1 9 6 7 , s.9; M .C . A c t 1 9 8 0 , s.1 02 ; M .C . Rules 1 9 8 1 t \7 0 ) .
 BLOCK OUT DATES
 WITNESS N O T AVAILABLE

                                       Nam e                                                          k f l . l U A A A S - . - - ....................................
 1    8   15   22 29 1 8 15 22 29
 2    9   16   2 3 30 2 9 16 23 30
 3   10   17   24 31 3 10 1 7 24 31
                                      Age                        (Yrs.)         i S a t e o f Birth    ....                                 ............................
 4   11   18   25     4 11 18 25
 5   12   19   26     5 1 2 19 26      Occupation
 5   13   20   27     6 13 20 27
 7   14   21   28     7 14 21 28
                                       H .itie or business address and
                                      telephone num ber
      8   15   22 29 1 8 15 22 29
      9   16   23 30 2 9 16 23 30
     10   17   24 31 3 10 17 24 31
     11   18   25    4 11 18 25
     12   19   26    5 12 19 26
     13   20   27    6 13 2 0 27       This statement, consisting of                         pages each ’ signed by me, is true to the best o f m y knowledge and
     14   21   28    7 14 21 28        belief and I make it knowing that, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I have
                                       w ilfu lly stated in it anything which I k n o w to be false or do not believe to be true.
1     8   15   22 29 1 8 15 22 29
2     9   16   23 3 0 2 9 16 23 30
3    10   17   24 31 3 10 17 24 31     Dated the        \ 2 ' " K'              day of          h 4                   ,19&=1
4
5
     11
     12
          18
          19
               25
               26
                      4 11 18 25
                      5 12 19 26
                                                                                                        r
6    13   20   27     6 13 2 0 27
7    14   21   28     7 14 21 28                                                                                      Signed......
' N T E R V IF N O D A T E S
  ) BE A V O I D E D
                                                                                                                      Signature witnessed

                                      .4..,a.rrj...                                                      Jllj. LU.AM.S..

                                                                                                                                                                                      ........
                                                         CfcKl                        ...11.-.                                                                             .■.A|srxL. . ) ..
                                                                     r^.                   .,<3.3,.                                                        .c>>l


                                      .\ty.....4ar|....^|<vy£.1s ..
                                                                                                                                                                                          ......



                                                      JXl£...rfySivfc.\Ls2 ..<3,lo)^..                                       ..pj\(a£....                                                         ..

                                                                           y      ....................................................
                                                                                                                                                                                           .....


                                                                                                                                                                           r\.£a.{...hz>..<aFj.

                                                                                reafcexd:                                                                                                         2--




                                                ...rbau'rj^K U s;.J.i...                                                                  rrja.css...c y C
                                                                                                                                                                                                        fv
                                      Signed                                                     Signature witnesses b\
                                                                                          .........
                                                                                           *Delete as applicable
                                                                                                                                                                  WG 4 1 3
                                                            WEST MIDLANDS POLICE                                                                                  (S.O. G 22)
                                                                                                                                                                  (am ended 9.81)
                                                            S T A T E M E N T O F W IT N E S S
                                   (C.J. A c t , 1 9 6 7 , S .9 ; M .C . A c t 1 9 8 0 , S. 1 0 2 ; M .C . Rules 1 9 8 1 , r.7 0 )



C o n tin u a tio n o f state m e n t of..                                                                iJsfjU&MSk...............




                                                                                                                                              4fg^gw-j?;
$ ...                                                       ..^ 1.1/rphlf- .,..iLii^£/£....l... h ^ t^ p.£^ l ...l.r^.....rrr^....
'hc.tt^k. d                                 . .trj.lr? ..                                .$.... rf& h ^ & 2 ...                                e ^ ir...          ...................
l u . / r ^ s l 'l i £ & k , ■ ■                       ■ •. ^ w S ^ l l k s . .. , u j £ / t L . .. £ ? p > .£ s rj..




'furjrl^. i.; .                          ...i.r^...                       ti^.f,..,. fSSsJarjj^.... SsT^JsLa.i                                                    .S a
t \Q ..   .toHr^r..                                                                   .,-k?. ....Vfei u           ^   r j ^   . ..                       .SSb* ) r ^ r ^
                            ...............................................................




                                                                                                   Dr|.....feLL/q).rf..q.....^\liS.....^.e-a/,

4..^1oJ<3r^.:L..ir^r^rrfL>£/r....U^

,IW....C5^..c>rL,

                                   UxicrKLl^..^...
...4...iai^l.k^^..^fe^^....^£.../.+u.nr7<f.lj
.i(^ ^ ...W ...i^ fe ..<? ^ ^ ...3 ..< 3 r r j S .4 - ..- ....^ ...^ 5 ....^ & ^ .....|^ .s g 2 £ ....a ^ ^
j!kf:.., 4 u m £ |....Itx.,rb\£.S>4t.                         |^.^.'...l...<9).3.r|:>
                                                                                    .h..^e.^...^7^....^51.AC^.....o/.

                             r.2iV^-i3XM:....)Da<5pl£                            J.r^...c^.aja^^......y£^...4}r^£....iu.r|r|2:' '




                      .tfc?ac..                       ..!i^ac.                  *
                                                                                        ...£eirj * I.L ...u d
                                                                                            *_ 1■"' " I   itl I                  / — —           .   . !-'# « ■     /- t i l




^ lr .^ ..jQ } .+...l..uL^...±>ejg^.                                        t T p S 2 . . . . . ^ ^ ^ . r..£llc^S^£...iK>.J^e

 ^t^k..O^..Jl^£....^£.r|./. . U r ^ X ^ . . < ^ O i ^ . . 2 . ^ S . ^ r ^ . T..fl...r^.(^...^.....0£aU^




              |2f£;S<£.u/£..                                                                                                             .   rik ^ ..irv^ir....^ rc rr\
 Signed           ,^ . L . ^ S r ^ ^ ^ ™ ^ ? ? r r r r ^ ...........                Signature witnessed b
                                                                                                                                                      WG 4 1 3
                                                        WEST MIDLANDS POLICF.                                                                         (S.O. G22)
                                                                                                                                                      (am en d ed 9.81)
                                                        STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                (C.J. A c t , 1 9 6 7 , S .9; M .C. A c t 1 9 8 0 , S . 1 0 2 ; M .C . Rules 1 9 8 1 , r.7 0 )



C o n tin u a tio n o f s ta tesment
                                m e n t o f. . S                                                                       .................................. ..............




C?rj..           ...qp^.rrp.-y<btdt..A .,ilki. .s...&<.:&.%&...                                  L i m k ( . . . . . px. uMf ' ?




4 f f ... r^c&s&u.                           .. rrytf. g_ <3rj<3...rrp/£~ .J.rj)rg.rj^ g....■■#■ •.S <rjr&A                                                 .■./&


k j k r f ^ .. «3...to ^ r y $ ,...,3 frr^.,.                                                                                  .....
C n x S ^ e 2 - -Ir^ ~ rW^£-■ • C .0 3 1 -J .2 , c ^ y ^ L ^ c ^ ..h &                           U J U s .ftp r r ..             ■               ■ifc s a /A ft >' •




^6...c95>i^2rrt^.g’
                  ....4t>...irg]|sx...^nrj'.-........................................



.U/tf..,4k g ,..^           t^ c ^ .r ..(?...f£ rrl£ n -^ e^                     1a       o ^ . ..<sjk .rgA£ .■                                               ...

|     m      t    .    r    ^     L    f     ^      .   j    ^       i   .   :        y    ^    .   r    r   t     .       .     .       .       J        ^       ..

                                                                                                                                                              ...



 4.;fcri....fcr^£ajl^.r . . j ^ £ l i ^

£ jp u i^ r p ..../fa-K^..■■--fc- ■.^ x rfT S r^ jiv .... p ^ s ^ s u - f ^ . .                                        i g g ^ / *..............



           ' )       \    i            f          ^                                                                    ,                        v
 Liks>...^ u / j & u c ^ c k 2 .^LJ....|sSici...a.n^3.                                         .fax]< S ^ O l g « A *3. .'Ssn^S7^ry
vjsAU-,          ^rje.S.OA^,                                                                                                                           ......

L£^Sz..J.....u£&.
S         ) c .\^ < 3 r J ...S ^ ...: ^ ) .t^ ...j^ ^ ..^ M ...^ /E ..r ...n ..^ ^ - ..^ r j......p L in ^ j ..
 R ..        (zk:tlf.{..< ^r\p ..... p u k .j.rtjx ? ...3 r j . ... < ^ r d b u t a r ^ £ - . j a i ^ f c k ..T3^ ^ x r f £ _ ....
    .k?...                            <q^rr^/<r>\...rhjcuS, p/fev 1.^..,Uj                                >.. iiUs»..tq/q?, .4 ^ J ^ ;.

    I...)^...4ufo...i^ri3t<^....»ai^..

 fa... 3 ^fe£...2 L i £<S-.....................................................

    ...0^.....rjiu/:rti^..A3..:T ^ . ^ ^



    il.PjS^Tl.bt^•                           •••■       <     ■■■■                    ■ .X-.r.J ^ if& >....b.K^rj-.t..4h lil^ > ..
    -ft^.rj..                                                    /■■■                                                                    T 0 7 ...iuJ.O- ■■■
    Signed        <^~‘.:                                                                        Signaturewitnessedb
                                                           WEST MIDLANDS POLICE                                                   Islaoaaj
                                                                                                                                  (amended 9.81)
                                                          S T A T E M E N T O F W IT N E S S
                             (C.J. A c t , 1 9 6 7 , S .9; M .C . A c t 1 9 8 0 , S .1 0 2 ; M .C . Rules 1 9 8 1 , r.7 0 )



C o n tin u a tio n o f state m e n t                                                           .......


                                                                           i ..,<arr|...,-sh !.L           .ui-skK .... 4ts>...     £.*....
                                                                                                                                     ...




Signed..            .        .          .CT7TTrT.tx'..................................   Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                                                                                     WG 412
                                                                                                                                                                               (Amended 9.87)
                                                                  West Midlands Police
                                                           STATEMENT OF WITNESS
I 15 22                                    (C.J. Act 1967, s .9; M.C. Act 1980, s . 102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70>
I 16 23
I 17 24
 18 25     N am e
: 19 26
I 20 27    Age                                 (yrs)                  Date of Biith
 21 28
           Occupation                                           C o \J             '1          ~~~          c?

 15 22     Hom e or business address
 16 23     and telephone num ber
 17 24
18   25
19   26
20   27
21   28


           This statem ent, consisting of    S'          page(s) e a c h * signed by me, is true to the best of my knowledge
 15 22 :
16 23 :
           and belief and I m ake it know ing th a t, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I
17 24 '    have w ilfully stated in it anything w hich I kn o w to be false or do not believe to be true.
18 25
19 26
20 27      Dated the                                       day of
21 28

is   I
           Signed                                                                                Signature w itnes


                                                                                                 O fficer's Nam e .


                                                                                                 R a n k .................................        N o ...........................

               (_                                           Sf-r.                                 ^                                                                      o~v__
                                    <xc3 oia-Vi                                                                                             ,CW- .               0>-\ SrjbJrti
                                                                                                                                                   o r



           .£?T~^                                                                                                                 o w ,<i                 L_lt
                                                                                                                                                            I
                                                       I                                                                          '          -          A            .          ‘
           4-0 (^atVJV               _ jC                                                                                   ■/>
                                                                .ff3.sj/'
           —!<2—           exr-ra.—«,<z_c)                  b                               O o rc ji
           I                                                                              (W/-            tVv4-                  <■>«

           CX%               (       ex                     a                 SLe_c- i
                        'HcJoa_jb-                                                       ^pv»^v£2!                 oo-J                      Ar                                     K -

                                           ^                                                                               ,            (        <— i<s-i                i-o
                                                                                                                       oLa-A                       «— .L-Vo                 /       c L ^ <-
           IA a .3C-I                                  kj&O-                  (.   a _o   >— <        iAa o i J
                                      ■1
                           tA                      >£2-v                                  <*                                       -g-.TS -

                                                                         <-3 a_* V                S't~1=— ^
           o a i       .           O-v             TV'-a-             VoOfv-.                                  C?—«*—                   I'XJr^’— _J
                                                                  OsAtJ'-3- ^                    \ X *^ S’ I—^-G/S
                           <?.ar.                                       Io                              ^              C—» o . -
                                                                   e J fc r                                                                                     \ f~ •

           signed G & V V . . ^ 5 =                                                . .     Signature w itnessed b
           Delete as applicable.
                                                                                                                                                                                                         WG 413
                                                                                                                                                                                                   (Amended 9.871

                                                                 West Midlands Police
                                                     STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                           (C.J. Act 1967, s . 9; M.C. Act 1980, s.10 2 ; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70>


„        .       .         ,                   .                                           /'-'I           s'?— '               <-J^7
Continuation of s ta te m e n t of                 .......................................................................................................................................... ..



                               ^                    ^               T u-'*-                  ^                 — cj              b^v>7                                                  ..........

Cu^a                      trass-/,                                    ^ fr.                                                                   ■ ■ ^Tf7. ..                                              ...
                                                                                                        fjQ'pr. ^ r y . ..                                            -ri ■.iT.‘.v^ 1P F ® (..

                 r°                        ^        ^       rsL^~-                                   ? ..... ^                                                                                                ■
                           uo.i                                  '^rTa*l=>'fi;--                  ,
                                                                                                  C^T. . .
                                                                                                         C,^'^7S.............................




 \           C ^i                  l-r*~>-a-r                                        7^ .                                                                                            T h 'f r . ..        .   ■■
                 \V-A a                                       sj-^ -tT2_r"                                                        .,           t                            .... ^                      ^—    ■

                                                     Ji,                .y^ vr?".Jk.^               .                                                                                     . ^TVl '.'Tf. .
-**>             ^ Ajr                                                                   I w , __k_xsL-j                                  4> o^ -a ^ ^ V T .............

 (if-                      ^=>/r~a_..                                              ?.... .tV^vfcr                                    !■..... 9>rr...                                                   . .^ r r
'flove-                                                     ^v-3 V"                                                     .... ( L I                                                                 ...'**<"...
                         ^ ^ .*TV^-f.-rr                                     ...     .^ \ t-?^~t~>
                                                                                                 . ^r’. A .................................
     t       "'' ^ - w '                           tv-v^ ’
                                                         .’.’
                                                            .’..£                          .        .        .           I t ..                                     e ^ . o i .........
 L^KlUV-                               (       u4^i                        ^                   P ^ 'A .                                              ■ ■ ■ 9 ^ .t> .‘ ^^rr. ^ Jr.....
    ie*2 0 = ^ z -                   OOI                i K j - e .....................,t S ^ /"e r . . .'r??U . . • • f>. ■ ■ .‘r ? Q. H .. . '. 0 . . . .
    |o       '                     '                    ...^             tv^L               SfOjL-s. . . . I                         . . . ••'3•
    ^sX L ^U ^.                      ;?= ?              i ..•                                                                          ... .T ^ r r * - ..                                                    ..
                           -S^'-S                  t^-^Ar-                            s^-v^—                                                     (        cL&-\ 4~                                      ....

    u ^ U \o         j                                    Q                                    fi.             C c A i^ r                                                        cmA jz^,....................

                                                                               1 - (p                    crr^>
                                                                                                             .                 4^ f.~ <i . '.               A ..                          .. C      .^ . ....
 "{V v-exj^ tv                       v -1 -tw                                               *rVr               ' f ’^ rVrVT. . . .                                               .^ ^ ? r s d .

    Signed                             fS!A^f:1JrA~ T ^ T > r T ^                      .             Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                                                                                               WG 413
                                                                                                                                                                                         (Amended 9.87)

                                                             West Midlands Police
                                                STA TEM E N T OF W ITN ESS
                                     (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s. 102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


                                           ,    C   o    ,        I                                         >
 Continuation o f s ta tem e n t of
                                                                           ,             h o M r                                  r-e-AL^                             TV^ff". .

    vj           <>'vjC'                                     .
                                                             cr4r^r?<Vr.                   V*7                                                       I                                      ••••
    Vs^|v\                                                   /-rTT^                         .. .'h .
                                                                                                   C^ ^ T .'..,I ..                                                                      .....
 fo r:                      . .U ^ r v ^ v ? - :. . .                                                                         :A@ r9-.b.-. ^                            . . . . . ) ...............
(                      C-.-1. *.") Ov                          Pr>A^~fyr$ ■ .Th^-.. .^.<9:J. .~r^....( .
g r /> <?-          ct.'yD           £ * . T j .^ .4 . . . .'rT T . . . . yT^ar^lF?>. . .                  CT*r: . . ■                                    ...


>—y . . /T |. . . , - v t   \                                         rz . . . .   ............................................._...............................\ .................

4\)jv/v-£^                                 I         <—*a—                         .^"7?^ 71!! ^
^                               <r   \    ^     »       ^                                       \^ r& T 7.. . . .‘rrr^                                                                ..........
    cvc                         p^a-                ira ^r^c i^.                                                                                                 i.      !~3:’r7^7<r5f.......
    y=,           ^ ,p                                                                                                        P f^r:.. 71.                                Ptt^ ' . ...........
                 .... O f ? ... .                   Vr                                       ...J^Vr. ...<^.7 >Vr. •                                                              ..........
    ^ O/U'-I           .. . t v i ... f r ^ .                                                          .... ...              .tl                          ./. •^ V . v b ...
    ^  ■ ■■‘-3........          ..,                                                                                                       i                          t     . / *t                     >




    .V.T7V                  fr¥^          ..... > ..vr. ...! ....■•                                                                                                                         J-i
                                                                 . f^^P-p.Vr. ...‘TS .. ..r^Tr^. ..                                                                    ■ ■ ■ .‘r ^ ■ ■ \                  7
             \(i U + -                                  ......... . . , 0 ^ ‘i‘^ v . ..? ^                                   .......................................................




                                                o— ^                  C-^y */s^-                            <         ^---f 4 *                       ■




     ( iT <po ^ ^                        c^ i                ^7^.                                rr>.3 . . .                                          .

     Signed       C ^ iv X .                                                              Signature w itnessed by
                                                                                                                                                                             WG 413
                                                                                                                                                                       (Amended 9.87)

                                                                  West Midlands Police
                                                       STA TEM EN T OF W ITNESS
                                           (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation of sta te m e n t of



. *>.           t w                                                                                        - j                           .. .              '                 ...
               ro _            oC              T '-e -               «^2S K \< ^ 3                     f& r.                       J.    .                                  /. . .

s\£=>          - ~                         cr ^ ’^                    ^                    ^                                   ■             ——•••                 ...............
                                                           2^-g                          —^r                                                    .... ‘h   r . . ex j^ r . . . .
                                                      -h z tsr c i c-                          pA 2~4                  i S              ~u J l
     ,C?\}
it'V^TT.                     c— i^ -4                        iy - e -                    o -h ...            I—i                                          :t v^.
       4—eAo                                                                                                       c         •^JO vJ                      ad
                            . fitirr.
     f
     ^•a i i                          . . «/Tr.
                                                                                                                   \J ^J
                                                                                                             ■fw
     pu&fy           . 3 . . . H “ . . . . .Vo ChA                                                             (-*=»
     , j<xj                                                                « < .... ^

                                                           Or?                  ^        !*rr\           «crv-r^.«=>'"

              v..ci         ^rr^-^r ( ^ ....                          .... crVS-^‘..... ."XV....

^y-                 S'V. * , & . . . . cW .'^rV. . . . Hr*. . .                                         $■■ .^77 ..
          >q
           _^,                               v_> —o--> 4-"                                          cLo        fc=>V"              <■* W - £ W . v . f - 4 - r -

£ ,v.'. «: >.                       .’ . . .                                 $                          ... t      1- ^ . ... .f>r*-4A '^.f'fr.                  ■
                                                                                                                                                                     o-. f-
     Q /£-                 «arv4                       L                             ...... 9 ^ . ^ . . . ^ .... -----------

     .fW«»r>                                           t? fVrMr^. .. .<?r^                                     i                                               .3
 .                               c ^ ^ i -                                                       •• f
                                                                                                                                   "t~V-T-?_■£<-                1           > 3-^
             ,L^rr,            .•f^vTt--.... .^NvT^r'^.Vv                                              ^ .......
 .th^f                                                               v ^ M                                                   ..         o ^ / K ^
 f V o ^                                                        C     -     o       ^     U     U      ..... /.-**-4...
 ■ .....................................       Y ................................................. • ................. LI          .          i_T              • t U I-     1 co-'ri    .lit.
 (r-^\r^_£                   ^                 fltVHU-...                                      .. .cJ^ r.


                                                                                                >S t~°

                                                                                                                                             ■>or.
                                                                                                                             .4f=f.
                                                     ^_icv— -4—                                -^==»                        ..... ^TT\ .                         iS ».'          I
       <XJ                       J C H .ir-fSr-. ...... I                           rtVs.-9v.ci Vrv f~T                     7^~.°. .^T. ...           .•.[-Gsr-~>.^.....

     ’(a A -< ap.1^                ...........                                                      . + ^ ' r ................. ■■                             '          l l ''\
     / & T T .r                      «          ^       TV^t                     S ' ---K-,....? < W .... ft-*-.
                                                      .




     <^J~r             ^         vs                                   ....................................................
                                                                      iVe_                     .‘ea\.rv:fc
                                                                                                         r,.',r^.            o.-rvV?                C - ^ ^ ,;^r^.....
                                           I                <± &y~-i........ CX.........<^.OPsj f>. . . ■ .«?i-r. ...£^.-y^^t"

 Signed                                                                              \          Signature w itnessed b \
                                                                                                                                                                                            s.
                                                                                                                                                                                                WG 413
                                                                                                                                                                                          (Amended 9.87)

                                                             West Midlands Police
                                                   S TA TEM EN T OF W ITNESS
                                       (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s .102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation of sta te m e n t of

^ 0-~s C                                  ^
                                                                    c^Jr                                                           c-___a J                   ^                           ’^    2-

                                                    ^ c_-5 C»

^ |U a r € ,.

S ’F ^ g ^ A                                   r                 3 ...................         .
                      <^py c . q o a S                            'h 3.'h ^ r ^ r i c f p l>.v>.                                                                —     ih?... V      ^ . ......
^>TNP>ipV^3Uv,—            c              .<p.C'H-v^rr.i.'r^>                               •rys.t.^^rr....                                             t } r s ..                   .*.^ 9 t t
                                                                                                                                   f^                        ^Pr.                    ...
                 ...    I xsaO                                             !<u $
  i" \          /Scz*                                        sj> ■MC. «v. t~[ o — )
                               ^   jlX                                   ‘
                                                                         s V'Shrff                                     I..                                                        .. rryr\
              ,T H                                                I ^ a . x > -—!                                                     l                ...........‘rV ^ T T . . ,?ir^-A.P.(~.
                                                                     w4“3
 t ^ 2-              ’^N r .cSc\ s
                                                                           t-~ o C ji.                                                                        I_;            ^ p c x ' t —j     .
 .(.     . W * ^ ! T£^V.H2r. .. .Qr^4?-:                                                                                                         ,‘ j

 .€ 2 0 ^ .9 ^ ^ .   II-e-i                    0^471 i                              iTrf-                                                               _A_^d 'X \~ fr : .. .tr r cj[ <FK. 'S ^ ^ ^
       C-=4            ^                                                 t-                      rt~                        V ^ rj^>___ f r y . .. fy^fy^A                          .. ^ irr ____
                *rr            .^ r ^ tV S ;           .i^          J- TT^ . . . .      ..Vs?                                    trs^T... . t T V r r ^ ^ . ^ . ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                        "j2_
   .U*rr>’. .Wr-4                        ‘TV
                                           w.v’^>^V. .. .^Vr
                                                                                                   ^                                                       cJL-vr                ^— a—
 A O             ^     i <!;■> £ . . . ,Q < 7                      SA r^ r^ .
                                                                                                                                                                                                    >
 -t<=                                               I            .S^TTrrf?-^. ..•                                    ....^.ea .‘                                  I     ^«tr.
.^j J    > \               The,                    (ri*> .< A .... ,<s£__________________..‘...I.,
                                                                                                                                                                                     -C—
~-fX_^Ar                       T'r 4-J<2-'                                                    «=\                            4~?.-VrV-r^.

 S v < s s W .^ -;<                                I~N--1.                  l                             -                        t }y* ~ .. .fi /T3vXi—                        .<rT^.

  .<CL>Tt^.‘.^. Prr'.                                                                   .   i , .............................................. ^ . .

                                         ......................


   P o c-tL -as                t-=>        D ~a-             .                      ,       pC^ .c? r '... .^rT*... .<5.£P.,.~r$...                                               ■ ■ ■ t ? T f r .. . .
                      ... .^ . . $ ^                    . . .ococx. ji ^                          .L 'r '.^ h . . .t® .V ^ °-..
  «3-^c"       C^<jo+"                   o--^-«_         o         oU=>c*c                   t f * . . ,r^A A .i. LAr. .!'...
   n c i ^            '’’’f o r’               ;tv ^                                                                                                        ^                         A ., f'5^ .
   (       c^y(d                                   &, c?( d          D'Tf-.^-.                                                       .. or^r^Tj.. . ??i2r*... v > ^ ^ .....
                     -wJ-iL'XL.*-X_0^                        cpC-                       ^

    cx^h       tVfr^.                  .T^rr^-.              .‘= ^ 4 ..... \ .. j-^:c ..X                                                   ^ .- 1. ..                              . rQA      ^ J^ .
   "H3         1^'J                •               ^     ~
                                                   (^ p X tA -




  Signed                                                                        I             Signature witnessed b>
                                                                                                                                                                   V         WG *12
                                                                                                                                                                       (Amandad 9.87)

       H O C K OUT O A T iS
                                                                                      W«st Midlands Polic*
    W ITNCSS MOT A V A I U B U
                                                                               S TA TE M E N T OF W ITN E S S
1     8 15 22 29    1   8 15 22 291
                                                                   (C.J. Act 1967, *.9; M.C. Act 1980. s. 102; M.C. Ruin 1981. r.70)
2     9 16 23 30    2   9 16 23 301
3 10 17 24 31       3 10 17 24 31 1
4 11 18 25          4 11 18 25     I    Name
5 12 19 26          5 12 19 26     I
                                                                                            Date of Birth
                                                                                                                        (O • CoO
6 13 20 27          6 13 20 27     1    Age                          (yrs)
7 14 21 28          7 14 21 28     1                                                                                                       .C S<E;P7cyy. .                  .
                                        Occupation

1     8 15 22 29    1   8 15 22 291     Home or business address
2     9 16 23 30    2 9 16 23 301       and telephone number
3 10 17 24 31       3 10 17 24 31 1
4 11 18 25          4 11 18 25     1
5 12 19 26          5 12 19 26     1
6 13 20 27          6 13 20 27     1
7 14 21 28          7 14 21 28     1

                                        This statement, consisting of            page(s) each * signed by me, is true to the best of my knowledge
1     8 1 5 22 29   1   8 15 22 29 1    and belief and I make it knowing that, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I
2 9 16 23 30        2   9 16 23 3 0 1
                                        have wilfully stated in it anything which I know to be false or do not believe to be true.
3 10 17 24 31       3 10 17 24 31 1
4 11 18 25          4 11 18 25      1
5 12 19 26          5 12 19 26      1
6 ”     20 27       6 13 20 27      1   Dated the                                  day of
;       21 28       7 14 21 28     1

ENTER           T NO DATES         1
                                        Signed
TO SC AVOIDED                       1




                                                                                                                             .   cjJ:.   ..                        ■ .9^.^-


                                            (% ,...                                                             . J . .. kcw eiM d. . M . .                                            ..
                                           'fLj?
                                         ■^V-q       iA*~pJcsU'
                                                          -^r'.       ..




                                         (euUjuuu.b&s. .                                            .4>. .                                                                      .o 4 ^ t. .
                                         /.iy * . .S?. .^£.-.                                                                     F .4. &*f- ■                                              ..
                                         4 ^ s<z-p. . .              . .’AM.                            .U 4 & r.-.                           ■**} ■                              : ........
                                                                . . by. .                                                                                              j??- - ■ ■ • •
                                          /1jU'      M p ^ . ..JLtifiA               .fo. ■ .4*.                                         t/.                                                 ..
                                          Jfic&r.**?. .or. /& * .* (? . .&*. .                               L■ .*•£*»./fY.-. - J. ■ ty r t-                                                ■■■
                                          (o -                                 .                               J. ■ tJ.a^ .                                            —          •—        - •
                                         4<4U.cot.v. r*A^r4                (       kSk.                                                                       •‘                   ■ ..•••■
                                           _^iSUuj      Q>                                      f                                                                          .c^~.            ■.
                                         Cysx                                         ,     I                                                   ffVfY f ^   . '•                            —
                                                                                                                                                       .cUdbJ-t . A 4 V * .
                                         s j& p s .. o ^ . ., ^ . . ,.^u^..                                           .. fc p J . .4v«.
                                                     i V w ^ . . kojkc.. aftzy.                                       fa .                                                                  ■
                                            ,     ..                .--=------- ^                   /../^......W
                                                                                                    be^OSi , .QJ^Ci. /, ( . ^                    . 'facQA^                       ^
                                           iyp^oJUL^,

                                         Signed                                                                  Signature witnessed by
                                         * D*l*t* •» applicab
                                                                                                                                                        WG 413
                                                                                                                                                  (Amended 9.87)

                                                       West Midlands Police
                                               S T A TE M E N T OF W ITN ESS
                                    (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)



Continuation o f s ta te m e n t of

              Co-OD^            y-J<?T      cU j               , .V-^. . . .                                            . . .'^-.'3q. p ^ S A ......

              .dLv'wy.c           .b?                                                                                      . f-K-. . .^                              .

 /po             ^        -ftoL                    ^oowQJbr^f!,_Qpeac^ . .aJbo vvt. .                          . V W^ -.                               ....

<fexftfoaM .0V^N<Vy^.... S W . .                                                                               .r*V^. .                           ...................

(X ^ -0 ... . o o e L u t.                 . . ,<^..                                . cv>... t w . .                                . / t a . ................
                       .^p<x4.«..!. .c<xJ.fc,. X^V^V^4rfV. .                              . y v ^ ^ v 3: . .
                                                                                                           ‘5^..               .. J(P-V4-*p . .            . . . .



                               . ■
                                 C^V'- ■           . .O-r^Jv^ .            .*. r^V?. . ^lAQ -C P -.    .                                   . . V^S-Hv . .

                                                   T t i ^ W j .W < 5 W C . . &>. . .t^e . .'oq^'. . fe>. . .^x.v-+j . .tt-P. .^ V ' . ^ .

0JU^\ ...(.,                                                  ■ /QA^ .                ..W j ^ n U : . ■Cj—         ■              ■0 l0«ft£S....
te> ,$2jy\/e..^                 .. bcaoAT..            .. >*?..     \ . . ,-Wlc*...TT^-wvy...Ws..                                                             ...
\QJZ£U/,        \v \    ."tUja.. .jZju ^ q X.. .                          ..(\A£*-. ..k x /W & A .teOMO. .                                       .PK-. ...
 jU-o                   . Psi.<JV‘z. .                                     .C*r .           . . <X .                   . . <?yCQC*. .

U>£.                   <*-M. . .U^WVrV^. .                 . . 3 0 0 ^ . .^AVf^. 1                                               ■ -p * ^ -                ■ ■■ ■
a Jh c yJ c     I "1 -1>0 OLA^id                       o Jt        \.           . . . I. . d jU & U . . A M . .                         .<rV> . . . 'I V ^ -

              .u^<x>.. .4kyj^-*v \ . ,4r^yW<....h )(r-..                                  . $y?- ■ ■                                           .W-'..

<jU(^£^!-k . t<>. ■cY^r- ■                               .‘Pr^s‘4 . .. <fMr‘?Q./.              . .v^. . y^p ^>. . f s . . .^ 4 ^ ..                                     .
we., 'CIa & ' & w *. . .^?. .fv^r. .c> ..-j^vr1..<j clx ^ . . . ^ v c w s . .Vr4..

                ?M''Vvs4^ .. ft^oivv . ,<?vN^:. . w \ . ."tv?.. .^+^>sr.Wv*\fi< -. f..                                                    ,'ikcsi'..'t^A-

g^|- -                         ^<^1
                                  ?         pssa. . .<&:. ~\^a .. .T^y^^UjiyV /.                              . .'.’>. riV^-r°...                .-Uo l m 'Z#

'jWp-y'!^.                     . .t w T ? . ,'1'2-vvuuJU?. .                 / ,<^A-. . .v^Xo./). . .QfiAjVcwt^... .                                    s£=i..

■ilA^L                             ca^dL                  . x / y V f y . .vsi.^P. . . C ^ . . . ^ 4 . . .                                ...........

                                  fUA.                    .<^\:         if&frfP!-.. .Cr. .                                .‘^ l : .1?^. • •                                 ■

          it      A. .wviev/p            .-Uo- .. i^ * 3^         .,. c r ^ . .:H~ro . ,«=/!H^'y".

 yg^.                                                                                                                                   . .U
         CA-vv£.         <S^t.      .'(5Wi^'. . ,<2wioC?l . .J . Q V y v x U ^ . .V^VJ. . .^ 4 V V ^ . . . i ^ V & .                                .V -SVJ .

        i .-> / vJi’rA/'i7. . G^i.S<jqLp>. . .<A. .                          S.WS\^?. . .              fc . ^ 9 ? ^ ^ . ."tV9. . , ^ V ^ . . . .
 UjiptAA.        \L~a.          ^ 1 - i-K-CP.1^ ‘"p. « l
                                                       T^.<^-. .             . . . Vv^S^rS . .                               . .,
                                                                                                                                ^ 5’. . :4'A“£ .....

  >VC^. .                          ■ ■ )***-. ■ ■ . % * * > < * ■ ■ . ^ S v ^ f t a , ^ a „ ,              Jfoy.

               w ^ y r . 7.j u s t .            t o J ^ i w r v .^ y > . .t v ^ . ..                                    •/•w v t s . « - M ......
                                           cJUys^L       .^fCA/y-S           px^;c.wp\..<?r*J?Yr?1.                            •. ^ ^ ^ ^ ::>.
                                                                                                                                             <^^^^. •••

 Qp& jck . K $£,                  SJ ^ juA ^ jsK, . i o . . v^jegJUfi . ,-fe. .                                                                                             >
 [ . M U 4 4 . ^ p ^ r . . . i V a v A ..                                      .. .^.. ^         ■ ?s              . ^ ^ V r ^ . . . ' ^ c^ .

                               oSjz-y^p^. ,^V«... Vsv^M<Vv .f P 9 ^ . .                                                                                    ....
  ,S>p3(V2i,w                      V>a-^,      .eowi .                  .iil-o^xA.. . . Ki£_. . .CpLrVYW^i^ .?*£■. . .tW?-........
                       !% /\
  .e^yc.


 Signed                                                                      Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                                  ~ z ~
                                                                                                                                                              WG 41 3
                                                                                                                                                        (Amended 9.87)

                                                              West Midlands Police
                                                       S TA TE M E N T OF W ITN ESS
                                       (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s. 102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation o f s ta te m e n t of

                         a .*.                                                                . . o-U^.. Wa^. ..
Ma(                                                             . y^.f- .-ipi'-t. .Vr-fV. . A .. .lp>eAaf“r*. . .^ V .
             j_ ^              -      '1          -1      •     *—--    - 4-> — <». •   1^ « I
                                    .<2r;Vrj                      .'..            . . .^       V      S                               •+ <C. . . Scj . . ) ----
    p            y             e      ^      -           u        -        ..;uSquQ
                                                                                  . . . t>?.. ,4^Qvvse...                                 . ,|O oJ}.. c f \ . .
        frvvyv?*.:                     A ..                     . .iVR . . . & 'r.<r -.. .eJL^^vp^A^?-S.... \ .. S ^ y V^-P-^: . . . .
I                    <2U^-C^                                   . ,<3v. . . .3^p (t. .C2M^+CLA^Ci3 . . . ^<Xys. .iVf^. .                                            .-

   I.                  /(-p /v t. . .<3^. .‘tW5. . . JvyS.t. . /.Q&X*:. . \ . . .C*3-W-S£v .. M J . TUvq . .
 WiX/0 iQQju^c^           .kKQQtef*^. . . &r). .                   . . ‘VV^VVi^.                                                      .



  i . . s*^ p*L C k...                                                 . ,<?L^v;Pl. .. V > * ? 4 b ^ ..          ...
1,-SUp.La-                 <£\ ’t^a. focKj^._ . . A+. .                                        . .■‘f^ r ...........
'I'UjLq { c>ouai, ^ ^ayyz. __yjoy'je-. . . .b a-w jik/S . . .a_Ltfo , ±ij^pL^jM>xk. .V^-vj........
  $zAxcp. , C»t'v txj-^iiVvAA^ \fyc^Lyk: Jpx^wv. .^W-v# . .                        .. V.. •                 . ,^-f^r
{ l^TtX-p                                                . . f^Y^Vfc. .^ V r^ . .      . .1"VfV. .
I .. (/'.‘Mrvcv^c^ . .im -^. .                 .S^cNi ^vv^. . . f W| .               .. .'iW?.. $£u,<
                                                                                                    U-.Q^v^w
^VN> .(P.-.‘? . , . |l’^CK^/yX^A/'i......... *CizA\>’r.^O-CL .      . .Or?1. ... W >Awv.. -f^^rtv^ATsOt .
                             ,W?V'^SfV. .\^rr. . .i^Ss?fV.Sc^. . yypVr^. . V^Pr. . •             ■^P * . . . . . . .
'}\*A ..c y ] i ? w di ..LnJ£*vQ                   . .   CS&   . . i . .             . ,<s 0 | ^ - . . sJc    f .'/C iM V ^     . .                \
                     i                 to.                    ^TV'W1?-. i .V . .W PTS^V-'-k ■chJ^ -                                                         .......
                         |\A/vdl                       ./icz&dL-* , \ , ,                                               .'"Vr^*..                       ^         ■•

    -Vt^                                         .. Q .... vw^ss. .<£Y..                                        .. ■
    \f(LM-\. AJU>i/^3L-^. . .J^.^<?VVC^fQ. .'tV-A . .                                   . .^NlGVj^ . .          ■■■
    £V<^LaV0-^                    . Uc . .L^iCX^). .                                               .... I ........
     &ju&jJLL non a-A-^r).                           f*y. ■ ■                                  . .'W?-............
     ,^U>KVS             , . C W M . . .V.... <Aju4vvt.. . Q ^ t . . .-to . .iv^.. . ^ y - Y ^ b J 4 L . ........

     )LAJ*S^Ac3-X AJcCojt-M" 3-                  , J               .                                       ........
     |^i ^y><-)1- Vys— y^cz^rorv^C-C^ "V^-<2-- ^.VVrV2. . ,^*P .                           .A.....................
     <gi^ t-/oxy>nt                                                   , \       UiCXo                 S                                                           ...
                               2-   <y^r..    ,



    C D ia   m                      ^ — f t- p f V ^ V V s 1? ^ .          i                  .   .   £*>   ■ ■


    ' Ar     I   <X ^hFj<y>. i                              VVf'fV. ^fVQ-. . .^VPS^N
                                                                      .          .                         .”\VR    .   .



                         r^vcAyyx
                        Arvt?
                           .                   .1/sAy^-. . ,v^“. . . .V^.^rV?. . .V'^<^fMr .                                .



         \       (£3c5V2-                  /Q4^=s4r.
                                           /QL^Ltawtr.              <:Vrt)(r:VSrt . .        - . . .^. . .     ••
                                      Xaxj^i.. __             ^{tsO- . ' .6 v , o^ Lxu^ji
                                                   jfeix>^-0^ r tA j^ ^o A J b o rd r             1^ .gcA^S

    Signed                                                                            Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                                                                                  WG 413
                                                                                                                                                                            (Amended 9.87)

                                                             West Midlands Police
                                                   STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                     (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980. s.102; M.C. Rules 1981. r.70)


Continuation of statement of
    \                        .'b a ^ v s .                       .... fcjpcpa»C..,                                                               ..VsJV**Vs

          . t& o d c ... <?Uv^.. A                                       .. Q ■ ■ (^4-M^..                           .. u *.. rtVwv..
<Pc. . . 9 ^ . .                                                     .. .“t a a . . . .                         ■ ■ . ^ f 3^ 3. • ■ •                     KQ - =•................
\       yv) cksO' . .                                                 .. c X ^ m c w * ? . .‘Y V ^ s i . .                     . . .Q ^vs^y.csA . . . . ■ ■ ■ ■
< s 3 u ^ ..                               .: W             < ^ o a . .-to.                             .. vsipv?..                                                  .y v M " k
                                                                     t e ^ . . w w & v . ^ - s o . . <3M A ^V P. . , ^ W ? v : .                                                                             .
{^rtattW W £ > y & ,                 .0^.                                                 y ..                                                                            .j. fcuxt
 A .. d u u W j t . . ^ w a a e . t k o d . . . • ^ ^ . . ^ s o .                                                                                ^               .................
                                                                           . A. . .                             . iV ift . .                                   ....................

    O d f& U M . .CVS. . .                        . . . $ £ k J h . . . OWsaf-. . . A. . . .■& & *+ *. . . .^ P ^ v S . .                                                                         . .
<?^Ur:. p f \ . .                        . .OiaaJtsTps^. . .f&Vvf;. . . t-v^A . «vw\» . . AV-o,. .                                                               ..........
                                                        .   .iv>^ • • • .(?)“MVy*i . .T^.v5>. . ^V>. • ."W?-...............................
                                             .. .W.tt^-..                                        . - + V * ..Vs><?^:.                                           e>^ cJS .. ■
                                     .\(?P-Prf3.KfK-. . V*P. . .                                               ■ -V- ■ ■         &*A^£vJ ■ ■ .CvS3s<?.........

    p ,e M iX ^ > \ .. < p o J J & A -,.           . 3 ^ 3 ^ . . m*>ve..a * w * ..                                                                          ..........
X^e-*S%_                cjujo^ob.svvr^.                      .<^J.erJS/ ...<?Vr-rte>..                   ...\PrC^Ar\«?. A.t.                                                            ....
    .VflbQ.. .4*s. . O W . f M M i . .c P * . ■ .(N ^ V V '.^ J b a ^ . .                                    . /tV * > . C v C U ^ .. V v 7 ^ > ..........
    Cpcpq%£pk                    ^h^rN=*T           V       y.* /r^ * A 4 &               ^ffrfiJU2. ..                            fpGOA^. .                                                                     .
C V O .. i . . . O C W              ..   . & & &        u . .. y ? < ^ v v ? v . p o ^ .S ^ X .                 <W    &    . . .   ^         .       ..

                                                   .,<2j*csfc>.                                        -. sjs^'^F. . .‘jpWfiAjT .. r W                                                         ;...

     rftv y ? .         A.     .<3LA v4                                                                                                     . . h O o C M - .. V v ^ .
    <^Ue.                                                    7^r<2. .                                                                       . .^/«0 .■ 0f t i -v. ^V. . . .
    .ifsAdUU.. X + & X x J b u A . .iW xi..                                           . .^ S o ^ > .   ..<>,...                                                           . S c ^ ..
     Ik                             .9* ^ ? ... P s . . .                                 . .Vv^43^fcfe?^:*.. . ' . . .V>>PsQ ./.                                                                                 .

    <?VJUyy. . ,U?cWv^. .^ : . . ^ . . .fcA^6L. . A. •                                                                     •^.P?sV?./ -A............
     5Qusr~l.       .1 ^ * . .                        . . <H^r. . .C^ 1. ■ ■ - ^ 'f tixv-.<VVVS*n . .                                                                      ................
                                 ^?upv . ,CV>te . . AV'-P. . .                                     ./. .G -^ - ■ ■                            ■ ■^■^‘2-...............
        ^uuvu^.               k z u j^ u e .. .             . . . f t o y s ^ s J i ... . c x J o < ^ - ^ c?v^ - c ^ ------------------- * ^ Q k ............
                                                                             ... £U*eJU-.-... f e w . ■. I v s ^ u ^ V - y .

    Ck      , <^J?r>r<?^<P9>. ■      .QsC+T5?.^ . .^V^-. . .^Sr^Vr. .                                                                                                                               .^.
                   C>ijy)-£A.            VM^yT^-. '.'^ V ^ P .
                                                             -               .   .                                   . . .tVr€_     .   -    ^Jvi^V r .f          .....................................................



     fpkjjLa-       ,                    V                       H               U                 X                 |                       <                          . . .....
     U Sjiusv.      5 l U ^ . . ,W > J^7r.y^C V vj                         U ^sA * .                     —      W v ^ ip ^ ^ v z -c i.                                  ...................
      $*Tyv^2-               .W v s ? fr^ P lS l,                         ___ . ,U -v P > /f^ .....................................................................
        /trCVJ<£Xr.-VC“‘ ^          —i - e            iT S J O ^ k ^ ^ W p ^ l^ . .                                                                                                             ....

    Signed                                                                            Signature witnessed by|
                                                                                                                                   WG 413
                                                                                                                             (Amended 9.87)

                                                  West Midlands Police
                                           S T A TE M E N T OF W ITN ESS
                               (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)



C o n tinuation of s ta te m e n t of

           n                  p                   C                   '          k                i           p               ....
                                  .'irV^-PAvv.'. .                                           .. .vvSPsO..V V ? ..iV vpt$?3V4-.
                  .ewfJL.                    £e^r>o£. .^T»S+-.V3 ..f.^P^~S/XSixA . .                                ..S-o$*V?---

 .W o ^ ( W       aa^.     .. ,\.. . ^      jjL    .                                                                   .........
                  ♦•.                            .'PPs-'&M. .Vc>. . .'^VrQ- . .W^C*£. .<^V .1>V£. . .^OPsJv......
  i       /UVH.          .^S u    a   /?                   .. c^vyj-v. ..                                                    .....
                                                  .^Vr^-r V^TV^V?-...KO~?*<Py^r. .<r^T • ."^VS. ...                                 .
 buofc;        \Jc,         dcLk                           ../ . ^ V v ^ ..?^P.<^ ^ « - a a ^ . ..VW^-y?^. ..

 .,WNj-csOvvt, ..                                       .r\z-S4£VVVrv. ..CLAj^CUT^L .             . ^ r\- ■         ...........
  O ^ i x i u x . . ,             .. A i k . .                   . .-^U-^Q ..                . . \ v . k P f = ^ r ...............

                                            ..V^Vr^S^T. ..Vvi<?S<5. ..                                     ...^...........
 .'CSCVA . .                                            . C & ? :. .(V°................. ) .^_.<2^T.‘S : ’............... ")........
   W k/        o c S S v ? .hpv'yCA-. .^          .rK-f*-. ...Ws4-M^. W c-r,0*£^V\ .                               ...........
      \                            </fyrcryVr*?A>                          .... ^    ‘.VS.."T..rt.'                    r.......

                                                 ..-U:. ..WSfiHO. ...OvVV^Vsn-v^-^.                               ...t1^    .....
k a ^x JccJ--^.                                                ...Cv>-.sc>^.. .Wft .                        .               ....
ki        ^P-Sr). ..VV7 ..                   ..«^evu£?l... . 0 0 .,<Xp. ..vu> ^ ..^                   ..V     ^ S .t^ r .
^~Q-                                                                 ..OUxA ..                ... ’
                                                                                                  !tV~W'>. .

           .v/^zMr'y... \ qq £M?~. .tei ..




  Signed                                                            Signature w itnessed
                                                                                                                                                                                                 WG 412
                                                                                                                                                                                           (Amended 9.87)
                                                                              West Midlands Police
                                                                  STA TEM EN T OF W ITNESS
) 1 5 22                                             (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)
I 16 23
) 17 24
  18 25      N am e . .                .C-,                                                                     ^rrSUJS-.vT’T......................
’ 19 26
I 20 27      A ge     ............................    (yrs)                      Date of Birth               .............. \Iq   .T   . .   \G . r. ..
: 21 28
             O ccupation . . . . ^                   “ ' O C * £ _ r O . T T .................................................................................................

l 15 22      Hom e or business address
 16 23 :     and telephone num ber
 17   24 :
 18   25
 19   26
 20   27
 21 28


             This statem ent, consisting of                                               page(s) each * signed by me, is true to the best of my knowledge
 15 22 ;
 16 2 3 :
             and belief and I m ake it know ing th at, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I
17 24 ■      have w ilfully stated in it anything w hich I kn o w to be false or do not believe to be true.
18 25
19 26
20 27        Dated the                                              dav of                                                                                19
21 28

is I         Signed                    &                                                                         Signatur


                                                                                                                 O fficer's


                                                                                                                 Rank




                       .   T 5 W .
             ■ W i t                                                            W                     ...V
             Cv£\C^.               .                                                                                        ...      .V/^y                  .     T^V ^nS^TTTT T
                                                         ^VioVc.^                              c =r>cS. . . .N.vcW jcs.

             ^JT\C-A
                    •V . . .V\CvW^-.                         AO                                            TO.'                                    A .
                                       £V.o:
                           .                  . . . .pV>nV^>. . . . Y                  ■cOTi . . .                  O.Q                      Cc^J.                      V- ■ •                . X-
                                                             •••                                ....                                                             C>^>cV .^cXsL-r. . .
                                                                                    . . .ori.wy\. .^rar^V:                                 •C A ..               . y. .      O'CVsY -^ . V . .
                                                                               O    ojcJi. . .\?v
                                                                                                N O -U                 .                                        t>-w v           „




                    . . . . c\ w.<X^vVT\c^. . . .                                       c£_...... ^oom . . .Vcs V-. . . ,\ ..                                                                      .
                                                          . .r o . ^ . . . .c c j v O ^ j                       a                 ^.Csyrv£jjr>. . .                                              ..
             Y . .                                                                                                  ...N n ^ .                . . I^ cvS j A                         C W ^ 'O J 'r-. . \ J
             !b o,c,m.v^a-..... \ . . . . A c T »-»c T C .                                                           N z » o v s ..                                    ___ , ^ o Y \ .....
                                              . . .,, . . . .V^>\\£_iTN..... .N. .                                                   .... )fcsu,-'r\ . ,~r> ,\\c_ .'tW'v . . . .
                                                                      . . . .\-^sz^s2^\£s-t: .... o ^ c Y . .\ W \                                                     .             CrvAc^
                                               . ^ n p D f/L . v.5 \s s *V . ■ • -V o .
             >igned            .       A t? /        //■ J m / X \                                        Signature w itnessed by .
             D elete as applicable.
                                                                                                                                                              WG 413
                                                                                                                                                        (Amended 9.87)

                                                          West Midlands Police
                                                  S TA TE M E N T OF W ITN ESS
                                         (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


 Continuation o f sta te m e n t of             . . c  ,
                                                    .'s-AfJ-tw . . .                                        s . -P.>.€:<^xj-v:T N ........ I        f            \

     . .\. . .                               0 ^ 0 . ..                      ....                                                               € . I • U oJ). .
 ^                                                                     . . . .       \     . .                                                              . . . .


     v-5-;...\p3u ..,c_ayjVrV—                 ...O^-. .^So_ ..^>..c^ro.cr cu .                     . . . 0-y\<^..... \. ..                                  .....
     ,'^£_c^C.... \ .....' w » 4 - ..•                                                           ...73^sssS3LT>.                 C^TT. ^A-. .%rocvC.
     cJbrr. ..Nro.... Nfea- .... ioJ^V. ••c^.^S^. ..os^^v ...C^cs^s^.(.c*_r>.A csiA^
     e V . ..                                                                            .,-r>cvs^S5-----..s?> .^V.£a\xa ...

(. VUv. . . Ptt_A . I.e. 1.17L.&) . . .(.........................................\                                                                      ^
 C o ^ c . • .V .S U . . \ & . l .V 5 > £ ^ . .C ................                         ...................................... ) • • v *- •                   •■
 ^ W r p . ..(.CU^*. .? £ L \ ..1. e J .Iu.e0> .f....................... ...)•••
 (cw...       \e.|. isfc-A ..(....................................J. .PVaW •■■
 CoZ... .c.^.i.Ae.(.ic,.(^).. L...................................). •PS>4rt,..
(WT                    .(. .e. I.i.i fv)....(.......................... s........... ) ■ *■ ■ •.
    0 & . . . £tt-.\.l&. 1A.^FV.Y. ,(.............................. ) ■••.£_V>cW. .(PR-A(G  r.j.I m
     ............................                             SNv^w. ... ?&~\|.£. I .10ft \C                                                                          . ■)..
     VS*?y» . f a * . .V<2j ).C. j . i i f \ ) . . . ( . ...........................                                                     ) =^?.0?ru. 1fe . ( ’& .& *
(
      \ . . .    ." V iO o J 9r-r . . . . \J. ' r> '                              \ i iC ^LS^O ............... ' ^ >7^ ■ ■ • /   r O .'O - .'. . A — ■ v-         '\Ov

      ;r<=^rft3>ca_ . (. \U , .S3. • ... AS ....*2 LO .\ ... C±S\<^. . . / A W , . . 53.                                                                         7J.
                                                                       )                  V.
                     >0,                               '/“W*-, .... A            stC^S    Otro...
                                                                       37^-.-.^                           V        . o ^ o.«?.x ...
 *^V
    n\          p o m ....
                                n«4  ^     •-Q....< .........                                                         ~
     . . \ .(-< T v ,rv r> o V              p C 5 b .x V ^              C trs J ^ ^ v -N                                                    ■
     , £ S o ^ .......\an^i                                .. . .   ,) \ . . .                      V . .Nri^js.crs-^.. ...Axjj




     Signed                                                                              Signature w itnessed by . .■’
                                                                                                                                                                                                 WG 412
                                                                                                                                                                                           (Amended 9.87)

                                                                           West Midlands Police
iLE
                                                              STATEMENT OF WITNESS
22 29                                           (C.J. Act 1967, s . 9; M.C. Act 1980, s.1 0 2 ; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)
23 30
24 31
25      Nam e                                            ........... .........................................................................................................
26
27      A ge     ............................     (yrs)                        Date of Birth                 .         k//P.                           ......................
28
        O c c u p a t io n ......................

22 29   H om e or business address
23 30   and telephone num ber
24 31
25
26
27
28

        This statem ent, consisting of                             S \-
                                                        page(s) ea ch * signed by me, is true to the best of my knowledge
22 29   and belief and I m ake it kn o w in g th at, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I
23 30
        have w ilfully stated in it anything w hich I kn o w to be false r>r Hr> n o t hplipvp tr> he tru e .
24 31
25
26
27      Dated the                                                 day
                                                                  . . . of
28

        Signed       x tJ f                       ifa J I.                                                            Signatu


                                                                                                                      O fficer


                                                                                                                      Rank

                               / ..                                               .c   S y . ... C^< 2..                                                              ..    clp / c/     msr>rp.
             CSV                . . srv<\. . . s i                                                 - . .............................                        .......................
                              / . . . . .0-^1........ . .J 5                                     9 /c -L .c /g ^ ^ j . O r ty .^ .A -94±cJ=?.


                                                                                                                                          .. f : . C               :..                           .
                                                                                                                 . . Cv. . . A + L 4 Y I. I'G jC . ■ ■ . 0 * 0 . ............

            tj\2.c< ^ ?. ... <. . ./ .QO.                  M .                                                                                                   Q yb* r*r'. . . .
              .J is-rru i-.. . . c ^ n < ' / . . . . cm j& f-t).
                                                                                                                                                                'A


                                                   : :' s Z M                          &          t:.. i r                   ^                :        :: w                      . x .             :

            o ^ ic        / . . . . .       /V o .                                                   . .^ r r 9 r f)                 . . ,                  /

                                                                                                  /TMT..          ,


                                                                                                                                                                                             ?(XtSr¥



                          atf-.... 5                % .                                         . . . <P*-.                                               o L . . . C&^P-


                                                                                   X .C z J .                          Qi> . .                                                      —£

         Signed           .                     . ./ .                                                         Signature witnessed by

         * D e lete as applicable.
                                                                                                                                                                    y
                                                                                                                                                                           WG 413
                                                                                                                                                                     (Amended 9.87)

                                                             West Midlands Police
                                                      STA TEM EN T OF W ITNESS
                                        (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation of s ta tem e n t of                                                 r~>cl
. ,< ^             C oW r...
 e' f Z -          *                               *.'P.       o , ... J r y ^ Q ^ c / . . .. & r t f . ...
                                . . / . . . . c . / a . . . ./Ti </-/....__________
                                                                          ./u n c n ^ J . ..            . fv                                        . r?.*K                  ..

. IxJ-GL. .                 r <f t ■ ■ ■                                           v -v.          <
                                                                                                  p^ / .    . .                             ....
                            CP:                                  . C r/.e^T                                                             .. id < c J .. .m a. 5?..
 c S % .f:v
         jx         ew-<rri
                         * j ...... /rtr%
                                     /. « *-<*rr.    . . .. . 9b . . . .
                                            ^ U p. .,..                  * '• •    / r . .. U
                                                                                            ^ x- <...........
                                                                                                     & . • ••- ■
  .c /'U :/. . . ,Qr<-i ccy-t^c-r/^.Q/^ir. /). .& fC i4j£~ {L . .. .A o r / c /...              . . . . cv. / . .
  0^6
    jQ.... . ....C-Hq.. . O^M?....y< rj
                    .C.Vf^VV?.                                                                                               . ->y •
                                                                                                                          - •••                                     -.... «-
                                                                                        / . . . C ( * < / . . . . K K X * .. .                                                      ^
            ■\& y u £      ..   ./h     &.OV1if?. t ^ r r y ^ r i. o \ . c ^~ /tL c r:/\. OrrV.
                                                                                     ..                                       . , . .   Z :\d .9 .      .



Cf->                                         /cJ:... . c S r . . .. &,6z?Xr+. 9/.:.. / . 2 & Q f . ‘C l                                         .Q-.r?.o^.....

                                         vV^ .               C    cl .   h           j& e p y ru i X . c r r / jl< *                    A ^ . c ^ r r . . !r< ? ........

. ^ o ^ c y J ^ . , ... < W                                 .
.. / y z ? m ..                                             c j ^ . ..                             . . . SstCz .. . c r ^ r . ..                                         ....
/ )                                     . . . . / . . . . r jL c / . . . r > a ° / . . . . ^ e .                                  ...*7 7 ..                         .
G u r?                 fr a r A .O L y .                                                           . . 0 6 . . . > /£ ? .. .^ 7 r r L u ^ .c f                                ..
  //- < .                           __ 7 . / k . . . ,<<vT=H\.........7 6 . . .                                           0 & c c & t- /3 & - .                              ■■■
A ^ tr io x ^ P . ...                                                        ■   /■ ■. A               ^ /K .V .c A ....                                                     .. .

.     .n .AC^^rrM-SLrfnc-x. .y                              f l /&     .C £ .r P .    .... > / / > £ ...Cft7^'XA-S?C/. .                                        .........
                                                                             .




 jC   ,               /O c f¥ . ..               . . . O r r ^ ~ ^ . . . .c ,s l .< Z t £ .6 l r ? .9 h > . ..............................................................

 .L T K ^ r C_ r                             ... .d ./x ^ r> .                                                                                 . .<PrC~................
< 0 ,/V >          a U          <       ? ^ ^ r h .c ^ r i . C A                              ■   ■ ■ - C y /r v .: ......................................... .................
 .. .V ? ........../ . , . , . a ^ . p / . . . . c j / . . . . .                                                   . a m + . o . c / . . . .< *% .. ......
 oc/t/v/r^L^ric^                             ^
                                  h-^..................■■'■                                                                         .. .A ^ c r p J jl...
- J : l.y i* ...< u i& ....-                                             T          <        %          >         .          .          .      .            1   /        9    ...


          l .r r y / .. . . t A x f / / . . . . r t . & . . . . ^ /T T U -. ( t U ^ . . . / ) O ^ U n j f . . . .C r L ^ .t. ...........

 t         C T J rO    9            ^
                                        ir         ,v . ..... /        . . j^ c y ^ A . . . . f?. o .. L . c rU . u ? ,.^. f<TT.........
                                                   0 M jrt^n£\ .. c l t fyQ. o Q ^ c co ^ P ... Lrr\ —
                                              J . j . . J d /c t.. . n a V . . . ^ f r ^ L r ? . -•
                                                                                                                                                                .•


                                                                                                                . . . .    O '

                                                                             'Qry.'-rS.              yf /\&< ? ..............                                       S\-£r*. Q J&
 d x J .   / .. . ^
                  J IM                           -.                               t^ tr .    Pu ^k         ty /.c tr ^ P r & c J ? .                                cU r \
 M ..° /4 ? ....C                                           r r p e f ..           C /.A .C & . . . C^V<0. '.O .b . ~ / / 4 . ......
                                                                                     r t a . x . ..                           ...       C x sv * -* \


 Signed                         /         Mm#.                                          Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                                                                                    y             WG 413
                                                                                                                                                                                            (Amended 9.87)

                                                                          West Midlands Police
                                                           STA TEM EN T OF W ITNESS
                                         (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation o f sta te m e n t o f                                                                  ••.
                                                                                                       ■■> i n   .-. .   ■y* ■.                              ..............

 .c       / t /r£.<                          . , / y \ £ ___ j Q . . . /yyr\ —                               /ft.Q r/c /\.
                                                            ■ ■ ■ J y& .o /. .yj JH o ... ^ x r ^ C r iJ i —                                                                                   ^
 .Q / t V P . . . / h           ^ .C .C < ^ A ^ - Q                       ......... O   r k ..   . . / U / S ^ ^ .C r O i ' O . . .                                  9 /~ > * .    ..              .   . . .

 .                  ... (Y         £ l.... O L .r r T ^ .^ 4 ^ ? .                                      ^         .      c< ^er?y..,. ^ M s x r ^ /A ..v54> ..
 .O lc t^ y ^ .       . . .
                                                                                                                              .S ^ r < n c / - l ^ ^ . .                                      _____

 j . . , .. ./?.<xcJ. ... ./ys^A..                                                                                    .. .C<-rCCyx^ ..
 y/&s£                   c-t^t'TO.                         *0.0 ..................................... \ c § / t & x ±                  .< ^ 9 r. .                    .>. - M                ■ ............
 .    G a ^ f r r .o Q ^                     Scm                          •.   c^ . ..                                                           w C lh V \} h Z                                ^
 & f7 ...,. /S yU -*^ cx**fd ! . . . .                                                                      .. .Qj_~cc&ri. 9 '....                                            . / / ^ > . ..
 .{P c r x lr ity ......                                                        ..... ' , •                                                             ••S / a « v Z .../....
 .   Lv77. & ./X 4Z < 7ru k ^ . . ..                                                ... e : k c &< r r b r r . ••                                    •^ 3 ^ . h j ^ c ¥ - ■ ••
* 5 r r . ___
                                             -                                          U^fyr^l-^O . Cy. . .                                     Cr/\~&rV. . . ..<?V. V : .....
           Uc?".. p 'c n ~ r>                O         '   ...                  ....                               ■*■            ■>.............-■......................
                        ' . / . . . ^ . / W f ... = 5 * u ^                                                      .        .        .         .... .....................
     ^ £,<!... V / a .... r s r k r p ...
/ 2 . / Z e ^ n ....                                                                                                                                                       Cs,..
 ./ V <' 5 ...3”      <s/'      M o -M r                                                               . jcwr? ^                          c jj- c r tA r t y [ . .............. ••
                                         ..   .    .



C ^ Q .t. . .c x ^ n c J .                             7/fe
 i^ -h + c J y . . . 0ur< c / . ..                                                               Iq                                                            .. & C o . .. ^2,...
a^=>                                              : : . / v      i        . / . -           . F         t   " . . .       .   < x * n d ..                                   .A4^.
     F 6 " *............./          ..                                                                       V
                                                                                                             ^ *4* ... . .&& jk&
                                                                                                                              & * 9{e
                                                                                                                                  * # /.' . . .// ?? J-q- n r r —                                      ■ v ■        .

           ^                                                                                                                  ^              N    o ,                     G    u            C f t:             .5       ^
     ..SJ..../... .g X a                 c   /^.. /n.O.¥..                        < 5 ^ e .                                                                  . p . t ^ c ^ ^ .i^r>..
                    3           ...... . . / .........% i a k . . . . ( y ^                                              / £ ) ; ■ ■ /y\C ^tyU '/\ .                                                            ■

          ^ i r n Z - C?.^?.                      &~Y. .              ,        nr/y/^P. . . . .                                                         .• O T r * r i ^ . O ^ ^ .                              .
                                                           .../h o /r n fy                       .v w h                       c ^ 6 x ^ < / X . . S -. O X )
                                    ,,...& ? .                                  f       c        .    ., : - < w . . . . . / .                                                                                  .
     ^ — ■^///                 iVz.                                                                         ....     ^                                                                  ■
      ,                                                              ...       .&s>r> c /. ... '                                                  ■ .T T ?                    ...i~i~F72e.O. . .

     J/.u.         t .t tru). ^ . . . . k L f?.<< y . . <rl<rp.%^ rr^ cyrr CM.                                                                           .P r o^ ~ ) 9 J u ..r,jj
     L f a . . < ? ^ C ,. ^                                                                                                                                                                   _ .............

                              [ a .j / j - L ,                   ?> 9ri r->ch./^c,                                c-^-. ,,,              (
                                                                                                 ^          < 2 ^               .. .H         s^cJU l                             /.g ft-7 .


     Signed . v £ 4
                                     f- j f i f r M                                                     Signature w itnessed
                                                                                                                                                          WG 413
                                                                                                                                                    (Amended 9.87)

                                                          West Midlands Police
                                                 STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                    (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)

Continuation o f sta te m e n t o f           . .

 jL^’^r^CroQ. ..                                                               Qb rrliL. \-y.. rU*~
                                                                           ...J?P. .                                                  ..C't-Cl
                                                                                                                                      Q/•.
                                                                                                            .' 5-Tv . f'WW.". ..t-~ .'.  .-k
                                                                                                                                           .V. .

 O^. . .t u . . . . C l iL                                   .... MflT^AcXir%...                                                 ^ .tojrh a ... J..
 .d ie /. . . . o o t y -                                 ^

                             ....                   o . ..    C cj..
                                         ./..... CrJ>                                        Lbj.. A(X4r>-4~... ^-ficrr^y.
                              STDCrT?.C-Qr. h r i t y U -
                                                     3-. ..                           /fe ,r        CC^rrsA. . .                     .•a O
                           d.                  ...'..                          ff.O ...              iyr&... A d . cO.
                                 ijsxrrzJ/^>..... .csts                     .. ■ C O viA S r& ^ ^ & rC 'y^ .. C ^ n c/..
                                                         ,<^Wr7.«
                                      . . ! . '& ru ... A / p . . 2 >                   < d r . os- . .. fi.c & o t. I ^ c o r s . .....
                                     5 J^Q C eJr .                                         / . . . . u rx x u / d . L.
 or?                              h /S .   v^fuzxyt. c ^ c S / d j. d .
                                                               / P y . ..                   «4
                    .Qtbc....C:f7cn.<rd! . . . . . /had... .c-rt.c./>&C\r3-£cJ/. ..dr'.rC-C
             Centre     c5 &LXX.. .-Z^r&r&r-...rp^ry                          iKKKtU V O .                                                                  .   .   .




 C                                                   ^            ^        s </f j {        ,. s V & J . . * * . < / * , , ...........
                         C^ryCf              .C*r^7d ..... m                                            .


  Q./Xrv^rf c^rr^iO. .. .3:^ /C. tr^c: /^pvr>i^r?Ay.c*<r?f{.ets                                                                        J

                                             : ........ / . . . . d o .... .rfo. 9\....
                                                                        0         J           <_d tr... jCdt+Q+ML
                                                         <f-s     .      rx?*<*T/... .C k < -^ a .......c^r?. ....^,
                                    CrV\.
  Cs            .e ^ r x z d i+ tid /.. . . . ( r t* u u /d .



 iCX....t/O.........IH..2C..OrruL^vn.y . . . Cun                        .Scm-Ac/L \3                                                                '
                     ......
  .< £ /\( jx - is /c $           ....C * -£ , ........................
                                                         d f r y s jL -

 .................           .........
                          / .............       si.cty.
                                                      c l i d . . ..           ,G-<*<r\
                                                                                      . . . .L < jd y c ^ J )*v l~ P .. .                  ..              ... •
   .t r * d d         clt-c*...                     ^r9S-cA.. . .      c     .. •
                                                                           /j i. a                                               .o ^ .^ r C .^ y ^ v C r T O           -
         /           cU d .                  * .o Q f .. ■      •£ c tO r7 ? < 'p . / f . ..                                                    ^

  .c L iA s j.                C & rty. . . .c ltc J ? ...                                .c 4 /y p .^ S k * ^ rs^ . . .. M o. ..o > .........
                /r?Z]....... / c <            c / . . . . .u d d o . . .. .C .O ^ c /d : . . ^ O . y . .                    ..     V .c r V r f.        .. & t T
       'T T ^ cd yd                    Or<tn c /                  £<jrts<?..         yr?o^W-. cJ u s z y ,
               I                   Cc^f^rxa^...                                             .... /     . Scvo.. . .

                                  ■7   / WL JJ■
 Signed .                   . . ... .       A .^ X d . ....................           Signature w itnessed by
                                                                                                                                                                                     WG 413
                                                                                                                                                                               (Amended 9.87)

                                                                      West Midlands Police
                                                              STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                                  (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)

C ontinuation of s ta te m e n t of                       .

                                QIa.                                       .. ./r?44<>rv/^Vr ___


 ....0 . :               (M                              :.1r                      .           x                                              :::y&::
 .chK. . .. /yur\ CTpf<<K.......... ct~.c .c .Ci^rx^ . . . . . . . v. . /                                                                       cli cJ. . . . T)o
                                                                                                   . c & y w . * . c h * r . . . . 76 . . . 0 ^                       <x.

 , ^ / r r ^UL^n.a                                                I      E

                                       6*^...             ■
                                                         //.....    j                                          ■                                                 Q 'L
 .                  . .t^ n .c-t 6^9r. .C
         ic<*rv......................   r        aJZZ<<2...
                                                   . .        f          c*r v * ? '* < .r . . . W V . W
                                                                         t-                                             ..
                                                                                                                         f}C H
                                                                                                               ................. ■   < f? c /.($• c J . .   &f        /   a        /

                     ... yr/Y-                                                    .. ,^>34rj^!Jl.cP.. . . r r A ^ t.                            ...                                           ■
                                                                                               S                   .fa.C.t . . . . . . . . . . .                                          .


                                                                  . . . /P.O . . . .                       v ... I x r / k v t . .. o ^ p -ju ic ,rt^ c s .<. yk
                                                                      C4^(Z>x^<rp.                             C ^ r ? .c /..           . . sO .O ■ 9^. . . A p .C r H T t - ^ n r j)
 .kCrJsc^y.... - 9 ^ / /                                                         /.                                cJ... . . ^C7L?Trt!^
                                                                                                                                   at?*.H
                                                                                                                                        .b
                                                                                                                                         .+
                                                                                                                                          . .<
                                                                                                                                             . .r.£jL-,.. . 9 ^ * .                           .




 CL4<\.                                                                                                    .. .9 ^                               ^ ■ * * * ? ■ ■«
 Ms**Oey> ’■                                  .< ^ r A ,c > .     ............., . . .                                                   .




                               d        c     «       r , . . / U g h * . . . * /) u y < c

 ..v     .oL v ... ~9!& ■....
                          ■■                                                                   ^           ' .&
                                                                                                           o           /../"             /    . .a       .C & .S *
 .   .S o .                                                         ..   Ji-nho.... tun-sp...
 .Qrrp~./LQCA 4 ^ x i < . . . .                                                              . . . . .          .o o ^ r x f ... .& /h a

                      .. .iMrb>rrs<<.. . . / .                                                 .s r y / y ?                                            c / . .... J f & h i—
                         ... mc^yr^j. nr?.c\*rr\(.C~/i-.L&..... S                                                                                             ................................
                                                                                 .




 .C<-rrtrzju ^ o c/. .. ^ 'r & x + 9 h ? y c £ >.....                                                                                              ,... c fo r M     K . cy              ...
 n a t y £ l< r x c r               ) .j . .. t y          t h .j     . . .c J ~ y . . . .<Oo ... ,0^( CrtA ?)/•■• .9 ^ ^ )
                    ..
 . v l^ c J . ^ / n o : 9 / .   .....                                                                                                                                                             ■
  ..../.           ./bLj.. . . . C$-c&.... Q/M) . . . . 4-^H^... ■ cP/.^.Or... ^ O s S S                                                                                                  ...
  .csv-z?                   C *J r:A .O r 3 /. J ^ > .. < p /.0 . f                                        .                                                          v .............
            / ..... c/ a ( $                      .                      . .&&... . T v . . . f b ... C.ChTrr^^<w.C4<csrv)......



     .cite/.... /P.o-fy.... JSJ2A... C^&<tr%a/P                                                                                                 . •.         ............. —                      ..




 Signed .            ^4/.^.:J...Mo$..
                     , ‘K ^ / . > .         . .^ l . .    7 ? & ( ( . .      .............         Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                                                                        WG 412
                                                                                                                                                                  (Amtndsd 9.87)

       BLOCK OUT DATES
                                                                                       West Midlands Police
    W ITNESS NOT AVAILABLE
                                                                            S T A TE M E N T OF W ITN ESS
     8 15 22 29     8 15 22 29
                                                                   (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)
     9 16 23 30     9 16 23 30
    10 17 24 31    10 17 24 31
    11 18 25       11 18 25      Nam e      . . .                        rtf* r r « e t > ..                            ...................
    12 19 26       12 19 26
    13 20 27       13 20 27      A ge                          . (yrs)                     D ate of Birth
                                                                                                                     I9-Z-7Z
    . , <..   28   14 21 28
                                 O ccup atio n . .

     8 15 22 29     8 15 22 29   H o m e or business address
     9 16 23 30     9 16 23 30   and telep h o n e num ber
    10 17 24 31    10 17 24 31
    11 18 25       11 18 25
    12 19 26       12 19 26
    13 20 27       13 20 27
    14 21 28       14 21 28

                                 This statem en t, consisting of                                   page(s) each * signed by m e, is true to the best of m y knowledge
1    8 15 22 29     8 15 22 29   and belief and I m a ke it kn o w in g th a t, if it is ten d ered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if
2 9 16 23 30        9 16 23 30
                                 have w ilfu lly sta te d in it anyth ing w hich I kn o w to be false or do n ot believe to be true.
3 10 17 24 31      10 17 24 31
4 ' ' 18 25        11 18 25
       19 26       12 19 26
6 13 20 27         13 20 27      D ated th e                  3 *®              d a y of
                                                                                                                                               19
7 14 2-1 28        14 21 28

ENTER    IF NO DATES                                                                                                Signature
                                 Signed      . .
TO BE AVOIDED

                                                                                                                    O ffic er's P*


                                                                                                                    Rank


                                    ....               . curt . . # . . .                           ./fiar*. . jhiorKj. .a£.          .(h ■■

                                   w < j.. .JvJkb t.-........................................................................................
                                                          . .Gt    JLfQQTpQ^f. .                               . CXi/Jb . .                                      a n d .haoL
                                   k z e / i. , / c r . . .                    .J r . . cw n . . aJoo . a . . Sto&tsn tuJvd
                                   QJtci cdtlA cL                   ftliQpl. . ,y»la4c4*P .-.................................................................
                                                fjbcuJf .&&..ifDC&b' kj^spe.. .                                                         .jifcJ,..fM
                                                                                                                                                  eu&cJrr.
                                   h p .erp c& i. .                                                       . /**?&£. . ./ .
                                   ik n .       0    r ti& P ..                         <**- n y . j b o h b r . 1                                j & .pcwfcb
                                    (& . fjuckfJb. . o u n J .li . . 1O4 4 . .far.                                             la p fvn j* . lourui                  f** Me.
                                    kvra,< ao
                                          On.               £oJa4j^L^u . ./£>.**. $ p r& .. ./*???. ojL . ajbttsdi.                                     W:3Qf*ri.
                                    {x^jcjthvr. .oS*/h. .                             . .f&Mo*?. . (aJ^'.cJ<.                              . .^ y - •                ^
                                   k     .. S k J i e M , .              tD z     .                .'L ..c a r .}                          ■■{ • &   * .   c^we
                                   A*aa4kJ. . o J b x fi.. i h . . f i i . .. c* n J .<M>..                                                                     no
                                   £?l rtsjJp      . if a . .
                                              fy l      pjh<pd>. .            /                         . .P.«*. . o s r z Q e d . . J *. .                               .'* A j

                                  j-cdJhir*. . . p w d 'fyd -. . . i& . . CMJT. .09 . . a ■ ■ midii*. .                                                 . ■ .C iM cuk......
                                                                        ?. . <^. a. . rh*k . .cmOcm . ./nan. . fy * g ro v o J * .
                                   Qyjr . tQoju. . fa . . t h                         .g n z w < J . . os*< £. .popped/. . . Sc4>.<ssxxl .                               an
                                    ^JLtj      tp o ^ . j .Q & /'               .ch. . &M-. .                                        . COvMJ. .

                                 Signed         . . . \ 4 :    .   .M .u J U      U f i r . ' ..................   Signature witnessed by

                                 * Delete a s applicable.
                                                                                                                                                       &}.

                                                                                                                                                                              WG 413
                                                                                                                                                                        (Amended 9.87)
                                                            West Midlands Police
                                                  STA TEM E N T OF W ITN ESS
                                    {C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70>


 C ontinuation of sta te m e n t of

 .. b U . . .                            . .om pcp^ .. rto.. prnkkmu, .......................................................
 ..... ISM...VaJtoj..                                                         QV,            .. .ipu,.. JT&uMKcA.. /?<?. fd..fixUau...
 .(Jjf^b'cw . . . o r .. (ZQccrr ,. hom<x>cr... ik f o . . .O .L rc .. S.U'ol. . Cjfj£<xt& . .. zk*tdS>u
     ...<J^7oitcpu>^..M-.. no. .fcva*..club.. J... &<;«...      ..tyi/Uhy. .or.        ^
  J               /t?*?.           ..it*..                   ° .....................
         2.. .cmypgfX.,..aJu.. .Ma>.. . . jqlJ,..adhavJb... .l.-.30p<r>...ab.~tkCo
 .uwt...... yeni... .ho>.oJJ... &amw.,d£f. safer.'-jwmkkQr..hub..J..hod____
 //p..iwhk...              . Utu. arpujnoly.:faqup&KC.. Ouj..               .olecLe.-J
 ctncJ... i.                        .. S oxrc/ttc/..                           .. fo lw L .. cfjtKXJP... GuJ&ak.. tb .
  rWvMvflfhx. fjc^.dtj .. tkm^L ..                                                                                                              ..bcarcbd.*...
  P -      d m o L .. n<W. See... . o j ^ j ..                                                             .. .iJ L .                         y .{m r:
 CMci.        I     .6«^. . .err. <~?ttT)eft0 . . H^>. . . CpemflXj.                                       . OJ7^. Q.H&. .Qcrfw-....................
                  a M a t^          ■■                                             . tjU ..                        . ./. .(w u o .ctJ .. /)<?. .dbtdk& L ,
      r&r>... xoh& . . £ jr.. _bA^Oox.cLa ...£?.. phu%-.. J.                                                            **            ‘        *     .fl.OF. '-atA7«
                                                                                                                        /        /)       /              ../j0
  %/M>.. ch kekkj.                                              .svA s.y . J L . . anL                                 ./.    .fcwxl . m j. met
  OauOi/ij... f t w i i . . & qp. ..                             . .[.ofl& xsty.. ajtLk
                      ■Owt..fkwjL..Hi.. .{jwrtxl..^?Jx.clr‘.. Inaclo.../o...rfbio...£+4*
 ewei. A w e r. . &?w>.. a /fy —             . ,c r.. slrGtPGrfelo. .. cb m Ju tj. .cvo. .ccJat ^ .
    .. czkxncJL... f it .    . .tutjsu. . (Jst+.. tixrmsX. .                 .. cunJ..../... kaJ.
 %    cu   pajwciQfL.. c J a .i j t m . . a s m . . .s^q/.
                                                    fj*    .. 6 5 . ^4* ..CO.U. .cp. . .6&J. tu * n ii
  /.. .irOeni..& .                             hjl. ard..aih... Pan.Ip.-. .fit.
                                                                  .tfeo. ..&*&. .
  Pm . .4 * ... H e r t.. i£o&. . tU rte & h j. . a . ■ ■ Loun^. . . C ^urntcr                                         ef:..pccfi.L..u).:.&&. f < n
  JitiW &aer          ucn+       . .c ^ e n d d . . .£► M L              . m e w . . <AJZMJt.ci. -..                   !2 T "    -LP&nk ..cuntl. sfecdi.
  h. ..tu... (Jm                          . .(Jh . .g p o d . a n d . . a fc.<u . . .                                        .fcdL. .                         .{rr
  cL . . .{jcuUL). cJL . .ij^io. . bjrv* .. /.                                    . /?<>/ .                             . /P ..                 ■ (^nuunk-.
 p>M...                 ... $ 5 * 4 ^ .      ..   O c i n y b b b u . ..S ktnaUrx^...........................................                 .....................................

  .......... Q     k . . .   . U ' . b & f . r * . ..   /   .   b tic a u m   z* . .(U   Q   P s i.   .c   f.   ,O A          (/tcrtepuC^. .. W . . fA»
  Awnh&r.. of . . . .      .<h.. .ih>. f in     m . . / b . . ZpzaL                                                             . .<<&o. ..bzccmChcj
 fflarc.... Rchkhd'.,../.. iDojj. .£■&&{.. .c/uffel.. .^j. .piLcpia                                                             .prGim. .oM r.                           .& s *J
 ( . . L e g o # . . .ip . . f o f i t . . /q r .. ( r a j, .                            . A i l, . ,<jf... a .. S a M U o . .. b n **? ..                                            .
  A .        tmfi.c          —                    .   f z r & x w . .. ^ t o i .. .4 .. A w ,                             au n u d . . o-kmi. .                     .u * j.. . .

           .Q*id...6<cw*4-. ..sJ-w>k4...o^xuxr^t:...Hi._b a s w f. .. ftnx-nd. W.c-.
  ./. could,..^c.e.. ikat. pccplt.. atsemd ..tyiocJocd.                 rL .. .enwh.. (<rx^.
  .CifCGfiuskj... idLhhvu#.'.ciL.. os)cL.. chcuiwq...for. .kdfO..... / / m u o e^J.or.. a-iberr*..
  .                  . .. u h a . c c u i A .. / t o t . . .See... . ^hJ b. .. iOca;...                                                                        .. csw khw x]
Signed . k l . . . ^t I                                                           Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                                               WG 413
                                                                                                                                         (Amended 9.87)

                                                     West Midlands Police
                                                STA TEM E N T OF W ITNESS
                                      (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


         Continuation o f sta te m e n t o f   . .        .   ffQTti&P.    .       a    .   .•............................

           .$3 ...SiOJ. .                . .C^LOjt.'....................................
               , f}k .ahndi. 3iCCpn            b&'l... ktcam....£W. co.cr. .. fiv...&<vrW'....
          a/id.. ccudd.. .fed.. . <&. . . fiG&ws . . / Ar t . .kddU. . . i .        . ,c.<sif ...
           ckld^sxd, .. a         h*&cte\. .sfc'jJwi. Mr .
                                    W ..                         . imuM*,... cf..rk.. /f e u 4 o v . ..
           I                         -
                                    Ly         ' i s*' “             /
          /.. .i£p&...in... /.. .lj$£.. .ysiatiL.,tr...See,.. .fcecf-k -.. •'* ? . .cv<w..CZ/
                                                                                            W.....
                         ,.. .U U n .. /. .'.IpR4W.. .fa.. .nuj . .n ty l.. J. .                          . a . . m o . . & I p. . J. ......
           Omtel..               .<M
                                   >..a.. .iP.htfi'..Malsu.. .ctq&L.<xkmk..               ..akcid:.%./
           laJLf..        ..hcuir. .l<ddt-ty..c.».kf...iizojmf .. Mfd..jwipZC.f hoerp&d. —
           £aarf)../.^ .ief1.a!L?..kom.                  .f&fivs...ikd?..idio..*£w>. .</).. f x l.....
           flfi. .. 6'OVM..                  ..1. .CauJ.fi ..     .                   .h.&sry..<Uo*>..
           C fU ohcjl. . .«SU3C»f-?»?/. . . H f* . .houCW f.f. .o Ix c L . .UtxQ . .QQC&flfJ’. . .hito. . d e p t’) . /& . <300. . . .
           o.em . dkthL&eoC.. cwdl. i^aM ..                                    . .ov£. .farr .. hdf>.:. Afkr..a                    .         -----
                       . .A-..frJpflpQcA... .sbjuJk ... .l.ftc.hcztJ... h*.,aA '..
          ql.. .q4ourtr..r&JL}. .o.ikr.. ficofb-... ajntsjwj... <-'.«/*>..oJaq.. .^cc<?>haw
                                                                                          ^..cm+pmv-. ...
          tkaJb hlL..&.aA..ih ..              . . a/ici.l3**X<..bk<7uJthtf. .tv. Julp. hXrt. ..huJz. .■■
         .tU... .sJ-fiPT..      .. <
                                   p^. . .&&.. cswJ--.. f.C<*te/)hd.mut. .^S«*i. .A?CTJ±*uj.■.aM.J...
         awMi. . cU>. .                             . .Mil. .         .. .blcfffcj. ..                ..
          oJL.ijjQ.. ptini:.. I .fa..fatioJ..JL.cLjhcMlk.J.c hreaHr. a/»</ .oao ccs^u^.
           0&%j. . .CjIoq4~. . id. . pOAHmcj. .0wk>.j. .OA<X. . .1*1 .facb. . . .fcK". ■<*-■ .                                    . .S.GG-PWcJ. . .
           .!.. .bioicJxcJ. ..evJbJ■&■                                          .in. (vnot. if..ti*>..harmr.. /. OOtfi. ....
           Cfi^oL... agtMnJ:.. .sc*<*Jkju> .. to o *.. sJhcuxl.. . / a a ^ . msu . .artJ . pc<A&d:c.J
           Phi.. fx?Yi ... .po-Vil'iq. .cyd^..aJJog<JU/~.‘..nIw.../.. .Ice/c.. ^>...                                                   .h9$....
           i k , . . g e / i . H w w i .. t^lcLod.. er>.. (HM .                  ■ .O.a/>y.. / . . v                     ..&«-«... 7th*X f. . . .
•kL-M.     L, had.. not*...                        ..&£&?.. .Ih . .m. cruc,^..and .ioac...Iq^ .—
           kjr.LiQ... .cv.... tJL... ./her..... fkbtU. ..**..../. cwJtt... Uor...peopk. s.iw^
            /fc.. .cjtU'...huM.. aft.. Ato... cLjiOjy. J... .0lQ*i.*gc<J..M>..^rah.. Luo. hand.
          OAfl I .. caidd... SC*?.. atUt..f.tesfik.                         .. to. fidJ..lum.. tjpy.cdj.---
          .Hub. ..-.pOodl.. ./ iod". .fiUj. ■£]*¥>■ *f- ■ ■rMUtd.. J?.and.. /. cannat .CeccdJ.
            a h « i. .,. Mafi&it.4... & ...... t/J/taj. tk o . .£&». .oh.. ah&th. . t&. ■   •• %. Oid>.cL.
            rVi-iA*.
                            aJb<nd'.. . . . 3.-J£'.f*r*.. . . / . . .fdfc.. .ik--... c rW r..
                           ///                                                                                    ... tc >z&irc.
            /j&O&Qtr. . J... i4>Q£>. . .i/d i..jpLtititd.. .aqojkoot.. . .Jco/ t&T.j-cr.. Sojmjj . 5ju.>. . .
           P’acn hxaJi^ . . . / . .        . .abk .. h .. /n/tiZ.. k&d.'Pivrcb.. .art<J.. cj3&*. Hicug-L .                                            .


            .fa*-... fiQSXiUCc. .ft&d.. .tf&r... CtaLaed.                    iX k ti)...         . .haj3mq. ■ dJ/tcid.C<j ..
          .. t f jc d L t i         t n a / i . . . Z.taund uv*. ■ ■ fiU > L . .tc. .. /* » £ ---------------■ ■ ?**■      ........

         Signed .. . ,‘t c . - .                      .«................       Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                                                                          WG 413
                                                                                                                                                                    (Amended 9.87)

                                                        West Midlands Police
                                             S TA TEM EN T OF W ITNESS
                                  (C.J. Act 1967. s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


C ontinuation o f s ta te m e n t of       . .                . . .   rt^TT*€&. .                     . ■ .......................................................

       jy y fy . . c n . k .. .hf&               w h ) . . 1 .. C c j j J . . h& aH '... n fp-M i,. j£V. ..i-fte/r.. W ....
 . cxJcul. . . /.tjqv'. .                          . . .k jf r . i ..              . . l / x d b '. .       . .(ffiu /.'’, ........
 . .//c iQ c c a            i        ^                    ./W f-.        .rc w y f'..   M st$.                   . .*■$#&.. ></&..... f i z d .
              .. ji, . .                 .............................

                  / / k . . 7 . . . U v k d . . jcM               m        h y W ' f U . . f U ..yt*/./.../‘A ..                                        .4                 ...

 . a x . . .if. %.a h o t.L L . . £& & & .           S ’. cJ& C J. y. . f& pp.'p. . irtVP. • • t- k ll.M .A       .
 . cU^tl.
      . .<j'.  r cltJp+M ..........
                                . w \ d . . ./fc/*£r         sc * d k > ixt. .c d c ^ . . t h .          ■xW j- ■
 . J . . C guJ J . . . s e e . .. y2t/?y... fw ic a ... a n d . . a m b d w o tr . . o ffk a r s ..                                                  . . ./&.........
 .^uk*.. . . . / * > . . .                                            a .. tVMnbf.. <rf..        .aywttX .. .pcepk                           .*. 1 "          c.ouUd.
 . .£>.£€ . . .fctsv?. . r£/Tt3UU¥>!'. . . ,(XcLo<j$!JW<i. .hoQfdfc.                                                                   . .(&/*.            .vW. .
 .                    J o . ./& Q .                         U ffrtd .*                      ......................                                                    .•
               j £ ..      ry k to h -. /*Hj.. .CtoiAj. . .6...              .64. . / t w i . f j f . . .ifa* . ./&». .                               . v~?^rA.
     Cpl/p        .tfai .pfhj^. . . fi.w. . . ..dkk .                                                                          . fJGO •.cpcrt* ....
 . j t * . .'.Jcn.€ju>.. . f K u . . . j n d h c . .*& *.. . 0 9 . . h f o . .                    . ,< 6/W < y.. .SC. . / . .                                              ...
               . Hu,.. S f J H . .. <4*Lg0. . .                           . .j& :. ruin ... jCT.«oa^.                       ..ih>.. f u k L - .jv r .. . .
 . . i m . . fo u w h o .. a t . . . t i k o L . .... J . ..                                     ■ /nc? ■ & 3 ^ 'j
 . a o z r . . U v i J ..,c w > ./. ut*& . .^ ff.. J& * L . . J . . . in u i. .fe .-ccntfbti.-.. X-.. . d u e —
 .m o k . .h a d :. < s ib .. . o m .. .c f. . Un.. s / o k . . .jetton20 ,. J u m lk .. Lm T. p :q v ~. ..
 . t U .. .fm J ii.. .a d d w & .. Sysfap..                                   . .th~.. .<WPm3W#U~ . ih d < .                                                         .& & ).
 . k>.. .4%... fCpjf&stct.,. ikiO .. .&M . .<d...                                             ... *rr£&prt. .*..                                                     . f.J iJ
 . ZFixk . < ¥ * . . . . $ & . .Q /W fic J .. . rthX Ay . . . <yyneO£*J.. a r > c i.. s o m . . fiz ltM & J .. . 1P . fa& e*.
 . / X . . .notkafJ-.. . a..                                 __ b lu e .. JH itf. cm J... .Oevwy. .cmJ.. itp tJ:.
       £ # rz -       y io it & j .. a d . . . i h r n . . a n d . .. d c U K ity .. . ( h r * .. fa r. .O.LoJr.. hxtJ..
 .. j T . zjpQcA____               . i y . .. J h r.. <=*f$. . .c fi.. .flk .. .gcjM a.. .j^ j.. m                                                                         ....
 . 0 6 .. / .. M ck .. fin & tw d " .. .cM To/)gtd.. . t o . . ..                    M * .. J tu r ....
 , U>... .rrtcUd— i . .. & u k J . . f a r . . hajjr. a/>.. h w ~ . . aticjl.. ih r p ..     .# 6
 . .%iao.. .<ft.. l+rt.-. . lU t . .. . ^ . ••t,k J L ..                                                     .H a ..g m w A
 . t h **... iM w~. f .c m J . . . &. . o y .. .ri$±!.. . & U , ... /. . c a jJ d . . & & . . a . .                                                                        cvk l
 ../... k*i»>...f&Cfl*... i-Os&
                              fz*...                                        ..<Jooci..at..fZC£i*Any... WtetMcoA. . .fr£jl#wd.
     . .C(J"i*hU. . .(£. : ......... (.................................                                                                  , ... .....
     ................ j) i. . i f a > . . p c u t l . .. / . . L H . . . Q H r* , . . . . . . ,u304>. . iQ cuJ^iifcj.. .t°. . .iP .& lir . . . .
     . -taiJr. . h . . UiL . .OJS:. -Oji - - j'te t (■                                                                            ■ ■e U . . A . : ....

     ..O&Q.. .O.cU^Tjfj....               p&4T....... f>.h<ip.                      huxrcJ.. . a . . .CoM... jixxn .kdU adj .
                                                                                .../..
      OttcJ. . .fHQ. [ v / h r . CQSTi                                rUSUHOQ . . Up. k>. .           .(pfid. . QanH-< ■ '*** ■ ■■ •
     .. a ...     M g           A t ^ . .. a /id .       .&£.... b c . i k . .. L ic a t. . j a J r . . . & .                        —         a x T .. .W vM t.

 Signed . . . .                                                                Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                                      & S -.
                                                                                                                                             WG 413
                                                                                                                                       (Amended 9.87)

                                              West Midlands Police
                                          STA TEM EN T OF W ITNESS
                                (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation o f sta te m e n t o f   .                                             ...............................................

 .. k . . . C a m . .in . .im o . .                          . A a J . . .LcJr&n. . p !*&..•_____                               —
               4i>.             Cotiy4£..       :tis>                .../. a& tich J .. .Ufpu&K&r. u
 .               . .um d.. f j j K..           .. tK c^ .^ J.. j.GT..               . tX,. P^rf.. Mf. .&jk J .. pUcj&j-,
            'ytC..                           .h    ..#(MJ..,^o==€R5fe/..i h J L .. .afotr. M e . .cntfb....
 . A t e / . . .z a fiG c i..                                  . (*M l . / p . . s t a / k i . u ^ / . . / . J1Q(h&c/> . GKk..
 . fbiuxL. m m .. .ttM w jf.. fx c p k . . h . . (n & b ..                                . z i J r . . 4/ic rc L r. . . b ....
 . .jrfZ&flt.. 'He/9 .                    .cm. .dksf?. cxOfi. . .o.&n.*ti\ ....




Signed .                 - ^ 1 tUc_iiL.LV'                     Signature witnessed by
Form F.25A

                                                                                                     LEICESTERSHIRE C O N S TA B U LA R Y
*%
                                                                                                                      S T A T E M E N T OF W IT N E S S

                                                                                //-> ;       a      i n t i       ,    n.   ny n      a     m a n   n   i m -   H A T   D nlnc   IQS!   r   JQj




                                           STATEMENT

                                           DATE OF BIRTH . . O                           p       f ..................                          .OCCUPATION
                                                                                                                                          ................. ...........


                                           ADDRESS
                                                           5^ (tiaxA stbuj?                                                    fiu cs                      cvu
                                           BUSINESS ADORE

                                                     TES AND ADORESS
                                           HOLIDAY DATES     ADORESS                                                               n ........................... . . . .
                                                                 QLU a                       \Q Il&                                [£ > U ^ a M £
                                                                           J iC P S & s L u M                                                       C
                                                 \    aa                                                                       A t o /lo u i> Q i
                                                 s 0 .j j a a           Z A c >u             j   > ^KSlxej?
                                                      \AJJIAK* LJy L/AA              \ ( )U A ^
                                             l—    f
                                            sf)l i i f q u /      M & L fr. A p a H a m                                                                                          ja a             b o b A
                                            1 | aA£ & / o o . i S j       Q J h j C lu jM                                                                                         CU/Dl vCU2
                                                     llm i    0 * ^ - /-• ^ 4^ J J v n s~\


                                                       l   )        U c t l?                                                 fc j-w d                             d ijJ r iiL d                     a Z


                                           T K lh P l\                                                                        flu e                                                           h A lM M S lfQ L L O
                                           ( D c e r 3^ n U x A O                                                       _________________
                                                                        ru x h \                              3                    U o u x l                    o M          u c U o l                      , .
                                                                                                                       Fb/tsJ'                                                                      ( Xu p


                                                                                                                                      U     q
                                                                                                                                              ri         i- A             n m u >AH {/?s
                                              This s t a t e m e n t (co n sis tin g of
     1    «   >S    22 29
     2    9   16    21 10                  k n o w l e d g e a n d b e l i e f a n d I m a k e it k n o w i n g t h
     J   10   17    24 11
     4   n    18   25
     5   '2   19   26
                                           p r o s e c u t i o n if I h a v e wi l fu ll y s t a t e d in it a n y t h i n g
     6   <3   20   27
     7   14   2*   21

                                           D ated the             /(jfr                          day o f O                    f e o ,

     1    8   15    22 29
     2    9   16   23 30
     3   10   >7   24 31
     «   U    18   25
     5   12   19   26
     6   13   20   27
                            7   '4 21 28   N . B . If w i t n e s s u n a b l e t o r e a d , a d d d e c l a r a t i o n
                                                     If m a d e b y J u v e n i l e , t h e n P a r e n t o r G u a r a i a n i u c n u u i b t ; o i c u e m e i u .
     1    I   IS   22 29
     2    9   16   23 30
     J   10   17   24 31                   Tim e, d a t e a n d place s ta te m e r^ :\ta k e n |
     4   11   1|   25
     5   12   19   26
     6   11   20   27

                                           an d by w h o m
Form F 17a
 ■
                                                                                                                              9:---------
                                                                                                                         Pagp-—
C o n tin u atio n Statem ent o f --------- r-
 f a» <cr. .s~\\rk t
    ( \ a v_i2n,'uydinj.j fcis ■S{l/\ Q a ± v b (5 *^ ^
Q,-tSAM±adl t j j . fJ r ifm U -As&DCi£i Hx X a CxaP>
M jaaj --iAAjoJ mhAseckA Mct:.iAAaLAOu>A               1
                                                                                                                                    \rr>ikAs

                                                                                           AAJi m A                     VJ/Aj
 Qfc X SL2.                    )h o       U A j G l X O X l u a                                    IvOUUi^OO

^ > 0 y Q fu —          4? ?
                           .
                                 M O r-J K s V
      '- - 4 t a j u J r 1 -& J D 0 W                                                                       O i
                       A tm r& M
                                                                                                                        Hxo      R 'q U /
             XO ^ K o r J                   t e f XCO                      UQCA G > £
                        • S x A U O to o v j)             X   o       C I^ Q        a a   Q
                                  *                               '             a m                                           a d

                                                                                2 ^ 3
                                            Q /m                           Aa   x   S j£ U
 t^ _ £ m > o
                                  Aaa            \I a £                     Ni&S               ■                        t3 /r a c i .
                        m i> > €                                              5 ,          b           i l                       ^gPA D U A
           D      C D x a XXTXs                           tijC H A          La A          L ^ U -ifilA                   £>   C & td J O l
        QA        G a a           O x C X M ^a a k J ) t . O x x y                        Q        >        J   a   J    N    ’g / C X u a

                  L o i                     A 0 ? J 'i r U , o                      IU j Z             ,t                            F tg u s
  l A j m .
                                        s         U £ _

 iaj3a              n                            oW                        q    L
a ^ a U                                                                                                         J£

           lUC_          PQ a a I     m                                        Q -t       T lu a                    ix A A ^ i      L3XO
■kxU.                                  A A fk                                                                            buJ-        5
 U io t x g t a            i Q ^ Q A x o t - f& J                              frn x U                              O
          'feu 42-qq^m -ms.                                   f t T .t u                  /V                                         3 -0


Time taken:     from                                                  tc

The person m aking th e sta tem e n t should be asked t                                                                                     -   O th e r
persons p resen t should sign hereunder:—

       Person ta k in g s ta te m e n t:—                             Si

                                                                      Rank Name and No.

       O ther persons p resen t if a n y:—                            Signatures _______
Form F 17a

Continuation
  ryunuauon Statement
             oiatemem ui
                      of ------
   m /r a               cq       ooqa                          A A sU J
                                                                                                                 C u m iM r t
                                                                                                                 7 Y T p\
   AAU--,.Q/Q
   A ix u                     r U i\ A J ^ y iJ



   !i ojn? \r&t£.                        AvuaJLL
                                                                                      n j? A X \a „


      pJ^L Q U ^
A A d fc 1W > n M                          Z                                              W   ask      o


 U jo T I o k o M
                                           !Qgo m o l                                               \Iaj?       A k J tx T
  lAAJUU                                                   O        l&       L   o   (a

 M aJDHZ                                              M         0 x Q a n> (1 q q I                            i>t)d tka
"AO. p jU x X % K jO J c _Mpu i/ssou io .au\/<^&q
    ^Abo iJ r        n a (M a k u x y c 6H Kua£^ k^s> <2&oJ34                                              .



                L&LC) (                CM^enDcAjOO^f O m d I
 •fUA.O O & x x b u Q - J Amq <J&&                frvoteMLv
 1U o J r & m / w o . c ,r u A \A M 2 f ± r l u a / j l o w ,
 AAi k k nM x \ \i a r\ ?*v“)A r \ r v i n KT ' SP IA 1 nr-H i i "TUia
 Cc^ \ a x ^ ^            a        C xM O d          y v Q A ^ to 'Q x Z i ?
                                               t m    j >i iu i , i o y      tii                       a
 w                                                   xicu-gfl txtOfo?.
 A /A /   i
              7f
                   ia   J?-                                    t/OOO AAXX/0>                                     rV a jo g j
                                          U /x :'-U oa i (°Q
              Ia V            Ia X I /                              _    _
                                                                                                                       I aa
               Qkq n.                             S id i        4        m   ?                                     Q X tfd
  Hxs Q>gQ                                         ftl>                      ^AD                           AVeuxi (>?qo
 £K A A                 A T U -o S                                           l°>ia        n    ifUuiaiJi O K a
Tim e taken:       from

The person making th e statem en t should be a s ke d ti                                                                       O the r
persons presen t should sign hereun d er:—

      Person ta k in g sta te m e n t:—                        Si

                                                               Ra

      O the r persons presen t if a n y :—                     Signatures
Form F 17a

Continuation Statement of
  (XjronAA.n.                 . ml)          OQXsl                                                Kkk QaaJtlcxk ori
  b p jil^ o iA               k      #         4       U      j       >     f         M D /n n        c rrx /o n l
                                                                  m   l a        /         f v c c x d r O U J!
                                             Q>g.(3 fl'AKxJ'                                jjl    y ^ o V fil
                                                                                                        .                  vS
 IkTXyQ hC)                        T \jrvx/) J .                                       'V O                  H   aa   /3


             lO J & O
                                                                                                                      J ~ L Q U /)

.L u J § >                                                                      A P P H ru ^
         Ik fo jU A           m o        r lfo u u £                                        ■O       AXAAAUAli/)

  £4(31           v9 O H a) <a                                                  Jl                           £

                                          < K T X      aJ

                   rfa x fx (d b > „Q                                     Ta    a

 - L f lf a c p              1a   J lu a a x \                              /\A>4»AAAA>C£jL£l                ^     Q.
  P T D u s rt (                                       1 1 1A             A a a ^Sk f l b u             Q i^ n
                                                                                    tv&u i/e n i q m pfcU
                   t x   Q          tP   a

      ( 'f t t     , h t f o             u b f .           . I lkaM M           W X fO J
 Q.     o;         ~.UC           vjX        i a   .                            l/5 0 /o         Q                     1U a V
                   iA O d      h g o x y \ Q 'C d j                                                          a o      K Q J
                     C jP x O ^ .    A PPA £X a                                       l o                   U uan          K conl
      k a
       l^ u M                 ^      /€ o ^            1Ud    m       l     te Z ia o -g d                  fa it Q /5
                                                                            O o e fC J D             ;y 1 U ^     Aa a
                                                                          lU ilo m iT T
                                                                                                 B -S b o    W a d (o W t
   ap. w o l o i                                   •& L                                      o xa           a jT u r u ^
   U A jp rb u J r                                                                                                            VJ

          :i m     L\                              d o . f it . imr>                                                       A ud
                 t /O C H 7                                                          pjfflflcs q                 r iw Q
Time taken: from
The person making the statement should be asked tc
persons present should sign hereunder:—
      Person taking statement:—
                                                              Rank Name and No.

      Other persons present if any:—                          Signatures
Form F 17a

Continuation Statement of -----                                                                                           , _       Pagp             --------------------

  r-x x u ^ .'J z d .                     v    e r J               .X M /U O /^ '          y ttU         ^4 A       /      0 £ T L     l   I       1 M > 0

  't n . X f iv v                h x i        > . n       J        fx c   C ^ /t* iu ^ d                 X \ ooj a          t ^ k iu - e                      f t
                                                                                                           an. « fl /~V . T \    k ,-v

  l A L h ' W J
   A AS ^
  Ca a a O
                                                                                                                                               i   0O,


           S.t .H-CX a .

          ^ A f l h v                          m    x i e k o d                  O         uoo                             -Uu;                /CQj'

              ^ lA t- P l                 Q>              Ia jU ,U              AJ_        £d€LLK)
                   v        aX    L£                                                                                          rkxo (1u_q
                                                      t u m               ix ^ .^                                 Vq J c )c€ lU T (S fo lX o
                                                                                                                                   ■O & J
  h   ^        i   / gK               c                                    i                              n
                                       a . i 'j U             '      -V n ('p i H                    i                  ttu O K fe
                           a .                       i.           k’ c a a ^                                                   i1   I U - L U J j 1C u j > _
 \ c. o          u          - w m n co                            o u                                                           j    0 iA . t10
  I 'y / 'i      C ji                                                   raLWJ KIK HUM Qxu.f
              M .                                  ■IS,           /)J                      i* J v        1 1 a .£cL\      |   K^trC.               ^Z-
 lllo                  L C ftt-                                                Qj C I



           a t(pL^ .AC’jCl'USjk 0MW
 6v\ 'uAii (^* uxh  J Aoo,a<Xv
               n. “to „
                               /J&?dapl u 1lax5.                                     ^T)   y-s



          XA A ;                  ~K                                                                                                       (-vTv^v^-^

                                      ,o i> J v               lln ^ V                s u rtJ               Ik p           f u S , ( i ‘sx:<-
                       o     o o i .c tt- i                       & j? c> ri . c m          7m                                Q j i O C ) [sC L & (
      t in                  olo\sn                                                                        la r ^                iv a d      k2QQu.
                                 j_                J tn a                                        ,                   . 'p K - u e u t c a
 -a       -A/O
                                                                                            A rti             -     iic c j/      i f
Time taken: from
The person making the statement should be aske                                                                                                           t.         Other
persons present should sign hereunder:—
          Person taking statement-.—
                                                                                 Rank Name and No.
          Other persons present if any:—                                         Signatures
Form F 17a

Continuation Statement of                                                           Page




Time taken: from _________________________ to ________________________________________________
The person making the statement should be asked to sign it immediately at the end of the statement.   Other
persons present should sign hereunder:—
      Person taking statement:—                 Signature            ;_______________________________
                                                Rank Name and No. ________________________________
      Other persons present if any:—            Signatures __________________________________________
                                                                                                                                                                    WG 41 2
                                                                                                                                                              (Amended 9.87)

                                                                               West Midlands Police
      block out dates
    WITNESS HOTAVAILABLE                                                  S TA TE M E N T OF W ITNESS
           -
                                                               (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)
1    8 15 22 29    1   8 15 22 29
2 9 16 23 30       2   9 16 23 30
3 10 17 24 31      3 10 17 24 31
4 11 18 25         4 11 18 25          N am e                                                                               «*?    I
5 12 19 26         5 12 19 26                                                       D ate of Birth     . ■ ■ • • C?V?V^
6 13 20 27         6 13 20 27          Age
7 14 21 28         7 14 21 28
                                       O ccupation                         PaU       cc

     8 15 22 29        8 15 22 29      H om e or business address
     9 16 23 30        9 16 23 3 0 |   and telephone num ber
    10 17 24 31        10 17 24 31
    11 18 25           11 18 25                                                                     ____________                                        ........
     12 19 26          12 19 26
     13 20 27          13 20 27
     14 21 28          14 21 28
                                                                •          'r~^h              naae(s) each * signed by m e, is true to the best of m y knowledge

      8 15 22 29        8 15 22 29                                                      - S S L -                                      ^      r     ™      “ u,lon"'
      9 16 23 30        9 16 23 30     h r,„ 0 w ilfu lly stated in it anything w h ich I kn o w to be false or do not believe to                 true.
     10 17 24 31       10 17 24 31
     11 18 25          11 18 25
     12 19 26          12 19 26
     13 20 27          13 20 27
     14 21 28          14 21 28
                                                                                                           Signature
'NTER if no dates
TOBEAVOIDED
                                                                                                           O fficer s




                                         .5.        ««        .P o .V i« ,.                      w « .■
                                                                              o , K , b . . £»*-).        .. S t c ^ V i c A r O       afc.

                                         ;;                                           •& * « -■ £ * * * * » ' * ■
                                                , & t i « . . S ' W f t ) . ctwr»3 ,.                   vsVicV*         k'*?v. b ■            ^ ,,vc               "
                                                                                        . .    ,cu>hf..                            ir A v & t.v '.             \ y ■■■
                                                               .. g y -o w d - - F!>)i*>rfc.                              , *rv        . ►w rv ^ e v s
                                              £>Cr<^S iP'T'.S’ ........................... . .................... ■
                                                         ^          a „        ca    . S.v-pfxKK-'                 c.fS                                       f > « « .

                                          '                           .. o r t w d t d .. t o            **.      . V * v * . • ■* » < * < ■'« * ■ ■<**■^
                                              .<£>H                              •. N u r t i g V . l A i j o W v l j                         f o v .fctx-u»


                                                                          .. pi^.Vcv'Wf'.VN .                    . .,£«Wcteu. A5. .ftpr.il.-WH
                                                ^   ' a vWc»<.c)               . W-f. . f « ,. C u p . . & v - ' i -f-vt-l • . f e e * * # 11 •

                                                w       kK      . bcfcU <<v>... JUv<vfw»l..«r>a .                                                                      -       •
                                                    A S ,v.. o \ t ... V V - * . .. U v l U . W t - y o ^ W . .P»4fcte«d).                              a^oA-wd,               •

                                                 S h « f e c ) 0 . - .............................................                                         ,           .
                                                             O w . ..           .. c      W        .. 9 ^ v . ..                                          .S v v >
                                                Vt> . .ftp w .L .                   > , ^ r . . V o « a t . . Q. •                                S . v , ^ r - - - V . ..
                                                 Q ?.        V>vk. . . v t £ .c ! \l* c V « r ^ ■ . o S . .V k . ■ p / t *                                     v-TWA
                                                                                                     .<ic C^O f Vs¥\\j . .                                ^

                                                                                                           Signature w itnessed by
                                                                                                                                                                WG 413
                                                                                                                                                          (Amended 9.87)

                                                       West Midlends Police
                                                S TA TEM EN T OF W ITNESS ^
                                      (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation of sta te m e n t of

     . A J .^ s V . ..                                                                                      bc<\V-\.
                              ■ .s W b ^ ^ .v s ^ .                                                       .. X iV v a k ..           . .. S P i u . .p.vtv.
                                                     . ps \   t.   ..    V \\\ \4>V?9y          . Q y .         . V j . ^ ^ V v p . ..
      <xw s|            C 'O .^ ^ .^ T O S .,. oyr                       e^ v^ )            b'\c.r\V V',r's. q.^?. .. . f h S \ c z ..............
 .                      . . . C k\:___\r\ >>Ub<?y'<WC\V“v ..... ,V>o.Oi                                      .'W.V&Vs           k~Q
     c*. .-^VyrWs^« .                    ..,S.\^ca .
                                                   v «-v^           cv ^   . .                       .                    .                      .ca.4-b<p\<\
 .   ckSt.      . . . . V ) H.1J   S.h&Y<JVajH.          .. c ? v \ . ,'V K ^ . . .                          y\$U Y >.          P ^ .        .^ P i         V (3 9 A ^

 . A ^ . P j p ^ v U . . . ^ ^ . ..............                                          .............................                                       .....
 ..................... h                        s j .... .Ori           t \ c u v - \ .,\VN.. .V^            t e . b ? r \ .. h $ . . . .
 . .\4.\.rU .b.c>vrc?s^K                         tJS          C * < y a\» c\£ b . . .tfrsC... S z n x o .Y .                                          ...........
 ..O .S r& cr.< ± ... . U b . O . .. ,Y>.c^... .Vt=v?                                                                            .p ? y ~ ...........
                 ^ . v s . ^ . ’m q v s . . .o .r\.. . t t v ? .               < p v ^ - V r . K ' . n . « > ? y x . ~Thcr<—                uzv*-. . . . . . . . . . . .
                    o l            ^pc-civ-v^p.V^... ,oy>...                                             y.y\0.o v<\..o ^ - .. Vr\pvi.......
                  ... -S^rviPV:.. .olpf^cs.ys... £ou.l£c>.. .Vq                                                co.’ovcJ^.cA-.. .tKe.i.y...........
 ..    c^ x i k x j - .....................................................................
                  f t t . .. . U t J U ^ . r ^ k ,. ^ . .. .U^.-S. •• £vfeuc\br<0.. yy \ .•V K ^                                                               ....
 ..Spvp.vrs.... k v ; p . .. .CVNe)... . U W K ... V M ... .6>.*sV.... S W p p 0 . v r V ? X 4 . .-.
      jD.                          ..cj'T'v      ^s.^.... y r u ^ v V ... .V>a v \ 5. ..                                             .. .Vfco-. . . . . .
 .          _ _ _ s test... ) p . < ? k . . . a t . . .                              p \ V c . V \ v . v r \ < ^ v > . . . V p . . . . ' U W x V .. . . . . . . . . .
      ..^rVs^yi .. ,v^«vs... pa                        c c ‘! ^ V m c ^ y > V . .. 9 ^                    UvVvv^pAQ^.. .SU’p p . Q V . V ^ ^ ..
                                   . . .v v n                 . . £ f l Y T > ? v f .. .k a ^ V r u /v * ^ ..                   —        i< P .p .. f l V v c ) . .

                  .... H.c? ry \> . .. .^Sz.^'r'cX.                                 .’W . a * . .. c o p ^ . Y P ^ >Y^pA?U.. .                                         ..
 ..    bp.        .£y£ V . < c ^ ... .U ^ y c X S .                     & r.t?Yr\ .. . V K * . .. £yrvr\)r.. . ^ r W S t k . V ? .....
       |^cnC<L.            .....................................................................
                    V^^vrc.... V'KrvVjcv-'vcib.. iv%. ..          .. ,^py:cv:iov-S ....................
      ^ V r^^ y ^^v N V .. ,V^cMr... ca.V ...     sA-... l= ..u«. P .1. C Ic^K v ^>. co U .0 .
                                       .. .VVs< ... ,C<vr^Tvr<?'.V ...pc.o-rV ..Vp.^Vv.Vsp?!. .t K ? . ..^05h\ ....
     . .ca.V: . ,V S « ... tHC.pf ! r > c ^ ... .L<\yN^... 5tV>.<£),v . ,c v .p ^ ) ^ u y c ^                                                  ^OVI. t . 0 .
     .,c^.p^.c\ViN|.... .Y^tfr... ,Hv.<...                                                           V.vv>>c.v .V K c ...fcwP..
     .. b   e    .. .Vfc*....          \ * $ k     ..a*r>c)....v\Cjb.V.. .o .^ .. .bc^.<;.. .c<WYr.c*!.                                                                    ..
        x^ y^ .              g->r\p!b!|.'... F » r . ..                             .   .v'<’HSc'r>.4..t H ? . .. . c v s V y r ^ Y ^ ..t-P..
       WvC. . . . Ck .y> !cy<^\.. . p c r s * v .' .• .c. :.. kKc. . . .b.^V\yv^. \ . >.. S ^ \c v \.d ■ V»C*V. V. ..
        . b c < ^ . .. .cittStr.d ... d ^ . v . .& ys.d                                         ^ o . p ^ . o v . v r c y ^ ..                                       ....
     . .Y .o . . . . V K . c . . . . \ A \ Y V ? \ s . , . , y ^ . V . . . . b x A Q . . . Q ' . C U U C , . . f c t . v : < . . ,cA>P. . h ? ) r . .
                                                                             .. v n < , c   c > .   .. b o        a c V - s /    ^   ^       v ^ c * v i



                                                                                   Signature w itn essed by
                                                                                                                                                                         WG 413
                                                                                                                                                                   (Amended 9.87)

                                                        West Midlands Police
                                              STATEMENT OF WITNESS <g)
                                      (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)

Continuation of sta tem e n t of

  .^r°!ri£. ..QU.V:..0.^1. ..                            .. .C e ,T'.Wvrt?vV .. p.C^V-S.^.                                     ..W ? ..                        ..P^ji.
  .ct< c-<rsjs. ...^r.O___........................................................
  .................................................... f r ' Q i r > ____ h x i . Q . . . 0 ! . C l o c k . . . a y r > . u . ^ y r C lS . v .p^P?p)* ..............

                 . .sV>U. ..                                 ?\.. .Wss.... .C<»^>reO... p x y^ S .. . £ V o > r v                                                                  .
   V< co<.,. .Ovv>.o.. . . W>j .. .V x x A .. .p<XsV:..                                                             v r s .. V \ \ |.. .a^YWCiVs. ..
   W s C 'V ^ . . . . V - i O v i . . . O.V-S . . , o \ ? Y } * V _ S . . . c k w C ^ C K • f c Q . .                                            . .\io v .                  ...

      j^ y v V V T p v V   .. .p!s.Y\S. .f p           .V                         ...VX. l?vS.C'V\             ..c?lO.^WYV. ..SiW3.V\9....
  W . V ^ . ...                         .... .-Vrvo Jft.. p <wYr. .W s > . Q . .. k o .........................
                            jpcc>p.Vs... oU.Y-... o ^ . .                                 ___ ... ?p.«;v\5i.. .^vo-,0 ..
   w s V o . ...                   ... s \ c i < v . ..                             . T T h s .. o r ^ .... p r < * c h c f \ ) . ..                                     u         .
              ... cid.Y^o                         S... .U#P^:V3__ VkCA.VC ... b<££.y\ .. .\zo..                                                                      ......
   o \          V N < j . V \ f c £ V : . . . o . ^ . . . . o £ £ x c x x S . . . ® \y > .0 . ___ V r ^ . v t                            V t e t v ^ . . A .v \ \ * > . . .

   VWc .. v < psv':..                              V k c ___ p * y > . , . \ y r s . . . o yr< 0?y . .. .W s <*&... Vtecvj...............
      . c & s A d . . . . V x a /< -. . . . . ' r r \ « ? V * c ) . . . t o s <     .. .p .c o .jp k                 o A r.. . t o < i . .                              . dp?.

  V fe : ..                     . . . \o < ?v C te... c)p.uy>                     VKc             \xvVWY<r.L,.. % ■ .                                                   ........
  p    ! .c a o .cA c .. v Vr... NrJ.^.4... .cvw&s.)\i... o v x yrcy&v-jd c.c)... v w . .. V K s                                                                        ....
   Oc<yv.\;VC> .V ..                           ..<SKS ....'rMmsW.ft. .. .a.p:p.CC\Vt.C) .. fa?..V?^.Vr£.....
      ocrys                c3.ovv^.               Vs>.            .v%\v<v*.. .!Hk=v<                           p    > x s $ \ t Y *..-. .^. Vr.....
      tK-.c.cNVs^.... Qk^.pftV.twV... .V:0 ...\~r\%----VfcftV... o . V . .. Vfcy.t.T..Q l c j ^ J c ».
                                       V-sc^J...        ,cA\<. .. A v*s                          —        C<.w.Vvca.\—                      p p \ 5 . .,.c)vX..
                                ...    .o.Vc yrcYQ^nd.ivrva.,..                    A ^ p y r h . ^ro'y>.. .C v n h a S ^ V s A . .............
      ^cv>.\o.v. . . . ? c ? h ^ . . . o w . . ,Us2T.. cXc?o|.. <k-Y. .. tHcwr.. . W d c . . .6 p ...........
      ca-VVcy>V>o>N...c\ y s <5.. ckc,\ric,y> ...W-x...v                                          x \ a Vj e^\... Y .o ... V K C ..........
   C?;yc v'.C'T'PV.cX.vyNA...\V>... ^S A                              . . . .. p.c.v>S.,..^                                       ....................
       ^ c ^ W             ' j ... C v v w .C u S ? ..                  . . . S      ~      >      c - A \ v > . e x . . . c x . V -. . .         cH " . x k ^                ...

      O.^-. ..V*S<?.. . ^ y o v r v o l .... SV<.o.o.v;cXr..7lof<c) ..                                                                 .. .e-C|VJ.Qv.\
                                  V t4;\j...SfCV'...\cAc^H!t'\|\Y\<^. ..VK<;.. .O.VCy/.<V'P.VK)M/> ^ ......
                  .... y ^ k r '. ^ c v         . . V K . c . . . . a.pp.^py:i.o.4:^. . . q . c ^ . i . q V > .                                 ....................................

                                                                                             ^        .. -j^s^ ..                                      rtlcvert....

      <n£Mov*A .                                 . ©.‘.C.toc.Kv . ^ u ^ v o y j ^ . .. p c o . p H .. . V * » * . S                                         f \ ^ j
   oOV             .ovnVo. .. \K.^ ... Jc^tAck... pvvn.O. ... , p > V c W .. vy>..                                                                   . o Q .. t K c

      oc.v>t''rf,
                v \...                                                                    .. \rv ■• ■\)*c...
      0 >r___.. .V>y><s... V)fvS.                           -VHc^:... ttor«y.< .. \^ci3 ... firs.................
      o : y c / 5 . p . ^ \ .. o ^ Y o             V k .< l . . , p \ V c . K            c A p . ^ . . . b s . . . t o ? . v V N \J Y v k s .vr .

                                                                             c \ c . r d . .. . V ^ v r v S ^ l V ^ - S            .                          tK <


                                                                                  Signature witnessed                    by . .
                                                                                                                                                             WG 413
                                                                                                                                                       (Amended 9.87)

                                                        West Midlands Police
                                              STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                   (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s. 102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)

Continuation of statement of . .
                           . p         S ...               . . . cM.c?..                   .. fcV>>»>K.. . v t , ..                  ...   p\ . .p>fcK.
                                 xk\      . V K < . ...                                                    .^yusA...c&v*.. p               y       x         .    .

..o.vp.tp.... t o * . ... p * c K . ..                                 ?...V-Q... ca. . . p T M .. .\d .\o y.s-.                                          .....
  .V-}.<\S         ,c?\....... V<?V: . .< & .. ca.^y^o^.<?r><^... Ov'r>P./>C \S V ... p .c o p .K . .aVPV/'W
' '***.! Vv>' i y^...                                      ,,bc«.«x..a^... W>. ..QVT^pm..fiV....
     AVs^V.                          ,v m s ___ cXvc) ..n cO r . .. v'-?a \                            < .. . t e ^ . ..<*..
  Y^ajs            .o.CPM Y.'yx^.. Or >... .to.?.. ,W<.p p )r\oyS..                                     X-&^ 9 .                  yrva.CAVNt t —
                     ,fT« ws. . .Vje.'rt-                                      .. to c\v"             C^A S.tA.pVOXol. .V.o.Vw*T T »£..
 .to.c             Ui ycy'p.&3\          . . . f-Y>. c), VA.Vm.c>\ .. CfAV.^.c)... f t w .W ^ Y ^ . l . .CV\Q*0 ?.
      bsj         So.y\% ..                                 .. ( T p ^ . .k-PM^?r<J.S ... Vfct... £ o y ? S V .evr\5.:
 "T^.^                                 <#v.vd                                                       0 .. V\qc->..
                                                                             _______(pv/^V.c.ir>+ t .
     ca       t o v\y\<3\j             .a»*^P.vr>c.V'rvc.*^V:. .fcp..                                                 .Av>,. ,to£               c^w^.c),
  .0 .0 . V\$>.iy>a . . VVsC.^ . . . \jV>.«*Ar . .                                       . . .t.crA.V.Vv>.Q . . . ip.\Q .£-? .*. . rr. . . . . . .
 _g\y-sp.K.            .fc"V>y\oV\ . . QyVOP.VJVVCS.VrvC A H . . .U (J.V \d /7T>c\VS.                                              .p.V'CVt.v^^ .0. .
      A ^ s c _________ .\V\... V A s * __________________ \<Cp .^>. ..t........................
                            ............. .$5 .. AAr... .Id                         c c m w        .. .O-Vpxi.tf.Vf...................

 . Yfycx*... SO V>^A-V>\v \ a . . .c).\rcvs>x—                                                    . . . VN<».-pp.c*\.\.*\.ov.. ^                h . to x .r .
 . U p p i w c y s ...                                                 ..> .                          .^ c p c c V c .d .                        ------------
              . i c c r s . .. b p . .. b e        ..    c p v W . c .0 . . . \y > \r ^ . . . t o < . . . g w . v v s c X . t e P . . . < « £ * > :

     .^.xs                                                                          .p^^y^.p><'r?>y>c4.. cA.uV>4.                          Cvt"...........
                           .. . M . p ' . H K f i . .,.. .VfceyC.. o.vc... c?t.\\j.a\j^sr'                                P: S> t A . ^
 . S v p . p e . r t . . D w i b ) ..cxv^U<*^.!.?... o U Y S ^ d ? . .. toe . .c ^ rV 'y ^ d .-. .JA .......
       .^ V n j ...                          . . V v > « a + . . . P ' 5 , J U ! - ? ........... U o . v ) £ ) . . b < : . . .                    ci     !V > .

 ..    S V y ^ V V .        ..                  ,...     k < y u < ^ .w c   r.>...                   ...   ^    . 4 .    ..?,..
                     .. . V x f ^ v f . .. « v s v \ . .                                 . .<?.G?ic*yZ ... .avrvvr.c).                          a.^.                  .
 ..C^VOVVN c A                     >^>...                   ... ^.<^-...                   ..
 .                 .. .c V v o ^ t c c ) . . \ v ^ . . . ^ o o v s .^ Vr.,.                                    .. vno.YC            .V\y^s. y^.«\j. • •
      Uvi;             .                .. .-S.cwc.c3. A.y>.5-)£?.?... & s% . .. .aws^.wc). /.                                                         .......
                                  V^c' v Vc). V >^vx . . . . W . « y ? . .. « b k . .. ^ . .. .P.^.'r^NyN^:W v'.
      . ^ i y S . V . . e \ v c > .. . ® s r > 0 . . . .                                          . . . b o . ..     V v ^ V N < . c>.      .

       u V s ^ x ^ . ^ i .. a ... A o . V . .                      ...   f> < ‘? p . k ... .pv>.. . + K c . .. p . ' . H . K .,                          ......
      .<2V?Y'J?y£.VsY ..c^.^.O... ,vr\<^Ar.. .Wr>^.vi... Vr\^v_3.... W                                                           VT*s W-SC\Vp^.t....

      ■ . p c o p t e . . . rrTpN?.^....                           ... <?v____________ • • •c?^ - •                                                    V*.9........
        V \x ( Y \ C \ V * \ r . . . . V > P S V -c) •             •                  . • £ b y . t . 4 VS          .. ,Q \? .|p W \^ .c ). ,.y .° . .. .
                                                                       Lc^V          a K .d                 U a vt     v p v o)            ^-cxy>-5. *.

                                                                                 Signature w itnessed by .
                                                                                                                                         WG 41 3
                                                                                                                                   (Amended 9.87)

                                                     West Midlands Police
                                             STATEMENT OF WITNESS <£>
                                    (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Buies 1981, r.70)


C o ntinuation of sta tem e n t of

 — •yKf.SC . . 0 ££).C^<S...                                                               ...Wa'A. .. .brC^VOs

                     p.c).     & y\ ... Vtv<... /p\Vc!k\                                            .. V M    .. y y y y j.Y < d ......
   £o.oJi.           . . f \ . . *S>r}o\V>.... .. .co.v) .^... b«*                   —    h&XK^ ... )e.fV...
    Vo           .S             c          <?>+■<.       VV ttc,... opp<?-$.\,'Oi^ . , ^ . y v S . > .                    y.tK *....
  ^>. .c\c.v>.Vr.               V >o*s<sy^)... V b r v s K . .. .Vw.yf.... .W>pv.Y<). .                               .. b ? ?.^          ...
  .tVvvj                                                        feV-K f!*>... .VV^t... .Viki.o.. .-$< b 5 ..              Q.C".......
   SU                                      .•O'Ts^....Q^. ...b>\Jy ..P)K3.^r. ... t W W V ^ V \ b ...VJP<3..^9!
   <,<&,         ^           J 3 ... c as A . d . .. .Oi£ V:... 0 ^ x 9 ___ )b»<;... .'p.Vhc.b .. .‘rvj'St 1                          .'Vx.
   q y .c            ... V p ... c\.s£tsb..... V O b b .. V S ? . .. A ' c v j W e fA,..V=>.^-.. .^3.......
   Cp.V\0. ...               0 .V.... j S c 5? ... Psyvrj... V)^>j.... V^SP^ .. .^3... .c^v.Vd.. b?H y.t,..

                 o \ } Y ... . o ^ h P                 Vk*. ... Jp\ >-.C i>... ^ V p ' r N ..VJkh-ev^..
   *5v.... £o<j.«r>....V=>c .c <a v > £                           o.p.p^t Vrcyv.Vr.. .b?..                    .... Hrs«-5\.I'tatf
                                                       .. c k ^ . c J ...<?>Y>.0... AY>^MYT.c)... !p>^.S/?p.\C .                        &VS
 44n<. .... j p \ * x h \ ,.. ,^>V:.... .V4f».^... V <                        Y>j. . . C.bc*.a to. C... 0Jr>.. t K e .....
  p ^ c W                    v ^ v . .. s o   y ^ \ . . . $ V < j y .,.                                                                        •
  O , .. vsU'r>h^'yr.. O.Q- ■ ■ •                                        .. V > £ V V \ P \ . ..V^PsY.CK^ £)           &Y>y. P ---
  >& s^.. p > V c V > . fvc/y->... ,tes.c... . c a r ^ . v ' T T : .<?£. . H > * .. . g r W b . S l ...
    bo      .. y r » | . .. v i ^ K V .              .\vx .. V ? £ b k v t c . v r \ .. \ f c   < ___ ICo.ip... pvw.c)......
  \bs.<z.... Y V a x t K . .                                                                                   ... If.^..PA/.V....
   .Wy^     . . . c s .... C K \ . ^ .^...^>>'>spr.c-V'c>.vr...                                 —     ‘w < . v < —   o . b . ^ v V ....
   ArWvlc*<v          .. ?.$.        & !5 ..,.                              .A V ^ . ..             ... .V^r ajiovN... p R r .....
    ,$.\pcb).         . . . .pe>).lc^. . . Cif£i CKYS. , . . .‘A s                 S o a r > . . . .<=13.                 ......................
   ,ey>?^.yc £>___..........Qkyrov.^.O... .■g'J<xybacftJ—                                                .^b.CAyrV?. 0 ........
   . a p 4 > W v . c A v v\ c \             V r\< ... . o f Q
                                                            ’ cr.'fS.                                ... « p j p ^ y . ^ . ,.
                                                                                                                            v> ^ .......
                             ,.. 3tV;                     .... c \ ^ . .. . - ^ P . V ^ V v ..               x j ... A-tf >rt........
     ,bs.<           .Pl¥?-SV-?'f.V'. ..f ep                                                        p V P l ? l f Vv^..                       •.
   .•^xjpcc J r f . D . ..                    ___ V p . ... <=y     ?. .. oy>y<?..        .      ... p \ V < - b . ..fv'rv.c)......
                                       ^    y% yp><pcA. .^Tca >a S ... \aV>0 ... Vp.C' . y S .. .'S>kfy)JQ f y yY\ fiv•
       c)pyv^                                  ... r ^ V c b . ....                ... !->V>9.l< ... Qy.c.V^ ^ ...
   >    o ..         5___ r - i r ^ _____            Q & .. .^ rh fS ^ ___ <?>(:          .C«.*^5. t .. .3... C?.V>              .Y>^         ...
    \pel.KV?                   H'M                       ____________ ..^ . .. .                     .... )frs*S&    ..                        ..
       b z s y y p ^ ... N>r>c.c)___ v ? p                  .Vr\ ...^ / £ v?r'r...<$£-■.. A > > f                                .S b ^ ^ . 7
                              i_j»< *>V7                        _________ VY>f... Y > N. H . b                V " .. W A y > .. y^ S f. .
        .V^\vjy.C.c). v .,
                         q v .V\                     v*<          ... \vvvt.0... u p . .. .G»p.vy\<3y..                          ........
            ””                                 ^            *     ___ *Vb:cNj... .c^t.cD...^0.. >..                        .. V^b ^ H . ..

                                                                        Signature w itn essed by
                                                                                                                                                                                                  WG 413
                                                                                                                                                                                            (Amended 9.87)

                                                                         West Midisnds Police
                                                             STATEMENT OF WITNESS £ )
                                                (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70>


Continuation of statement of . .                                                                                                                                     ....................................

             iCXvc’.vY\c).. . C W . f . V - r . c i v s                                                                                  ... fep.V .q0 ...                                      ....
             qsY .     .                               .. e \ .U                                                                    K -S ...    A ry v ^ s )     . .v * p .. A             ..............
             %-Suy^r. . . . Q ? r .                    .VbsC. . . . XsJoVYV?. . . S V f j W . ^ , • A *. . . .CVf^.V. . .Q9 r . ..........
 . o w f k .. ,Wr>... W s s .. • S r & t e .* :" # > ? * * • •                                                                                 .. . b ? * . . a » * f O r . ............
 .            vVicv* .. I.V-.___________Ci yV.>! y>.9>.. •5=i^.... ----------Pf£j.c*ifS........
         .^.Lp’
                                      .. .e*rtr. v .                                                   «...                              .. ^ ^ V . .. k<^<*.)..
         . O v w . o ....c)v$v?eV< £....                                          ■ . ••           v \ t)... v ? " Y r ...                                                               .. U ...
. -<?vV__<?v\). v .. , W \ < > y ? ..... V-^A-S... frP.... .vrjcsr.O... £<?K. •.vt-.»—                                                                                                                      .
             \_jcxs                 p\pv.)c/ys. .. C^.v>.c*P.VT..                                                    .               . V. .. .VV.V .. . ,CVf:VJ().. Pjy>.^.
             ^         Q ^ y y . . . .vy>\$.. . .vtn.<?o4...                                                             . . v?*.^.v<l. . . . .Vp.. . ..........
             ,p t> V *y > Y N < *\W ... W . d .                              ..                                 .. .C b rO S X . .. .!&AYU<*YVp v v . . . S W . ^ n
     ? J r $ r y r . ...                        -S.,.. v > u V y r w v : > ... .<&f\ < * . r 3 ..                                                       .. P<A)< 3 ... . c t o M ....'
     w > V y < ... \ V v ^ . .. .Vvv^.0 ... ,u>p                                                                9s sM\iy>sV... NSm. ... f / w o f c ., £$•. •••

 ’ A * i *                        ^ > v ? y N .. . V * f > , . . . .“                          T ^ c           v *           • . . V * > * ...                 . . \ V t t O .........................

         \j :p             v>r.VsJf^\\N\...                                   ... \t4\.0^rV>> .. 5?(-:.. A H                              s    .... (p.‘'VcV>„. ,~TV.*-?...M&i
         .c t r \ 9 h 'W y               . . . ,\= ?^  VH?                  .. . OV>\cV>.. ^0.. .c<?vA<^.
         y> py.                                       v<:.... ... W s K x ... Pvr>\jVV.vo.Qj...
         \ Q            s\).cxacsv. .. Wn<vV.. .£ 0         ... s u ^ o y f Y t . y s .. . \o«v.v5..........
              \yv VCv 4 5 . . . . ."Hs?.                                      V*CW .'. .                                                  .W r K S -- *09.^*. ..                                         ..
         Air>?.0.                      .sJ.p. .\w                        Crc.rvfc...                                     ... VH<... .kp.p.. fir?.0.. .tH*....
                                                                  . ..v a V s ?. . . . V ^ < ? V A ? . . . V ^ y . C . . .                                              . . . V ' . V C K ........

                           y7 .                                                                                                          ..AK%.••W\jVKC c)....o ’JOk. •                         ...........
     .                     .............................................................................................................................................................
     ....... ;Di>y:vxvoy .. .^Vs^..... £OV.vr£A ...                                                                             ... .VV^<;.... :ch^. v .^>.............
             £ > .\v________                                         • ■ ■ .c\vrov'o.<3                                                           .. S 'h o .< /.\.6 . .                             —
     .                         ........... V . S C . 0               W       j ^ V      v      .. .*r> c » .v ^ .. . ^ . f ^ c . V > y . c . U |                                                   . . . . .

                 V A C:V ? -             V W                C X .y\y>. C '/.\y y ^ C C . V r v C y > V < : . . . c                         >y > ^             V H c . . . h Y ? : » ? ^ ’ .c i)r>J.,.

             r^yYy^y:...                c N . c ) y . > . s » \ y v .< ? v . . W s < . . . .   £.Qr:S> . . . .<?«£*. . . .Vo.. . . N A V ^ . V . . M Q C > .............
             .Vocvppfri'.'TS P \ . . . o .v r. . . .VYvS^M^.hYs.c;. . .                                                                           .. \.Vrv. . pvy>^. . . .V J9^.'. ..
     . . ' T V 5 .... V r c 4 y> CVJ                                   CXy>. r         \       V       \         C       <      ?    s    \      . ..               ...£y*V\<......
             \-±p<s . . .                            . ..  ,^\a<AX>.d.q)o.C.0. . . VA<a.S. . . . V ? . y \ t . . . . po.VX v A.^n .5P .
              yrwkVv ..                                . /.\Vr..        ... .fWfV:... ."V^•••. \ r > ^ ? V ^ ,\ 9 y > . .
             j^c\t                 cravVc)... V <                  VrYS.                            ... .oy<*? W \ c) ,v \pV.V. .. ft A                                                 ..V^^^r...
         .    p ^ P . p k . ... c ) > 3 v o A - . . . .W .c n .v c .                               .       .     .   .    .      . c y q y y v c ) . .. t e p . .         .p.^ v r >             - ^ v . ..

                                                                                                'ttiN .C                      p ^ o v y > c )      •»     . I k S s . . P ^ ' f > A <^ \ y ' <r S ^ 15- y v

                                                                                                               Signature w itn essed                by .
                                                                                                                                                                         WG 41 3
                                                                                                                                                                   (Amended 9.87)

                                                         West Midlands Police
                                                 STATEMENT OF WITNESS                                                             Q
                                    (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


C ontinuation of sta tem e n t of

                                                                                                                                                                    ....
   ^                                                          . . ..1-29___ ______ o r                               )r.Q___
  tysiv\V_ <?ivo^b<?Ch) .Y^<?X\d. . . .W?SV^. . .                   . . .V\C*.£f . .4-hfij......
  \y t ?jo.....Vx>l c).... \.0 .... > S V ....................................................
          ......................... f T f l ^    . . . \y > c \c ) f   a   Vj                                                                       A V > ,. , 1 h v ? . .

  .SV^^y^cv^V.,                                    .. ^ . ..                U .*.                                    s . .5?.£... h 9 V A ..                                •• •
                                                                       .,c ) U V n\ .. .o\V.... M:v\.Ufc>fty'p.v^V>.,

  . ^ . v l . c c ) . . . v v n . . . . t t s c j t y r . . . c i v i c s . . . W p t V . . . q s Q B ^ k k v ? ? ^ ...........

                                                                ..................... r T T > . e . ^ _ _ _ _ _ ^ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ d t h > Y ) ? V . 4> .

  yyzxj^i&fr'.c.K.. ,<3>oi. ."HvC..                                             v>.9.<yY\x.c*v\ cV.. .du^... V:q. . .to?.........
  , ^ . c v ' . . . t V v p r i . . . & f £ \ e * .* rs . .                       . . . c a . 11. . . . K * r \ U , S . . . U p . .                        ........................

                        'rvV?'. w                                               .... W> . .. . O k ^ . V y .. OV~!$:<. K$... Q y QY d ....
   VW<                  CV;vf                   .. .^uOfcvri                      ^g^CYvW... V^^VCA^'TK'^................
                                                                                  y
  . v a c ?v \ . < ) . . . V s c w c . . . . t o               b e               c ^ '. v r c c . h r . c ) . . . jg* . V . . .                 .. .O .V T .^ .V l...

  . < # Y J> V > . c ^ < M ' r > ? \ . . . o . ^ h c t r .                 .•.. O . V Y . '. ' o . c x . . A         t e . . . . t o * \ v r t > ) .............................

   v>.»r\P.V^.S                    icrfz.'tAj^.e.v - n                 H   t v '.<’?.    .. .«^vs£)... \ r \ c A ^ ..                                           3& > < . ...

   .p0\K< . V-^^.llVj.. . .|<?.SVr. . . CtfV^XO'.) . .c?*^...    .... SriV.^.vV^YN..
  & y.   .V\\^\s.V?oyp.P.^rs.».. rXT>?>|.. ..W*c!L.. .ctoco'o.^?-^... .Vp. ..v^aqvvv
  .c o y r^ r^ .. .c^v.'Of\... VIiopsV....      .. V>WVr.. £Vm\ f.d... Vo.. tfco ....
   . £>6. , . . rXfc*. .. . ^ c \ v k . . . .-s?cp!\y»p.k.. . o £ .. . - H ^ s ....Vj?*$. •.V > v ? r > j j ■
   ..Uv*...                              .... PS.                       ..\^ \v ....                        .. .a V ^ W N C ^ . .f h \ . . jd?\*Jy
  ^5.,. .tKv ... V^W.k... cXvovVN.d... ,U< vz.. \r>S.Yav>VVj..                                                                                                     Vs'?™.
   A r V s e . . . . P a ) \ < x . . c a .c a * * ^              .     .. u ^ y ^ . ^ s . . . .                                                    . h f * ^ . A & y S I

                              o v > .... ItLc..... t ^ . Y Y W . <                            S.r.. r r > > ^               ••rS£Yv\*V..P.GtrY*^.                                     i
   ^Wvj\()                     W y c                   V (fA \)s> c .O ... .W f& ft r .. Vte-c... . c k q u c ) ... VrJ.1                                                        ..
   A o < h ? r > .0       .... .W\cVr>... aA.<?i.vyvr..              <d... .VKcy... ,c?V?^o.ca^s.\\\ . Vv*,<D
                                                                                                            .
             \vr           V X f t S t '. V ' S .. &>y... c)c,A
                                                              .vr\c\ ... .VAVv^rV: —V^.\j.. cAio •.......
   . V ^ p . v j c y * . y ' . f . . <P v3                       ____ . a 3       • • rT V K ^ —             F - S ' .0 ! - & —             W ^ . v ^ - . .......................

       V'V^C-O. vjp ... wn .. .f/ftXvV.. .c& •■ •.VHc                                                              N)(3.v^:V\ .. .^V<AV'.0.. pv\0.
   . ,tK « ;........ \c e .p .{. . . . c \ \ ) . . . .£<py>A
   .C^TscD . .. .V>< Li’C y' ....X//C.C 0. V.'C y
                                                                                  STATEMENT OF WITNESS

                                     (CJ Act. 1967, s.9:                              MC Act, 1980. s.102:                                    MC Rules, 1981, r.70)



        STATEMENT OF

        DATE OF BIRTH

        OCCUPATION OF WITNESS

        ADDRESS AND TELEPHONE NUMBER

                                                                                                                                              t of m y k n o w l e d g e a n d b e li e f a n d I m a k e it
                                       .     Of               ■<              p a g es e a c h s . g n e d b y m e . is t r u e t o t h e oe st
        This s ta te m e n t. c o n sistin g of                               p
                                                                                                 b e lia ble t o p r o s e c u t . o n if I n a v e w i lf u l ly s t a t e d in it a n y t h i n g w h i c h I k n o w
        k n o w i n g t n a t . if it is t e n d e r e d in e v i d e n c e , I

        t o De r a is e o r d o n o t D e li e ve t o b e t r u e .


                                                                          a i                            ■6C\.
        D a t s b ttio
                                if            d a y of

                                                                           S i f j n e d .......................                        A                                                           ...... .
                                                                   S i g n a t u r a w i t n e s s e d Dy
                                                                                                                                                                                                   I c..»b
                                                                                                                                                         bein g unaD le t o re a d t n e s ta t e m e n t b elo w ,

                                                                                                                                                                                                                , re a d
                                                                                                    of
         I,
         i t t o h i m b e f o r e h e s i g n e d it.

                                                                                                    13
         D ated rna                                      of




                                Q>>                                               cd-                  ^ c                    a b o r t-                                   — l* 2 ± 1 L

                                         \ L                       PtsYlrfl                         c U I U b u r V . ----A L f — h J l L l :                                                   /S

                                               IA    fi _ . 0                                / \ /\ -I t Da.
                 r\La                             A ilr ed)                                  A   r it b jo 0\_^_ ^


                                   ODrv                  fcfjL                                                                         f
         \                 °\                 Ox                          fijl                         A »'                rp fo f                       MS                                              ----

                                                              ,/i                                                      i c jb .                                           huoosL



              JL>A         A                   c                                       ftA                 'i s              c S x ix j^                 3                               d { J )c ^ d L

                           |/ h * ' L \       j                    CYQ ^ *-                       2c 0 .. f>*— .
                                                                                                               l-                           U i k               z A b k ta J ' f J                    c \/k -

                                                                    C                           l                  k
              M tn & i                       ■=eg_
                                                                                                                         jV*/                                                      k tL * J Y > c ? & £ -
                  £A                              C                          R jL n +

              r^.C •                     /?vwJ^                                    A i / u J L jI d tL                              b - S L ------




                                                                                                                       S ig n a tu re w itn e sse d by
GEN/7         S ig n e d   . ..
                                              STATEMENT OF WITNESS                                                                                           ^

                  (C.J. Act, 1967, s.9; M.C.A., 1980,s.102; M.C. Rules, 1981, r.70)

                                                                          () . A/i                        •
        Continuation of statement of                                                                                                   ~

                         CAa j                    tlsL         /\b/                   ,                  d/AJ               ^                                ^

                 li^ /-trui                                               \A U )M              Q 3                                              £ 5t? 4

         k?       l'f<L          c^ c o v a S.           c\J r             g h o u lr             P                     ■       f c n V c f u P dh?

        Ovk?                 . Q j/r t y s t U r                  c^<A jh>                      c^e Q             \p                     ex. ig jc ^ L
          pr o tocP                     c(                                           a i : ___ ^ L _           }ris *l\L           Ll&     •

        \A£+o___ 0 £2.i:_(M l __ QCcto
         yj-t rr AO !r *Y\0 Y \/\ k_ Y h n ) v<-/L                                                                               I acvt* A
                                                             o (£aj>                           u -y jt
         h*              .           /I/-
        kJ/V'Aci                      1/S                                                                     £ W l KUM-_i/2 ___
          fa(k       cm                      t\A -            k flL              }

          (x-- ^

          h        i ) a^fA / A              r^ cP                     ^        __ k s n    p U P         /^l

        \^ C V >              l^ fU x ^ ^ C                    b                 <yp **                                 < j}        ] I ____ :______

         UjLe_            v o tu k z fi              <V>               th ^ >              c T D u o c fi           m           c X ro     v   V
        Jl ✓ u            m      \   (\aj                  Ay I                  w        ki     f>L                             £aa£         d ttu k u f

         ItP                                  fil//                     J t&L (TOl^>($                             ho C^Cp/t^h)

        uJisPJ?                   A 6 L-            In rAs^c                         g^i VtrctP J ^ L                                            ____
                         9             \? C tA ^ & > e                      u /C           La ^^ x l ^    v   L

                                            . ^TU                         cro 1*2(9___L*j>0 ^jL<P L?e c J & Q V_L
         Y v jo              b         l/U n o             Y k o L & tv x D                           c ^ J          °>

          ■d o L              J      ]fyu O & fo_            ( x tD i/'/I j                               ^ c / J /4 ^               c s v & L ts A -

              Al                 A -~         t                                                    j& L           y o o lo c e
                                            < y A ,h               b                 rn ^         ru ^ h Y              k tHAn &           s )c £ s ? _

                                                                                      jQ.        <0l^/        fo o t^               r o ^ lu P     //?,._

          a />               JLul            CtJ Q                 ($& . C JiPuo<Q & s f                             ($J?
                              uK r\ V             d x ? u r\                          /m             h\ y/ t /ir J L            I z P fs i'    l^ o t    .
        Signed . . ^ .                                   ....................        Signature witnesses by . . .                                  .............


GEN/8                                                                                                                                    ^ y^
                                                STATEMENT OF WITNESS                                                                                                     h

                  (C.J. Act, 1967, s.9; M.C.A., 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules, 1981, r.70)


        Continuation of statement of

                     - L r z J l\                  o & r n /s ii'           e d L o K t^                              tL          tk
         fj       ife-                                       .        UAl               u ^ l /- __ k >                        (& _            I j j J z _____

                                    cjl    lJk>                   b tr T K ^ C ,                     0           \S h -

           I                     CJT)                   ____ l&RUM _
         gW ~ri£y^                                                     ^rt? ^                                     A?                                     /:
                     l$ (/ A   _________                     s f<Cplv I                    ^          A        ,r n       •             C y j'i& k iA ^

          M Ca\ sTs t j 9 _i/U^vA                                   °y           UOC^                    >I)      c lx j^ CuJ J k \
                 U                        W    u ^/]              y O x j^ U iJ )                      0£C u^\z/                          ct          c r ii^ L
          O o m jy             C ^ £)                   Cs0 l t J ) r i , L                A i O i/c                  - ^fLe                   ^ r tQ Z u T -

        \sO(A^>               '\f\)rtsY )> sC                                      o lfo r                                        c* T p i*><@                   wm^

          wlTX-___ (* A ^ o i/^                                                    ’ /yj           d L \^ * n ^                              ' sn

                      o, l \ t 9 ^ h ^                       V                                                  (x/> ___ °2> o p i/L d i'W y

           oo    ^    l   ^                        ,1                                                tfc r tA             *o

          ch\><n^ ,...—                             Ihr              ^.OArj2               L S^v) rW i AO lt/± / £$&.
         flftos.                          i^a>                   rcXtei^c^                     /                      I                 gv//               ^               .

               xtq / 1 I-            ^        t/             <Q         n ia M w ^ fi                        A?.

                 A -           io fx rT U J              •        ^TLc             y p ru > ^ v /t                        U    l^

                               l& L       houcL                      c^ S l                              U<A              ^ ___/yp                 £££

           K A ^               e)         ML                                           g v j _M m                         .Ci^J— h ^
         (i L m k                    u y                \o U >        {& l        <>£ c*a <P                    C jJ p O is ^                    */ 1

           V tm u x
                  (P a x ^                v| tv ih * -                              (Q __ ^                    L o o jtfj)                 ( { L o ^ S y__

        aJ-       (Al               W j -^iujl                c^J/                                                                     bv\i( i£>e.
          poltA jC                  h n *IfA svy^                           ($ s>          jiV U M -tlr O                         j ? A T < ^ O S ____

         c L o i^                    h?            y j                  \I v m             m b                    lA -            p i k L                      b ? ._
         nW<- (A. prx^^L^. S> alsfO bnu^o ^uxnJl
                                 M O ti o * - ( v ) \.                                                                        &y
              Ytrnm.y                     V)\A               <o                                                               L        (A^                   unru_

        Signed . ^                                                  . . .    ’   Signature witnesses by . .                            . . . .....................................


GEN/8                                                                                                    ^
                                                                                                                                           V.
                                                      STATEMENT OF WITNESS

                          (C.J. Act, 1967, s.9; M.C.A., 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules, 1981, r.70)


         Continuation of statement of                                   ^ ‘ A acJ^o ^'V-
        df/jjJ               .                                              ^                            -ioek
                                                                                                       AUv               A?

                 [_$Q~~                                        _S t?             rJAalljcs!) k? -dau^s- t&
         frJX> \s/)D                        £vt     rO       irris^             c^\cP -d o ck A > ^       dfjetu/?.

              hod/i/> ........... .—*-*——y fa tik i /                     l&dnlAtfl {&L
          s / fs^KfP      £aj> / tL      \ Y f r y u a / ubo }4n
             VrijAMlh k, r^oi/[n^v\ kki I'Utjii /Jaa/^ *>0 ^3
            W/kI as>r / j           >0 kuc        .tyrtjffo LSC/l zl/Jud? *3
         l/J /'x /)   U00Ci/V\ v A / f              tin b o ctii^ A ? £*<£ J
           <0 fyo^lef           k'ntl) A a ^ PoI^jt> o S ±Cuji
            Up                  In / / ^ /      (Pap J (A*h ■ ^ i-udyioul
                      U                                (\ksvO           '\clw \t-\ / t u /
                /n    I $jjl.               (Ptr} Up           P&UA£ CiQAJb>*-L4/k6?
                 "hO kvc^c^ •
                             ^)r(^fstD Ubxc~ A r                 c o t /> &

        \J L          VriXJA j&X rTUA, A / W l U P                       A i > r / ii/i   .

          Cx \^ yrl(h J Cijir l$Q-                                  i <T

          w iU r t              l^»         1' rU\sks(0      Jpj c*a^
                    ru^hL- arm , u ^ U ,-iX^ V «s ' O / o / ^crUo^K.
            M*                             _A        \ r    *Lxloa . *sl l\ o /it- ^ /y j a / t
           Lfl/iw ,       L i H r\)0$^          0>.       ^     I//7/.7       ^ . X



        C^Ji7                    Ca ^ v?L v j(^(y &A                                                            tyfart   Ci/f foyl
                        r" ....... '
                        IW          h(y 1                      •

                                          ^ A                      0 P» O) ( 0 V               pt-oLr/un
                                                                                             tfc.

        [kro><                        W / ua?*(                     fl    iahtc not- c ^ H / ^ v /k r v ^ a l
                                                                                                          3
         lliL                    l- i> n f \s J - |, i ^ )     ^>vl   c A  £^nt>vrjP^ . Gy^&r-
                    (S /W ,                 «2uU»;£&             t&L c-SV^A o J k h \w L iDa/J&n't
         S ig n e t ,    $       £h                                ..   .         Signature witnesses b y . A                    t ■/■ •


GEN/8
                                         STATEMENT OF WITNESS

           (C.J. Act, 1967, s.9; M.C.A., 1980,s.102; M.C. Rules, 1981, r.70)

 „ .           .      ,
 Continuation of statement of
                                                      A.
*=>        S                  CoA                  Cssv (Q     L                                          __ b \sV

                     A 0 /• jS tlM                             I ™ An\ -                — ___ h c u a £ . —

r^ v j      mo        (try-          J t@o chfuJ^L                        J                    ^Cl LU>
                   A K               &-S~ 0 /vn                      lb                        chcK _    ^       a ^ c ^ A t f

Jkl L _        W L        C-S) M A O A              ) {jrt} O i / i                             l ^ C f O ^ y Q c ^ _______

   fivoi- b a M ?                C       covaS           ■         Polda            C o o > I ujUte__
                     WVouaf          J)               U>      ru t           t   ft.     D h o lv tA ju s fL            bcM ^ s

J k _          r \w       U          7       ().       ^      \d U s A lr 'J lts S /             r W L gj^>         L f \ 0

                                                      cj >7V^ \           f o d m - Qs r>oc^ fi£fi____
 ^ U w A f                (A l           b o d }^               t/    /»7^          ^»Jhiz              u A .0    *r\      ___




 Signed   . ^ . ' V jcW              i   '                            Signature witnesses by
                                                                                                                                                                 WG 412
                                                                                                                                                           (Amended 9.87)

                                                          West Midlands Police
                                                 STATEMENT OF WITNESS
22 29
                                     (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)
23 30
24 31
25      'Jame                                                      ^       fZ, i /SkyJ                                Q.H                             .
26
27      ^ge                           (yrs)                  Date of Birth . !                               .......................................
28
        Occupation
                                                                                    r->
22 29   Home or business address
23 30   and telephone number
24 31
25
26
27
28

        This statement, consisting of / ^ - c'^H>age(s) each* signed by me, is true to the best of my knowledge
22 29   and belief and I make it knowing that, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I
23 30
        have wilfully stated in it anything which I know to be false or do not believe to be true.
24 31
25
26
                                                   day of                    /-)          /u
27      Dated the
28

        Signed .                                         " "                             Signature wit

                                                                                         O ffic er's Narr


                                                                                         Rank

                                                                               . . A * * : . . . R e . ^ y . ..
          *~L                          a                 'TWi .... /iv?oT'?^V.^ ....                                            ....
                                           IrJsx-. .                       . . 7**    . ■ ■ 7T»*-. . . /r>.+r?-H . . . f t
                                                                                *V *=f                                                            3
                                        C - ^ 2-


                                                                iu-j /Z'e-.'Z                                                                      .9'!^        .    .




                                       S o.       .m               ip.Q 'j.'.'r... /fv.&v.
          y                ~          ,V/£               ./^*r4.... ............ *r. .                                                                                              «
                                            /3>o~-C t+r-                       u " T ^ .x >   4 r~ . . .   . S .O            . . . .

              *5?£                                                                        ^          ■$ * +      4 ^ ■ ■ ."T/.Od-* 77 . .
           X           .                   /?-*>59. . . & c ___ > * * * , . . "7 > .< ____T y . ^ ^ r - . . . . .vJ**/<*». . . .
              ^                            ■.          , / M^-. . . .              *? f                                                     — ■■■                        — *?• • ■
                                                                                                                                C>~!&'■                     T o
                                                                       AJ * ^->r-V (>             Kr . . .T-P.
                                                               U*-/^                 k ? /c > V .          . . . .              «r- ! .............. 9 ^       ■ ■

                                                               w       4           6 r< = c c .            N                . . . .

                                                                   )G i* -* c ^ r * a ___ ^ .S ..... ?#*$<<> ____ S '* * ---
              M ^ .-rr.                         ....                                                . . . . C V f . . . . '.T ^ . • .G r^*u.J& . ■ ■ ■

                <, o              UJ.S. . . . M*Z>.                    T7o                                      ....
                           ^oauiS’                \^ f£ - .......... ^                                                                                                          ■
                                                                              —+l£> ..... />/>£$»?«•_. . . ./ i^< . .                                      V             .^ ■


        Signed                                                                       Signature w itnessed by .

          Delete as applicable.
                                                                                                                                                                                   ”2                      WG 413
                                                                                                                                                                                                     (Amended 9.87)

                                                                      West Midlands Police
                                                          STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                            (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation of s ta te m e n t of                      . . .                                . .   .Td. 'P.*-hri                                                *.J..................................................
                                                                .                   ......... & Q P.*-! "77. . . . / : . 3. ft                                              . . \ r / H -^d..........
. io/£                L Z t z r r .. . . 7T.H*-.                                C a ^ ... . W .4-                                  id                    tT .             T r? .                    & .. . . .
      hj            /$ >jf     / ^M          ,)ry?                                           ^     ................................ > /y'.KL. , |........... .......................................................

.Srry%9~~r.'.rJc.-                               Q^rr                                          . . . ;T~M4-                           C^tPmr<*>...../j.-r^
.     IZ .                                                                                  W / W            ......... ..........sd.'+ rx& z*-*- ........... Q.'f'r.........
      ,£v> /V* o a-TT^r^                                        4 m                       77~.” * -. .......................                                ~ 3r._*M *> ......... <2
                      '. f.h - id.<r.                        t r4                , . . . ~7^Ji.&?-?4r. . . .                       lj-1 .'9 r $ . .......... *d.9.                  ..                                  S>
       (✓/ /.'7-y^........ v»^> <2,‘*                                  J . .V / r ...... -£. ^i^ d . .... #-r(                                                                .............
       $. T?£h iK > .i*'&                           oW                         S tT r^ -f.Z -T r............ C-£>/?~r! & * -A ....................                                                          77V>*£
       \yjJ                             ~P7^.                       d. ffl^T                       Q-.^P.                       . .*. . . ' T     ' / ’/ ^ r V ^               cy         .         ...........
       /iS &.kh». *J}?                                                 y?.C ................. }^?-=2....... &                                                                    .C■Q-pSS .....
. .   7 7 ~ M ^ .......... $ V / 3 s£ . . . . S>777^r-<£s£-775.......... A-S. . . . /-St ........... 7 > ?.......... $ .7 7 9 .? . ........
...                        «V77<*«-A......U S                  ) t4 fT.......................... 7 7 7 H 0 S 4 , .. \^ )M f^ d . . . . -ZZT .
       & rr9 ,:~T7                         /. r>.Lr-J. *Y ?-x?S .......... ~7T./J£-........... ,~/r V • ? < / . • $ i> . . . .^7 77 . . .
. . . ./^ . (? P.sctTT............ <?-.'.                                       . . . . J.         Ji£.     . . .   .W                      . . . . £?^. ■ . .               7 7 7 -^ :.......................
                   tx.^7". y                                         Vo/ .'W                        /f.K                ...9 ^7...... ^Vp.                                               #•. ./        H .^-^
       ,LV .-w                       777^.^? ........y^V.^.A
           £ > .~ < rr........ 7 7 7 -^ .................................................                                                                                         U / . ^ _____ .
. . . .7.                                    l ^ v f .-^ 5 . . . . . / ^ O . ........... XP./.^-'Z'. c . 7 7 . < i v i ' . . . . .                                                      . . . £■ ' . i 'f r y. . .
....             ^ ......... 7~S?i<b...........^ 9 .* ^ ' .Cr<............ J^HS.......................... . . . & $. . . .. d r . ...........
            C ^ .^ M &                       ~TX.ir»rr . , . . . Z Jr. .T                                       S>£                             ..........‘7 '° . . . .                          .............
       . 7 7         S .'•» r?.^ . . . . Q f r . . . . sT .’ft? -                                                        J. m .■€*->.S                             ........Jd^ -up..
         c f < p 5 . ». . . t<\/. £ - . . . . . f'n .‘*t704t.                                                       dx*-              .........u><                   ••••        ■ • • •~77~&€-
           r C    . , ' . ^ . ^ .......... - p . ^ ....................................                                         . ,y . .                         . & M < - .b ~ * - s ? ......................

                                                /<?.                 yS > ^ f2r^r,.‘^r<-.-. . .-J'T. . . r> d*yd. . . . .& . . . .&.                                                                   ..........
                                           .O             <y *£0.                   rt-p. T. >M-)^7-.,.<i-brT~. . . . .O f r - .                                          /    S+.& ..........
    7T-"                  %'77\ y.'f-r*. ...*... \ d . £ .... V/.                                                        .... J            T         :     fer+rTl                              .......
.... N o                         o d .'Z .                                                .............................                           £ ) ; + . ^ .... ~7~7. C.•*-.<£77 $. . . .
        .!V.o ^                                       ........... o.-.'t-...... c < .......... i      ...                                                                        W
        ./9s....... € .... ^K'-rfKr -*1°......... ~7?¥Sr-9.^ fr.H...... 7 7¥4-. . . .^ ^ 7 7 ^ ... d~T. . . .
        .T '.H .'d K , . . . . V^.i-........... ^r?M .^:77.. . . . Jrtet^S'Z.. . .                     ......... 7 7 V £ .. . /-./* ,$ * -
                       1/* f- -2T........./ f-iL/Z^u t >+........ 777/M. . . &. r4rT*~-. . . . 7-fc-7........... *9. ( &<J. '.'77..........
             S      £ ■£                   fQfJ ij............                                             ^ .4 -.                                                    ^              ..•^7^ d.^ .                  ■
             O      y~ -7~S       / e?<........................... ^ A * * . * . . . X . . . . . &                                               )          7 &7~.                              ..........
             ■ A d j ~ " ? . ..... ’77<2r>£                                                                ~7y?....... ; « ,* ................ ...&<&*.

            4    ... . \ \         . JA                                          . . .                Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                                                                                                          (z)                                     WG 413
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (Amended 9.87)

                                                                                                  West Midlands Police
                                                                               STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                                       (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s .102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation o f s ta te m e n t o f                                       . .                                                        W . 9 W r / ..........................................................

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 .   .



              b J M tr* .                           \rf                                      C r & T ...                                                         * * .......... ~7T&f-... C r * T ,< .....................
    ....dtr....                                       LA                                            ^        :’£~£                                       t<                  T~.*rJit                         ^               ^        ^      .....
              ~T~.*rl                                777y.+f y. *f.*: *r                                                        r/f              .... 7T'y< ...■£.                                    f'.-J.           ...!3T......
                                                                                                                                           y                                             siy/?...................
                                                 ..... C><.<\                                                                                    /Or1-*?.............                                                  Q<n/........
            7T 7t - t i C                                                 {*7 7 7 .......................................................                                                                           f 1. ^ 7 M ^-. .. ^ ? W . e’ S *




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            .
                                    \rf.                                                                               ) ? h -r Q * f* z ........... ............................. 7 7 ' w                    ^           v . . , . 7T H ^ * - / i- .

              V'T7!                                                                /7               7                ............................................                                       T ........... .................................

               W                                                       5fr*.                                TT/f'f*............. ^                       ^           77.     . . . . P < ^ .. . . . 7 > 4 . ..                                                 ■
               f ^ yh~o                                                                              ^r. .r                                                      .... Vr'/’
                                                                                                                                                                          .***....../>/'?. ..                                                                  .
....                                    b-T. . . . £ h ^ ~ ................... _ £ .7 - ? £ w .*& < -.                                                  ...................... CL-Q*j.-I"./ZZ'. i-.^ r                     'fir-.............................

            " 7 7 /.4                                                                                            <Q                             7 7 ^ 7rr                    £j-.rQ ‘Jr/.eP. *. . . .jQS. ..t-r/^. . . . .
            Is j                                     ................ ■ ' . * < . T r 9                                                        ............. ..........................7 2 7 ! . . . . ^              » - f ? w . . 777¥ ^ r -

           \s * t <£............................ ‘-.'P s'S . * . 7 7 . ................... .<**-*-. / « ? -................... 7 T"?3. .............. 7                                                               7            7            T .7 " . .
                      c:          s                                 <p ^                                                                           / ^       a   L   j   c   . tJ C r       ^         IZ^              .                      .'77 ...
.                           4 yS»
         . £ 2 , 4 ^ i r < $:                                        ty. f .                                 < ; < » - *-.« > */ / ? -                                   A»o y / < £ ............. * > . ’ C H r r . . .

        . . 7 ^       ......... 777/ f £ . .............£ < - & . 'f - . T . ........... O . ^ r . . . . , 7 7 * * .4                                                                    S y y + J & s . .■*-..                 3 r . ................

          &        j jq<J. . '7 7 . . . . $ :? ■.* -                                                f & H 't f                            ^ / . S - f o . *?-zO.-&t-T-.                                           . ~7 ~ *-h ^ . . i-rS                        .

                                      ~7~¥^. . . . ./^ ■C /. ...... Ck'&r.                                                                                       .... ./#>/>•(                           S.^Rf.'^yP&ZrS. . .
                                                 ...... / ^.....                                                                .... ........................^vr~r... yt~!.3 4 ....
.. ..<5 y* i^rf                                      /^*cv!-r ... .r-f'r... ., W . ,fh3l                                                                             S ,'^ a.                                                v^^p.-rvi.. .
. . . / ? » .Sf                                                                        ................ ^ X .                      . .     7       7     7           ....................... . -. . ^ c >-.               '9 x- / . ."P7 P £ . .

            ,^7r \ ^ r              ........... .‘ f^T ^ r ^ r ^ r / •£-. . . * . . —                                                                    .^5 . . . . . / *

                           .    .‘'rK .                         <!,.’<? r?'fV ......... ............................... **.!>.. . J ."?...................... ^ " . . . .^r-.................
                                                   W . > ^ . .... <=?.... ................. ihJ.&Aps/.cr.                                                                                                                 0 .>rf........

            A"?            ........                                   .../^>!<rf+T..... ............W . ^ y ...... C / 2 .                                                                                                                 .......
                                                 . . . ,'/r 5!< ? . A •7' f * 7 7 ......... 7 T - y . < ............ &                                                           .      44- . . . .                                                                .

..                                                                                     ^$fT~f+. -f . . L~J. i-KrJ. . . 7~ J R . . . .*r?-?>>'f-0. . . . . £ ^ .Q ^ V .........
          . '7 T . ? . V ? A < x > « 9. i                             'T F H 't- . . . . .                                                             . . . , ^ Z r ! . . . \ r ! . ^ . s / . ' ' 7 7 . . . . r S , * £ i+S'Cr

                                 .............................................................................   I                        t                                                                                                               ..


                                                           /-~^>/<Lu/./t^y3-&S. . . .                                                                   4'H..... 7T^/.^t........... &. >.
    .   . T 7» .£ r .... C'r-.V^.M ....                                                                                     ...y/^Z-»Y.... . . .                              .'TT'h &j . .........../ ? W * ? ....
    ...^X. .. .UV.irW                                                                               4>.                      trtr^ L ’P .                                        ,> & /^.s '.7r .     . . . . A ,M.<-.........
                               ./T&K. .-. .XsJ. H'Ul. . . . T .h>£._____________________                                                                                                                                                        ~3r....Vr/.^ ■

Signed ■ ■ • - p T ^ - > k V -                                                                                                           Signature witnessed by .
                                                                                                                                          (*0
                                                                                                                                                                  WG 413
                                                                                                                                                            (Amended 9.87)

                                                       West Midlands Police
                                             STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                    (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation of s ta te m e n t of
                                                        ...............                                                                                 ..■TTSf'g. .

    777P.                                  7 T # .* -.                                  ........~Jr. . . •\srfatoJ. . .                                          ........
    Sr\C. .A w S7. ___>*?____* .*?/____ .<?*/ •••                                                         ^                  .* ..3X7. .Vr/                 ......
                               C!                                                   ^>.~r                 £/        srt.j..               .**.*.... y. f n . .

                            XA-                      ?**»/.'*?'?■. .*. • • )rt. £-. .. . w <5=1 . . . .trJ'S& f*. f-'ft ... .•**....
    .l-/.#.           ... .•vT^A^.'^-rr..f ..                               ... ££**?................                                                      .,.....
       *    9     -        4        -    ~-r.               3^>.                              .. . / / < .... 4^?              ptc.€^.... ,'iw .//*=:.
                                                                                                                                       /a
       >/.4p...../V?/.6 *-7 :....                           ..../V. ...>?*....                   < 2A na                  Hvrrt^.'. ...r: ."'f•?".....
                     , .   . w Y '. 'W ........... .'V.Ct'T’W   t 1r~. . . . . Jr ............. ............................... . ."50? . . . .                    Z?. .
    M J.ffs. f.           3 X 7 .... P.ip.**‘. ’? r: .... $ r ^ < ..... '9r,. J£7H.»j.<'. .                                    . .e.'Fr. . . 77+*£.......
  . S . r ^ r r . . . . o / f r . . . . 7 T " * ........ <?. ^t>*. .,...                        . 3 R ................................ 2 T.. '7” .t*S r:.
   A t e v * : .... .... ^ 7 7                        iCT?.           .... V//.«fv^y>/.<r............ /f?5.J> /.r>“V ....
   ./^r.___ & & .*.*?:___ 2-.                                                  p. ••3 T . • .4r-?.-??r.                             'ttlr'rr. . S & f S t * .
   .c . **7 .     77 . '<->£.            .,. . .<3*:T....................................                         ■ # .... xrrJ.^ .t,r.'^. ■. .. .■J r . .........
           (SW                                     ,p^-c>..... LjJ       O.-'Z-kZ.... '‘‘‘l^ v/'1=^-j
.. ~77~H$-. ....                                        .... 77 # * -.. .. .         .. . . ."Tr?’.                                               ....777f£ ...
   .$ .T~A*fP.S. .-. .S t                    £ VfSf-                                        . .. . .<-?.*£               M.f*                 '.V.T!0. . . 7TM4-.
   $. X**r/.43                 ^J_ 3 '......................... ><7j>.v.'.                                          .... trhl"?. ....
   y>7 £ . . . .•A-?.*. . . T fr. IT. . . . <<y. ........................... ~7Ti*^<r:. . . . 7 ./- ? ) ^ . . . .^7.
   X.          ^          !$*A . . . 7J7. . . ./rtr**& . . . . .4^P.-S” ......... TT/"? . . . U.-?"<... . .<?.>^ ...........
                 sZ-.tcrtf?-.                               .... .123... .*7:^ /v:%-                            y.rr                               —      *?.<&=?vfT
   ^       //.                          S(____ZnM'&J. .-. ..3JT......G .+.b!                                                        .'77^a_-<---
    j^T. <ffr /n               <9.^:.... ^                          &             Q r f . . . . 71               .... 777~f^'.*-r                       J. P.V..
    !??,■£-. t -JCr              /rhz.f.SyZ'*-#                                 . .Ovs-77.....Otf~.                  . . . . 77~.*£. ..                      *
  TJT'H %St—4~r .... t-o/.                      ...... C                         *PtJ . •••                                                            "XT. .
    .£?. i. >Prl ;.T".           77T.‘& .> « .......- f «•. .../V<? TT/.Cr 4-.                                           o    U/.hb&rr.
    u^-         .... « 4i>........... -rv.^..... IZT ... .^/. ^                                           ....v T w ATT. .... 777?*-.% <■

    ~7y>              O -^ y r.             o    w     X        ... P & 1 * T f.... '.V.....                         ’7~.H^. .                            ........
                 a              L .i                   ..... ......./ ^ / s w : .................                                                   V^. t :           .. . Q f f . .,
    7 7 /^        ./^4 r/. ..___ QT.#&*r±..... S                                ■fm M             ......77?..........                         ■ •^ .n w * &'*:..
       U ,/f                                    ....                    .^.tp.:* .-jU                                   /-TT                           <<-. ••
                                            . ^ . 4 .... /4. . ..^.*T-/.C4^7.W............                                                      77
                      /        .... /^T-:....                           ....    J r . ' L J . ...                                       ...,0.*f?. . . 7 7 ■

       .C ^ rQ .W A2?.-. . . 327. . . . ^                ffc*.              / Q . H X - / ........ 7^7“! .......... 6 -. * ^ t: . . . . Ovi .77". . . .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WG 413
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   (Amended 9.87)

                                                                                West Midlands Police
                                                                 STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                                 (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)

„              .        ,                          ^ ,                 f                                                           f-hJ                                                   .
Continuation of statement of .......................7 T ......................... ............................... .......................................................

                                       X . . u-f ^                                        ... p. ia t t                            G f r . .. .*7TV.< .... ^ vw*-r>f                                                              ......
       $ &T7y?*'.*-&J.                             . ~r.>+£..... ' T T W ? - ^ . ^ ■ . r 7 .... ..........T'M'f...                                                                                                                              ...
     . .W .-?« ......../r*.. . . .rJ: ' S m                                                                      o.*f-.                                   / f *■-.<..........................................
          <£s&iP , ^jL-;             TTZty.’A 1*-. ....                                                                                                                       . •••. ^ r ••
       .T T 'f.              TjT.t& vr:............................. /tT V                                        . . . . . . . - i r T ................. -£>P. v - /............. ~77¥&r7 T ....................

                                                                       ....U-/'./?H1 ..../uP.V.<£.......... ... / 7 > f                                                                                    -A..........
                                             . ,                 \jU            .......... S . r r ^ j ! ^ . . . . . . . h - / r - T / f .                                                 M          . * . c r > . ...              ..............

                                                   . t w # '. v -£ .*.. . 3 T . . . . . V / . f M                                                    4 - r ^ r r - ! * ^ ............~77<r>
                                                                                                                                                                                          s.'?r/. . . . 7 " ? . .
       A ’f-p.-S. f     ’.'rrrtu ; - . . - ! . .            .77>^v'....                                                                        l~farV-.tr Ar*>                                  \ ^C ................ < • / ...........
                                       * -.*?.«. . . .”3 r . .                                                     yy^ .'i^ rr?i^P.............. ................................. X * ? * - ....................
        C ^ y^ .* .-h                                    /s-t. P ^ r l ............... 7 7 ? .............. ^TlJX........... & /Z'<'r->. . . .                                                                       ............................

 ...tP.is.C,                                                                      .4 .^TT-SA-                  ZTM^rr. . . . . .                           •■'•••                      — —
      £ 4 ^,                   X/^f \r r ..... r?r                                          /T~-frTvr^                         £                           i < V . ^ w r .... ^
               ............................................................................                                    —*                                                         -r-
      -yr*>............ 7 7 7 ............. . . . . . . A                                    r 4 ^ .............................................. 774*€. . . . / v- ? .^ 7 ? e / / . . . - ^ . . .

       W".         ........... v f     J£ ar'rf.                        fn. u-Cj-i-                               >.r/................ ^3       ..                                .<....              ■rX'.. . . . . &?x>rr' . .
      7 7 /f a ? :.............. ; . ™ .                                                                            ~7r& % *-,4,.............                                                                *&.. 1r-rm *±.
 . . . .O .ffh ...............O        .-^      .CrZhSi S.-4.-T?. 0                      4 " / . ..............   SOrt<3.............................. . 4 " .   ' .* - . ■ ? ...........................................................................


         q */           .   y r»?-.. . . .                                      ••r                       O.rifr-iC-                           77h £ .................... O r .^ r r , < . . .                                                   ...
             *-f£              " 7 7                         S              *iJi_................................................                                  ....             .•••.}
 . ..V S . & $ .                   v         < ? .................. C ? ^ / ^     ....................   ~ rr° .................... 4   ? / ’. ^      *   ^ - r r ...................      s. * s . #> - A W r * .                               • • •

        ~Ty>                             ............ L-.                         .......... <C^=>.w «s?^>..............^ 2 .^ -4 -.-... X T . .. f’.W vr. . .
        S 41 <c                    A'IX
                                     J h.                                       —.& . . . f^. -y^yi~f4^s. . . .
                                                                                >                                                                                                      . . . . \^. . ■ ■ ■ '                               ........
         Cr            ,J 0    .




 Signed                P:                                                                                             Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                                                                                                           WG 412
                                                                                                                                                                                                     (Amended 9.87)
                                                                           West Midlands Police
                                                              STATEMENT OF WITNESS
22 29
                                             (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)
23 30
24 31
25      Nam e . . . .                       . .^           C \ . O v / X ................................................................... Q C '? '! ...........................
20
27      Age          ...........            . (yrs)                             D a te of Birth                . . .Y '.           . . r-?          ...............................
28
        O ccupation

22 29   H om e or business address
23 30   and .olephone num ber
24 31
25
26
27
28

        This statem ent, consisting of       '        page(s) ea ch * signed by me, is true to the best of m y knowledge
22 29   and belief and I m ake it know ing th a t, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I
23 30
        have w ilfully sta ted in it anything w hich I k n o w to be false or do not believe to be true.
24 31
25
26
27                                      ^                          day o f          O                                                                              1 9 -8 ° t
        Dated the
28

        Signed             -_ii>                                                                                     Signature w


                                                                                                                     O ffic er's Na


                                                                                                                     Rank          . . .


             .   . . . Cr .'O.                                                    A. <P?         . . . .     V.

         a c s t e ...                                                                                                         v ^ . S . f ..
                                                                                                                                                                                                      .s - j    .

             V-KCa 'v C; . .                                                                                        cltXiOv''^?--i^SVsS

                       . . . AfccL;. . . . .\ A r U A / ^ V > c                                          y     ^      .       o                                y    ^                  s X .« -? .       r~ rr?
                                                                            ,£r                      l v \ ^ p e . d^ciC . . . .IfX                                                         ....     M
             . v v s - i i ^ ................ w        j   w j x        : . . .          , \ T Y \ .C c )N o -                                                                            .c . e ,

             ........... d                  ).v ^          ..... o^.                                 sp.>c^.                                                       ..     , - c . e ^ . ^ c.
             V > ,v o w y - ! % S = > e ^ r                                                      . .3 —                         .Q s ^ r . .

        i . ^          A X .-.U .O .                         O     :"^r. .                                          . . . <2 ..CWr%. . . A o ^ v ' r u                                                   ..
                                                              .            D
                                                                           t >OOTTTC/V^
                                                                                  T D . 'A » WQ-'C'C
                                                                                           (.X V V as~
                                                                                                     ar-                                                                              - _ > _______ J
         . W- C V O .... \U\ . . .                                                                                  . . . .C>9r.
                                                                                                                          ,o>?. . .                                     . . ^>.
                                                                                                                                                                            OxCvvPrC
         .                                                                                                                                                 % V v p ^ . .p ^ . p p X e ^ - .<.2_
                                                                                                                                                                                              .Q                           y.
                          v w c y ....             ‘              . . . ^>. cxs»*s. .... C i . u e J . .                                            * ‘                               ^    -          - —

         .o      v   . 'S p                 V ? ^             v      \ a                         K W         s -a   . . . I n ^ & A Q j r . .™ Z X c »X/ w                                  n   .

         (j" 7 .k A           ........         3           .......             C Io        j    ^    ---            .Gy^CjpOwV/rs. . . .
         .                                                               o k       ...... . O   ^.   .   .D c k ^ X                 .   .   .   .O r ^ .                                                       J .   • •


        <
        GslI .>rvo                                                     .73_Y>.. .-.l~>:u.•..xs....                                                                                                   .......
         .V o T c v ^                             ?0.                                     r~s.............<3s-'.                        ^       (N - ^ . xy . X » . \ 3 .v > 3 . \ j ,c

         ,-Vci                          ^ICV5.3. . . ,\>NNV>. . . .C'sSV.. .•^^k>v_CSo'v^^ov                                                                                                                         ..
         . < ? . A h s . q .J .c x O          Z J k a - . . .<~yz&5sSL..
                                   O oo cC v\ C^,V-4.       . c = \ C 3^ £ L . .. .. .. o£~-......,            ^ >.€Lcr\
                                                                                        O ^ T ~ ...................................                                                       V p .

        Signed                . . . .                                          7~fy-rr—
                                                                                      .. . .                      Signature witnessed by

        * Delete as applicable.
                                                                                         ^ 80R%
                                                                                              A   A




                  Hillsborough Family Support Group




Your Ref: YBF/GC/3341/89

28 July 1999


George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
CPS Central Casework
United House
Piccadilly
YorkYOl 1PQ

Dear Mr Croston

R v Duckenfield and Murray

Enclosed are copies of the depositions of Colin Moneypenny and Adrian Brazener dated 16th
July 1999.


Yours sincerely




Ann Adlington
Solicitor
                                                            RECEIVED
                                                        CASEWORK rDIRECTORATE
                                                                   \ ? D i: r T n D a t e ?


                                                              29 JUL 1999
                                                           YORK DIVISION




           Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151 23 6 1936 . E Mall info@hfsg.org
         1st Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6 R R
    And th is D eponent, the said                  c o l in m o n e y p e n n y


    upon his Oath saith as follows, that is to say:-



    Mv occupation is local government officer. My address is
    I                       I travelled to Hillsborough on the 15th April 1989
    to see the football match. I was with four friends. I had a ticket for
    the Leppings Lane terrace.           I had been to the ground on four or
    five occasions before.         I arrived in Sheffield about Ipm to avoid
    traffic. W e went to the ground and then to a public house for a
    drink. W e returned to the ground at about 2.50pm or 2.55pm. I am
    referred to plan DPPI07 (Div 13).I have been able to familiarise
    myself with the plan and remember going to the Leppings Lane
(
    end. Conditions were chaotic and completely disorganised,. There
    was no queuing system. There was a huge crowd of people milling
    about trying to get into the ground, and as far as I could see very
    few police or stewards outside. When I arrived, there was only one
    way to get into the ground and that was through the turnstiles. W e
    initially thought we would have to stand and wait and that it may
    take about half an hour but things rapidly changed. To the right
    hand side of the turnstiles we noticed movement. People were not
    going in through a turnstile but through a gate. I refer to the plan, it
    was gate C. There was no stampede, it was an easier way to get
    into the ground. W e went in, no one was checking the tickets.
    Because of the problems outside by the turnstiles, I had lost track
    of my friends.       Later I discovered that they went into the West
    Stand. I was on my own and it was a couple of years since I had
    been in that part of the ground, but I hoped to meet up later with
    my friends at the car. I was present at the ground at the 1988 semi
    final, but not at that part of the ground. I was in the press box the
    previous year and used a completely different entrance.                       I had an
The Examination of
                                                            continued

idea that the best place to go was Pen 7. I specifically did not want
to be behind the goal. Because of my age, I wanted to be where I
thought there would be more room and believed that there would
be more room in Pen 7 rather than behind the goal where the
younger ones usually went.      Because I had forgotten the layout
and in particular the radial fences at the side and because there
was not a single policeman or steward in the concourse area, nor
any other signs towards any other part of the terrace, I took the
only entrance available down the tunnel which is depicted on the
plan. Even as I started down the tunnel my plan was to turn left at
the bottom and head towards the north west corner. Matters were
then taken completely out of my own hands within a few yards of
entering the tunnel, which had a very steep gradient (see plan
divider 8). There were an enormous number of people heading
down the tunnel, and I was carried off my feet for maybe forty or
fifty feet, maybe more.   I then ended up near the front of Pen 3
near the barrier that I later believed had collapsed.   I came to a
stop when I had my toes faintly touching the ground.       This was
almost exactly kick off time.    The conditions around me were
terrifying and I immediately realised I was in a life or death
situation. With one of my toes on the ground I could feel a body.
The only thing I could do was to shout and scream and to wait for a
chance to get out.   People seemed to be disillusioned about the
lack of response from people on the other side of the fence,
primarily the police and some of the people including me, turned
our attentions to the supporters at the back of the terrace, to shout
at them to move back. Something must have happened because
after not being able to move a centimetre for ten to fifteen minutes,
a few of us were able to eventually move back towards the tunnel.
The Examination of
                                                            continued

Eventually I was able to get out through the tunnel going the way I
had come.     I have been shown the photograph (exhibit number
RHHI/61) which shows pens 3 and 4 I consider my position to have
been about ten to fifteen feet behind the perimeter fence in front of

the collapsed barrier.


CROSS EXAMINATION BY MR. CLEGG Q.C. ON BEHALF OF
DAVID DUCKENFIELD


Before 1989 the area behind the goal was a popular place to stand.
When perimeter fences were introduced they obstructed the fans’
view of the ground and I therefore agree that some supporters
would prefer to stand back to have a view over the perimeter
fence. That would include me and that is part of the reason why I
wanted to go to pen 7 and stand at the back.


On the day of the match, I had a spare ticket which I sold to a
supporter at about Ipm outside the Leppings Lane end.        When I
returned to the Leppings Lane end at about ten to three I do not
remember seeing any mounted police officers. I have been shown
DPPI07 again. My attention has been drawn to the metal fencing
and gates between the road and the turnstiles. When I first arrived
at ten to three, I think I joined the crowd and this was outside the
metal fencing and gate. I do not actually remember the metal
fencing and gates because of the crowd. I was not one of the first
to go through Gate C. but believe that I went through a minute or
two after it must have been opened. I was able to walk through the
gate quite freely. I am sure there were no policemen or stewards
in the concourse area. If there had been anyone in authority telling
The Examination of
                                                            continued

me not to go down the tunnel, I would not have gone down it.
There was no difficulty in me walking across the concourse and
going the first few feet down the tunnel. Then the sheer volume of
people and the gradient of the tunnel combined to take me off my
feet.   People entered the tunnel in an orderly fashion, they just
wanted to see the match. I was swept off my feet to a position not
far from the front of pen 3.


CROSS EXAMINATION BY MR. HARRISON Q.C. ON BEHALF
OF BERNARD MURRAY.


At the moment of entering the tunnel I believed it was feasible to
go down the tunnel, turn left and make my way to pen 7.


RE EXAMINATION BY MR. JONES


There were no radial fences at the Kop at Anfield. The terraces
were completely different.     There weren’t many first division
grounds which had radial fences of this kind.    I had forgotten that
there were radial fences in this part of the ground as I had not
been in this part of the ground for about three years.




                                                                        j
And this D eponent, the said                   a d r ia n   jo hn b r a zen er


upon his Oath saith as follows, that is to say:-



EXAMINATION IN CHIEF


I am Adrian John Brazener of the force headquarters Nottingham.           I was on
duty in uniform at the semi-final football match on 15th April 1989 with two
uniformed colleagues.     I was part of the overall police operation with South
Yorkshire police.    I attended a pre-match briefing during the course of the
morning attended by Nottingham and South Yorkshire officers. It took place in
the North Stand. There were hundreds of us present.             That was the only
briefing I attended and Mr Duckenfield was in charge. I recall that officers that
were policing at the Leppings Lane end were asked to collect a meal ticket
and that was for a hot meal at a quarter to three. It was during the course of
the briefing that this was said. I don’t recall who said this. To the best of my
recollection Mr Duckenfield was present throughout the briefing.          I do not
know the names of any of the other senior officers present at the briefing.


I was on duty outside the ground in the area of the Pennistone Road
turnstiles.   I had a radio and I could hear messages going to and from the
control room.    I do not recall being tuned to a particular channel.       I recall

shortly before kick-off time that there were problems at the Leppings Lane
end. I do not recall one way or the other whether there were any interruptions
or whether it was a steady stream of conversation. There was a build-up of
supporters at the Leppings Lane end and I recall hearing people asking for

the gates to be opened in a very concerned manner.             I cannot recall any
specific orders but, because of the radio transmissions I could hear, l decided
I would enter the ground with my colleagues.       It was the tone of the voice in
the messages that made me go into the ground and there was a specific
message requesting all available officers to go into the ground. I can’t recall
the time of the specific message other than to say that when I entered the
ground the players were still on the pitch.            I have been referred to
photographs in order to familiarise myself with the ground.            I remember
walking from the Spion Kop end towards the Leppings Lane end. Once I had
The Examination of
                                                                        continued

got to an area between the penalty area and the cinder track I realised that

there were people in pens 3 and 4 in distress.


C RO SS-EXAM INATION       BY     MR   CLEGG     QC   ON   BEHALF     OF   DAVID

DUCKENFIELD


I do not recall whether David Duckenfield read from a prepared script during
the briefing.   I have been referred to DPP DOC194(Div 17 at page 1148).

Serial 1 containing a number of police officers would be facing the Leppings
Lane terrace, amongst others, from the perimeter track. The document says

that this serial was to take its meal, staggered le f the match, in the gym. I am
referred to page 1157.    Serials 14 and 15 were to police the Leppings Lane
terrace and rear enclosure south and north, and, according to the document
serial 14 was to take its meal after kick-off in the gym, with serial 15 taking its
meal in the gym after half-time. I cannot say that it was to be serial 1 and not
14 or 15 which was to have its meal before kick-off. I thought it strange at the
time that any serial would have its meal before kick-off, but what I heard might

have been a reference to serial 1.


Dealing with the radio transmissions requesting the opening of the gates, I

cannot recall whether the request was to open the gate or the gates. I have
no recollection of any particular gate or gates at the Leppings Lane end being

identified by letter or number.




NO CRO SS EXAM INATION            BY MR HARRISON           QC ON     BEHALF OF

BERNARD M URRAY




NO RE-EXAM INATION BY MR JONES
C P Domes Esq
HM Coroner
The Medico-Legal Centre
Watery Street                                                            YBF/GC/3341/89
Sheffield S3 7ET
                                                                         your


                                                                         22 July 1999


Dear Mr Dorries

RE: Hillsborough Inquests

Thank you for your letter of 9 July 1999. I apologise for the delay in answering but I
was out of the office for most of the recent court hearing.

I'm grateful for your kind correction on the holding of papers in the police archive.

For your information, a search of that archive brought to light the statement of
Inspector White that was seen by Dr Popper in 1990. The statement did not appear on
the Holmes database but was discovered in a dedicated file of inquest papers. It was
dated 25.2.91 as Dr Popper correctly remembered.

Alun Jones QC, acting for the Hillsborough Family Support Group in the private
prosecution, was able to make great play at the committal hearing of the information
contained in the statement.

You indicated that you were having a check made of your own archive. If any further
statements of Inspector White are found, I would be grateful for notification of the
same.

Yours sincerely




George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
A M Hepworth Esq
Hillsborough Archivist
South Yorkshire Police
Complaints and Discipline
Dept
Windsor Road                                                                YBF/GC/3341/89
Sheffield S8 8UB
                                                                            D&C/AMH/LJO


                                                                            22 July 1999


Dear Mr Hepworth

RE: ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

Thank you for your letter and enclosure of 6 July 1999 which was faxed to me while I
was observing the recent proceedings in Leeds Magistrates' Court.

I am most grateful that you were able to find the missing statement of Inspector White
that had been referred to us by the coroner, Dr Popper. During the abuse of process
application by the defendants, much mention was made of the contents of this
statement as well as of the briefing notes of meetings between senior officers that
were taken shortly after the disaster.

 The art of disclosure in the present legal climate is a difficult one, but I feel that the
co-operation between police, CPS and the coroner has been in the interests of justice
in this particular case.

Yours sincerely




George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
Dr S L Popper


                                                                       YBF/GC/3341/89



                                                                       22 July 1999


Dear Dr Popper

RE: ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

As you may have heard the above defendants were committed to Leeds Crown Court
after a full oral committal and abuse of process hearing.

The fruits of our correspondence on the statement of Inspector White (dated 25.2.91)
are that this statement was discovered in the archive held by the police. The holder of
the archive knew nothing about it as it was not detailed on the police Holmes
database. It was eventually found during a manual search in a file dedicated to
inquest papers.

The private prosecutor made much of the contents of this statement during the abuse
of process hearing, and they obviously considered it to be extremely material to their
case. I enclose a copy for your records.

I am most grateful for the way in which you brought the matter to my attention. It is
of course unfortunate that the police did not discover the statement in 1997 when you
first wrote to the CPS. Their difficulty was that they mistakenly expected all the
statements to be entered on their database.

Please let me know if I can be of any further assistance.

Yours sincerely




George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
 Ian Dames, BA(Hous) Dip.Ed.
 Assistant Chief Constable
 South Yorkshire Police
 Police Headquarters
 Snig Hill
 Sheffield S3 8LY                                                       YBF/GC/3341/89
                                                                        ACC/ID/VE


                                                                        22 July 1999


 Dear Mr Daines

RE: ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

Thank you for your letter of 21 July 1999.

I have discussed your request as to the DPP's intentions with the Director of
Casework here in York, Mr C Enzor. We shall be consulting with our office in
London and I hope to return to you with substantive answers on the questions that you
have posed as soon as possible.

I have written today to Mr Hepworth, the Hillsborough Archivist, and thanked him for
his part in the finding of the missing statement of Inspector White. As you may know
the private prosecutor made much of the contents of this statement during the abuse o f
process application.

Yours sincerely




George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
H F S G                                    ^+ 0151-236-1936                22/07 '99 18:13 0 :0



  ^   ss0* %
      • . •



                                                                                          St/ppO^

                         Hillsborough Family Support Group




      TO;                Cj&OSV)1


      FAX NO:

      FROM:                        Ann Adlington

      DATE:

      FAX NO:                       0151 236 1936

      TELEPHONE NO: 0151 236 1919

      NO OF              ES TO FOLLOW:
                     i                 ,

      MESSAGE:                 &                  ^




      The information in this fax is confidential. Its contents are not to be disclosed to anyone
      other than the addressee except with the authority of the addressee. Unauthorised
      recipients are requested to maintain this confidentiality and immediately to advise the
      sender by telephone/fax of any error or misdirection in transmission.




                  Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151 236 1936 . E Mali lnfo@hfsg.org
                1st Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
H F S G               j                              ® +0151-236-1936                            22/07 '99 18:14 0 : 0 2 .


*

                 QD*                                 CHIE? CONSTABLE’S BRIEFING WITH
                 0. -A.*^,rnL                     tliGAGED ON* F .A . CU? SEMI-FINAL DUTIES

                                            9 . 0 0 am, Sunday 1 6 april 1 9 8 9




    Mr ? Wright C 3 E, Chief Constable
    v‘: , f ^ ^ L L S     M A , ceputy Chief Constable
    M. ,v    ackson, A s s i - a n t Chief Constable (Ooer*-‘c - )
    Detective Chi 6 *
    ^   i ^ujsr;n;^nd‘r,;s Puckenfield and Xesbit
                          ChS-'r“l n ' < * • » " '« < « . ^ - s h a i i ,       KC-:S ? , H u r ^ y , p * * . . ,   F. . tC i

                           E“ i ; Cre“ 'r ' K*P»or=h, 1 3 d Sumner

    ! « £ « « ; «S5E*; o S S Z ' J T S S S T '                                      **•« « * «*«•
    Cans tables tMiddup and Ryan
    Lindsey Mcrarisr.s (Press Office” )




    Chief Constabi?
                                             ^ . the b“?in,s! of ^e sti o n i n s decision,
                                                   graphics, I know chat e-r*-vt^ .                                  *
                              was
                               t
                                     done in the or--*-.
                                   _ .                 '  *2" w •
                                                                   «% < r<-
                                                                          • w % . .U    W- C w S *
                                                                                                        S.            * rfSS cone
                                                                                                    fl ^ * T * • ! /» a ,a r
                                             im'41
                                                 . -                    .                   ^ - 6 V,Iv;C? O ’
                                 a _ * : . 6 wi,.. c: very vsry Giffic"1t                   -- ^,__ , ^ .
                              rtrsnolosy or . « „ « which i t s « , s t T n H - e T                                    “ J V
                              for „ to „ t ir.                n i n d . j thou.h t ? h" * b « - “ I ™                            -•
                              do t-’* u                  •’         • .                       ie ossi- way we couxa
                              ao t.._s is to go tr.roufn the events as I und»"S 4 rrS.
                              *rtc to get tne individuals who can conrent* on" t-*"” '
                                  X understand the® to say so                        Do p ^ > £                              *VSntS
                              df«£ZT..,£.. uit.^ m                                    on ^ be concerned about
                                                                                                 « u h my
                              reaUyV^ii-'lv^        *       h£p?er,ed sa^ 3 0 but it's
                                - - art a-il.ty wo grasp the overall picture     r rh---v
                              I ve Sot a good idea of it now bpt there w i U be

                              vwu   w u , ^ 5Jer -=nd
                                o ^ *.c..vssi<j    i d he
                                                       ^ r ki c / tthe
                                                           knew     h r parazetars
                                                                        mind the d eof
                                                                                    c a Uwhat
                                                                                           of you
                             ■adt     Very j‘larrc>w w ’
                                                       hen tired and therefore don't t~y and
                               djusu your mind to what someone else is saying:      Stick r-i
                              « « you know. Stick Co whet you saw and £ £ T"S„ J “ f «

                             there a ~ s o m a V -                          ^      “ \ “ J« W l c of it because
                             as 1 2 . 0 0 r.oon and by 2 * * 0                                ** °P*n the 53tes


                             l o t ^ r L “ ril' r! X? thS grCUnd r “aiise<* th at there we-e «-
                             L it       fps an a        of areas to
                             Liverpool stand. That's at 2-30 Era. .
                                                                           y u n t ’? rn-
                             w - ■,   ■ *                                       « 0 0 c. ; u 1
                             Pfrore 2.30 pa-that anybody oees-^

Ch Supc
Duckanfield;                                                    ?“ •     The                        r«03 had tot into
                             t..e Spian M p snd ,s fa.- as I v a 3 « „ c.rn»d le ,aS ors « v
                                    c"-«y w*re in the ocher areas on eh* .*          P‘5Cty
                             i c was rem ark ab le a s f a - a s ■J ^ # g ^ e a h 7 :~ - ? f r f ■■ ^ ~ c s *ari         a?1
H F S G                                        ® +0151-236-1936                      22/07 '99 18:14 0 : 0 3




                                                                                                      *

                                 stand was almost empty and also the Lepoings Lana
                                 particularly on the terracing..                   stands


               Constable
                                 t S - e ? y0nS            ^   ®xplan*ti0n es t 0 '-hy they weren't


     supc .'larsnall
                                aesause tr.ey vers c r i m i n g cucsids off-licences,


     C‘- " f                    Is this personal serc-otior;?


     Supc MarshaJj
                             No it's not perception sir 2 ’v- a c t u a r y se<tri         ... .nm
                             ««dn      fi--, --*.*•       -           * —-«/ ” s -l * - , V/2 flSY»
                                        7ua 4BVta. ins Gateway supermarket <r. Ivin,* w -.,
                             *ere ^ i n ^ f o u r p a - , and beetles c f wine t h r o ^ ' a
                                  - ‘ u"e G=c-- There were hoards of                  0-
                             grass outside Halfords near Halifax Road' dri~>« ‘
                             nubt.a?r “ 5       We’s 2 0 0 » « * * « « outside the" ■? '**”
                             puollc house crinking.  Every off-licsnc* tV*-           «-
                             was doing a roaring trade                     ” 1a ” ’   o-en


    Ir.sp Sykes
                            n - - - I ^?-r L a n - s u : 1' . l n t o n * « p « c c t v , .   At 2 . 3 0 pa
                                            w ,v*     -              j,,iS r^c.d   zo v « v *''la-,                 „
                            ““            •h« r «•»«»*               -•»*-'>««

    Supt Marshall
                                                                      «   l-» P» U p p l r . , . U.-W • ,„ f « r
                                 r. c v , l: w " " ' !1? u “ 4           « ' • tolnkiM« i „ ■
                            .        c ‘ 3s8 l
                                             '-’e r3<^     there was a d e ‘»y   t'-= -
                            oecause of e f c . r « ; that service buses ^
                              -cm vr.8 roac zowr. into the Leppir.ss Lane terrace.       '*

   Chief Cons cable:
                                                                     Cf Pec?-      f?°“ Liverpool in the
                                --        -I      v..- 6 -o u r.c.    tfa^e w$ g o t ^        e v id e n c e tbar
                            t t K f t i S ? a £ ^ in T r.f i 5           « a ? K » ,$ 8 & >'S“
                                          fa n , « r r i» « l a t the jround b . l n i M. U t . . a i:


   Ch Sup: Nesb:
                           No sir, I car. tell you thac as fa^ a? :4p)a.
                           Halifax Scad and Langs*-.- R©*-» thl- *sir,                 *      an“
                           sterile of fcotbal’ t r a ^ c          ~~ t t *      w"3 y .wer* esxpl.wly
                           5 in           _      -         •“ ’ - 1* was a.r.asini «*” «)«'« v,*-
                           at'i L~'C7 ??n * C r a v s U *d * 1 1 the way f r 3 3 Che
                           all tne w*y through to Halifax Road.                           y C3n^ 3 -


   chief Coos table;
                           nr        iS r‘5 *vr * ”ce whit» « v i p . b f the delay in t-»n s^
                           of t„e tar„3 . Tile fans arrivisd at the e~aund
                           g r l y enough to"*g 'in"the ‘ ground but i n s t e a d went ~ *
                           d rin k in g.   THIS WAS AGREED.                    ■ • -n •• .




                    s
HF S G                                          ® +0151-236-1936                22/07 '99 18:14 0 : 0 4




  Ins? Sykes:                There were fans there who said there had been delay                          T
                    i        no idea whether they case by car, coach, cr train/


  Chief Constable:           Can we Jus- check on that aspect on .the network of points
                             ans, covers to make sure whether or not there is any da1av
                             anywhere. It's simply to g»t ...                         "


  «r.sp   r.sr.:-jEviss;    Sir, , the soeciai -
                                               w**
                                               1-- — **-"■/
                                                          „v. <- ,■•-/,*== cue a- i*r:j£ £*d that
                                                                  •<
                             was m at about ±.-r- p." and that ws.s the cniy tr=i^ -■-■
                             which is contributory as well
                                                                T          ,

  Cr.ief Constable:         What about the buses?


  ir.sp   “s.rtc-Dc.vijss: No real problems as far              *5




  Ch Sunt Nesbitf:          No sir, you could travel - at S.30 era I drove frora
                            Penistone Road
                            Penistone Road cast
                                           cast the
                                                the (round
                                                    gr     to Kaiifa” R o l a n d there
                            was no traffic whatsoever,


  Chief Constible:          Airi        ./A ^ ^    0 " 3 U5 S as a U F- - V_3  - .- ”1- r 0 ~
                            W £ 5 d« lay I ^ v:55 i-.^■ 1r ' CUE,! ~A— ••»«f“
                                                                            l•J1* 1 " vasr*
                            and "hers V o . c r* V & *      ho  —j?<5              £ ■i-aA cc
                                                                                                '£ frustretio:
                            of peocie C O i Ti l ---S ts the         ii. The.• s =* r r *s  s to be strairht




                            ;
                            N o ;v •             a ‘ 2.30 p a w e ' d got p r o b l e m s i a .that..area,
                            l«e                  road closed, w e 'd rot the sheer mass of * ''




 Su?= M c K a y :          in e x c e s s of 3 . 0 0 0   and fror, what   I could   see

                    >
 Chi ef Constable;         At     2 . 3 0 pm?     '



 Sup: McKay;               y es aa(J incrsa3i’n5)           C a a x Cake y ou ba<;J^           ^

                           m e n t i o n i n g the h i s t o r y a n d this of c o u r s e is a reoe'at of
                    I      la s t y e a r 3 se=u-final.              I was at that g a t e Lappings Lane
                           la** year, the :ans were c a r c a i n l y not t h e r e in those
                                         f - - ha5 P * rSic^ a ? . ElK;* las=                th. increase
                           cam e a. 2 .p, p a w n e n a - tne d r u n k e n l o u t s a o p ear ed ar.d
                           w a n t e d e n t r a n c e then.                            ’



 C.„ei Consiaoie:          3u: w e ’d got problems before 2.53 ja.
HF S G                                                       ^+0151-236-1936                                22/07 '99 18:15 0 :05


                                                                          -   4   -



              Mc.\ay:                       We had,         t h e y w e r * -a r r i v i n g       ...



             " '* “ “       —   ■           “'Q "   ' -■ - s *3-Tur. on ar.eas ena cnaE'3 v/hac I'sa £^v:-.-.e
                                            CS,      rr.« focus o f this e n quir y w i l l be o n th« periocTti:
                                            ff.-f. s e e    f r o r a a ’° OU£ 2 . 3 0 pn to about 3 . 1 0 pm.  After
                        j                          i t ’s jus~ a q u e s ” ion of h o w we d e a l t w i t h it e.<'tiT-
                                            tsat    .




                                            .       .                                                             -s.-ion cet e-iorstsd
                                            •       £ •}0 p m a n a n e v e r improved.



    Chief Cons-abl*: .                      fi,eat resources were deployed in that area at that-time
                                                                                               ;    ^S»EeJ'tne'freso u r « s’*                    we'va
                                    ^allocated there deployed in that                                      a re a .    THIS V/AS ACnZED.


    Oir Wright then scans r=o3 for Ir.sp Purdy - who was no; ?r—                                                              b-             —
    ci - 5   wording elsivhere',




   S.-?c Marshal1
                '
                                        Yes he w a s because by 2.U =                                -here was an 5r.O •T'rr^<*iz            r.    a: t
                                        of fans pushing ...


                 Consratl*                                    cs:        -■e 5 5 ;     C13 2 . t *      p.-n. -as an;
                                                                                                                                    anything         ::
                                                              the ? ^ r 1 * c                       — -30/£»"*p



    '■       ’          7*              I;:: -
                                             >a3 tr‘a                           wnan the rented officers and foe:
                                                        r* “« «                       mounding up fu s                co ga5 thaQ i;.;o
                                        the                        "3 W8?5 '°USy                               shepherd fans towards



                                                aii to that,            a.z 2.3-0 pu there w
                                                                                           was a h u g e presence thar
                                                  S<\* crx .c*~* « = a r « c - s i d e the leppings Lan*
                                        vj...,._l«j sue tnat nu=o«r tSr. u«;« there should hav
                                        £-"a into tne ground by 3,00 rm.


   Chi ef Constable:                And         s h o u l d n ’t have been any problem.                          AGREED -          NONE.
                        !           -

                                                        '** t®-*"** m® whs." Cri»                      o* criif*« . ,          k   **,. ■*
                                        —               . w .s r s na.^'”
                                                                      > . z s ,'Al***5
                                                                                     *          V ^ ^ vn^ c>r£:?,
                                                                                                lArr^y     ~      •••,••*■              many ----
                                            *                                           *      W fW      A a e re ^ a n y v « rr« t^ 1 & S S & ifc        j   *
                                        ptacs?            AGREED - XO'iE.                                                       ■ W W O T t "
HF S G                                        ® +0151-236-1936                   22/07 '99 18:15 0 :06
     t




  Ins? Sykes;            V i r t u a l l y impos s i b l e ,    the people w h o we re    a r r iving had    •"
                             b e e n d r i n k i n g e nd the   sheer mass o f n u m b e r s c? people wit:
                             d r i n k and ...



  C hief Constable:      And      if w e ' d s t a r t e d rcakir.g arrests we w o u l d have



                             T e l l a* abcur -he r t c i o . Thers was          ss~e    fault/cro'tler.
                             w i t h the radio at that tir,*.



  Sup* Murray:           At      that    ti.~e r e ports vere c o ring in into           the control rocn




  Chief Constable:       Jftrs y o u in contr o l ?



  S u p 5 Murray:   '    $£'s sir, chat there were radio p r o b l e m s that cessages were
                          b r e a k i n g uo a nd they weren't r e c e i v i n g control.     We have a
                          c i v ili an cqSsnunicatior.s o f fi ter on star.d-by and before we
                          c o u l d c o n t a c - h i m ne a ctually carr.e r o u n d to the cor-." I
                          roo m and s a i d 'the radios are b r e a k i n g up I've cane rs st=
                          what I car. do'.             He did replace the p a c k set.



  Cn.e. Consi.ao_5:      Can ar.yocay say v/netr.er that caused ar.yrhing other sha:
                                            "P±d. it in ar.y way c o n t r i b u t e      to the events
                        0?w a x e n ;o-i-icwec:



  5 ““ “ '--’Sna.l.j      Yes, I tn„n,% it d^o,        ■- was trying to pass a r.essage about
                          the g = ’ a and I c o u l d no: ge; thr ough on the radio ar.d I
                                                                                                       os-
                             talk, abouc -he prsble.i. of the gate.               I would s = v          tine
                                                                                                      r.at
                             was a little bit later chan 2.30 pr. b e c a u s e               the jr5'cls~s
                             s u r r o u n d i n g the gate were srcut 2.^3 pm.



         Constable:       Y o u see nJv;, you've got to ce v e r y              c a r e f u l here because *■«
                 !        are t a l k i n g about the gate and the               gates. Y o u are t S K i n e
                        • iSput.'' h o w ' m a n y gates ?



  Sup- Marshall:         t     was    c a lki ng a b c u r   the   gate a:   the side    of   the   Lessings
                          Lane       turnstile.



  (Mr Hayes cl arifies a n d point3 o n            the p l a n to the gate s p o k e n of).


  C h i e f Constable    T h a t 's      ,' C . T h e r e ' s a n o t h e r gate, gate '5'. That
                         f e atu re it seens to me, I'm anxious to gee this partisula
                         asp ect...      Y o u wer e talking about r e l i e v i n g the press in
                         f r o n z o f :ne t hin g a n d the press was c a u s e d by everybody
                         “*v - -s »o *,e. -n «.,e & rsunu v i t h i n a s n o r t p e riod of ti:z*
    HF S G                                           ^+0151-236-1936                         22/07 '99 18:15 0 :07




                                  W h e n rhe m e s s a g e was p assed that y ou w a n t e d the gats
                                  o p e n e d it w a s n ' t r e c e i v e d in the first instance. Is -hat
                                  right?       I've m a d e a statement ...



     Su?c Marshall: ‘             T h t t is r i r h t .    E v e n t u a l l y I was able   ...

                     I
                     ;                                                 ,

     Chie f Constable:            Wha t   z irr.e ?.oi;r, what         ti ”« are we    cs._k.ing aoout?



     Supt Marshall:               Probably about           2 .^5 .


|    Chief C o n s t a b U :       A b o u t 2 .4 ? pm whsr. you first cscided,               in co njun c t i o n with
                                   Mr Purdy as well. '!



     Supt Marshall:               The s i t u a t i o n becar.e untenable o u t s i d e a n d Mr Purdy              was
                                  e x t r e m i s at th£t stage and was beg-ging for roe to £3
                                   s o m e t h i n g to r e l ie ve the problem.



      Cnief C o n s t a b l e :   W h s n he was t a l k i n g       about t.ie sais w h i c h gate       was he
                                   talkin ; abou t?



      Supc -Marshall:”            H e '$ talking      about      die gats at        the side,      gate ' C .



      Supt McKay:           '      W c u l d it h e l p if I in dicate d the .., at this point becau;
                                   che race 'C ' was n e v e r undar any a - ^ ’surs at chat pair.:;,
                                   it was not a ccint of entry and it was ju st ignored.



      Chief Constable:            _ Pfeople were n o t t r y i n g to 52 d o w n the           r o a d they ws’
                                                                                                              re- ?
                    }               C ryi ng to g et t h r o u g h che turnsciles.              T H I S WAS AGREE'.'

                                    Can anybody describe               the -azure cf the e v e n t s outside
                                    these turns t i l e s ?



      Ch Supt                     . C a n I gi ve y o u a view aa I saw it frora the control rocs
      Duckenfield:           (     sir?        Tisnes are difficult: but at soma s t a g s we did have
                                    this rad io d i f f i c u l t y and I've got it i n m y rr.ind that -he
                             I
                             .     s i t u s * i o n c o u l d n ' t be ass essed and d e v e l o p e d because cf a
                                    man in the c o n t r o l roo m c h a n g i n g r adi os a n d there was a
                             5     delay.          Mr M a r s h a l l was assin* for h e l p a n d the gate to be
                                    o p e n e d a n d for o ne o r two reason s he d i d n ' t get it, either,
                             I       f i r s t l y b e c a u s e we d idn't receive the m e s s a g e from the                 >
                             '      radio o r s e c o n d l y I k n o w at cne sta ge t h a t I wa3 delaying .
                                     t he s i t u a t i o n b e c a u s e o f a s s e s s i n g w h a t the consequences :
                             j     w o u l d be w h e n che gates opened.                   T h e s i t u a t i o n wa3 this
                             ;     a b o u t 2 . ^ 3 a n d I ’ll came b a c k to the g a t e as I saw it.                    At
                                     2.^5 there w a s a c r i s i s and a d e c i s i o n h a d to be nade
                                    w h e t h e r o r not to support Mr M a r s h a l l a n d for ae to make
                             !     :;-.a: d e c i s i o n to support Mr Marsh all.                    O n the outside
                                     t;;ere ve rs C,-.':*.' 3 .             fans.       As I saw the situation in
HF S G                                   ® +0151-236-1936                    22/07 '99 18:16 0 :08


                                                 - 7 -



                          the g r o u n d there wsrs spaces at e i t h e r e n d of Leppir.rs *"
                          L a n e . S e n i n d trial west stand there is & conco urse area
                          that w i l l e a s i l y a c c o m m o d a t e if I've got       , right the
                          c r o v a ou^^i>cie. ■ Tne insxde wa s fuij*.           Q u i t e a largs area.
                          So cn that basis, then the o t h e r c o n s i d e r a t i o n was right
                 I        vs del ay the k i c k o f f but sadly before Z c o u l d consider
                          d e c a y i n g tr,= kic.-» cfi the players ran out onto the pitch
                          w n i c n sust be I prssuite 2 .JO and that d e c i s i o n was taken
                  (       a w a y . Mr M a r s h a l l then ca~e acrcss o r s o m e b o d y did &ad
                          the i-5 = ;£ii ca,ne in to the c o ntr ol r o o m 'if you don't open
                          this gate soon someone is going to get k i l l e d outside
                          h e r e 1 . A nd I cou ld see. the d e v e l o p i n g situation.


  Chief Constable         A n d you d o n ' t k n o w who said that?


   Ch Supt                —      n t ,<noT>» wno s a i d that ( i_ v.isw* tnat s o m e c o d y seid or
   DucksnfieId: :         the radio in a v e r y d i s t r e s s e d state, qu ite properly it
                          wa s n ' t p a n i c it w&s a case of fa?’ G o d ' 3 sake'h elp us he:
                          because there are people who are going to be in<ur«^ an.-
                          killed.



  Sac: Marshallj             said that.


  Ch 5 apt                Now I thins the people in the c o nt rol r o o m will say wha;
  OuckenfieLd: ;          we heard.  Mr M u r r a y t urned to me and said 'Mr Duckenfi-
                  I                     gites o p e n e d w h at's y c u r d e c i s i o n ’ , ■


  Chief Constable;        Let's    p ursue   that.     We d i d n ’ t k n o w w h i c h gate    ...


  Ch Supt                 We ll no but the thing is I can taka it a little bit
  Duckenfield:            further, ^ N o w we get a s i t u at ion whe re I can sea on the '
                          video and I th ink it's the gate on the e n t r a n c e frcz the
                          SOU1..1 sta^vd.  X ’d o n 11 k n o w tne nusioer o f it but T went to
                          it las- r.ight.


  (Mr Hay eg iderit: 'led and p o i n t e d to the     gate on the plan).


  Ch Supt
                          Right, now, t h e r e ’s a video seq uence t h a - ' s runni ng that
  Duckenfield:            show-3 that at that point fans were c l i m b i n g o v e r a wall,
                          fans were not o n l y c l i m b i n g e v e r a w a l l they were
                          h a r a s s i n g a hors e a n d a h o r s e m a n w a s h a v i n g extreme
                          difficulty.             Now I k n o w that I've h e a r d s o m eone say it
                  i       l i f t e d but c e r t a i n l y that m a n wa s in g r e a t difficulty,
                          chat h o r s e m a n , a n d the s i t u a t i o n there was
                          cl f ^ , S § t e ‘h a d ' b u r s t ’o p e n . N o w - 1 - d o n Vt k n o w
                         Tllhat"w                               '


  Chi-;' Constable;       i * a n j b o d y o p e n e d it it should be o b v i c y g          the video.
HFSG                                                 ¥ +0151-236-1936                           2 2 /0 7 * 9 9 18:16 0 : 0 9

                                                                                                                                 » «

                                                               -    3

               i
   Ch
   'r Supt  ..                  Well
                                'veil it  * Should, if y o u l o o k for that corner where t
   Duc.eniieia:                 w a t c h i n g it, that gate open ed...                   *                                 ’

                        i
   Chief Constable:              It'; c o u l d n ' t    ce o pen ed f r o m outsids              c o u l d it?     A CREID MO
                        i
                                 -hs,t       rats     ccsnei       t-d   *• *   */»s           a -= --         »•
                                                     v.'- r '■             V               *«*-.* ans t.nsn i ’m r.i;
                        :       *•-* s-.s            o j . j.            li was o p e n e d again.   Sue the
                                s i t u a t i o n we; then that f r o a r e c o l l e c t i o n tha*- c-aoi» v-'~
                                ct.T.8 in f r o * there didn't a p p e a r or, the video t o \ *                   .
                                c a u s i n g s e j c r problems a n d also net o n i v c o u ^ I W 9Lr ^
                                v i m s I c o u l d wat ch the t e r r a c i n g a n d loosing at th»~”
                                t e r r a c i n g ^ t h e r e w«, still p l e n t y of space around the sices
                                a n d c o . ^ c s r . n s th« v i q s 3 and the t e r r a c i n g the s U u a f o n
                                d i d n ' t look difficult at that stage,                                     '‘0ft



   Chief Con.stapis;            C o u p l e d w i t h the large a r e a inside                    che turnstiles.



   (Mr Hayes i d e n t i f i e d and p o i n t e d on th? rlar., the large area wh<ch «*' —
   between t..e rear of the west stan d and the turns tile* leadi ng to L e p ^ s

                        j


              Delaney\         sir,         iz w „      r>c p r o sier because I             w e n t through        tn—
                        j

  v»—   t .    Cvr.sts.5 »s:       ich ; = c e ?


  In 5 3 Dela^^v-                                                               .
             ‘   ‘             C a "-        C          was open anc            i went t h r o u g h     the gs-e
                        i
  Cr.ie: Constable :           What         ci,-e was     Chat?
                        I
                        i
  l's? Delaney:,               - d on't          kr.gw vhat, time         it was.



  C.-.ie: Constable:           rrs-mat ch,           after icatch?


  Ins? Delaney:
                               Pra -matci u         My s e r i a l was d i r e c t e d to assist w*t\ {"«
                               s i t u a t i o n at I . '40 b .t..     we-- rou--i          m .s u  * »
                                                  ,         ■...... *    e,‘“ r 3 «“ a to the back cf the
                               h ” &
                               Q£<« v   *
                                                      ” CaUSe ? e ° ? ^          w * r* c a u s i n g d i s ord er a- the



  Cluei       Constable:       Are y o u saying...



  Ins? Delaney:                T h e public.,.



              C<.no.,   .».    ,;^a ba>s c f          the t urnstiles             inside     t:
                                                                                                  e ground.
F S G                                      H +0151-236-1936             22/07 '99 18:16 £3 :10




Ins? Delaney:            ‘ Inside that area, inside that area at the bask of the



Chief Constable:          Ir.sics chat ares marked TA C ' .      THIS WAS AGRZrD,
                     f


;r.=p Delaney: ;          Ar.c they -./ere saying that if so~sthing was r.ot dcr.e
                           ssseoris was gains to get killed out there.    I heard a
                           message cc.Tie ever tne radio '_cpsn the gates a; the sa:l% of
                           Lappings Lane terracing'. T h V gats was opened and I went
                           through that gate...


Chief Constable:          Arty'Idea who authorised that?         Thai: was at twenty-to?


Insp Delaney:             t £2r4'c y.now who authorised is.   No that was after sir
                           because I was there Tor a few minutes before...! went
                           t.-rougn that rate ar.c, saw Mr Purdy and I was then er.rage;
                           in pciling people o*f tne turnstiles because they were
                     .    getting crushed. I via* pulling them out to gee. through
                           the gate.


Cnief Constabll;          Can I just get that clear in r.y mind. When you were
                          cirsctei in response to Mr Marshall's plea for he Is in
                          area you took your serial...


ins? Delaney:             v0 f I -,/snt r V£S cr> lT1y 0v/n at that ci~e. My serial was
                          the back of the first gate which was gate 'A'.


i Mr .-.ayes then pointed to gate          'A' on the plan)


•       Qdl&r.-Sy;        My serial was there,     in response to that message I went
                          t...cugT; rcur.c to.gate v» to see wns.- the problem; was an:
                          the gates were opened.     I went round the back.


\.'ir ..ayes then identified which gats Mr Delaney was referring to (*»--
-he plan)        -                                             *


Ins? Delaney:             Invent through that gate and the gates were than opened,
                     i    ' C gate was opened and I went through the gate,


Chie: Constable;         W h a n you say    it was   opened^B^pexiedSt.t'?.-...



j.ns? Delaney:           r d o n ’t know who opened it. the gate was opened,        well...
HF S G                                               ® +0151-236-1936                                  22/07 '99 18:16 0 :11



                                                            -    10 -



  Ins? Delaney:                  Well    Shire bus: have                  s-^ards                   on that g a t . .



  Suat McKav:                    Iliac gate was opene d a n u m b e r of tines,                                      j. was    cy tna:
                                 jjra     for S 3 513 £3 3li~U"6 3 -            *



  Chief Csr.r.iiii:              IS it a gate           that's r . c r - i l y u s e a ior p eople to go *r. a.
                                 out?


                                 tv ,-'. r f s'"t and in fact it had tc ce o p e n e d to t i i aw
  Suae McKay:
                                 i n j u r e d parser.® in. '"here vers several injured •'*srswri*
                                 we Z-* th-augl'i in a p e r i o d of 20 .-ainutes a n d It was opening
                                 and <T s  h u tting
                                         shut   ting ail the tirce ‘e uc it was n e v e r under the
                     J           pressure          t h a ^ ...      .^



   "r- Catcher:                   My s e rial w as b e t w e e n / o n the turns t i l e s on* _
                                  I car. suaaort there were scr.a v e r y d i s t r e s s e d pecp.e
                                  c o m i n g throu gh there.        Y o u c o uld see the crush through tne
                                  v " " ‘stiles and I told the a a n to Jus- cut his foot or. the ^
                                  p e d a l ”ar.d"iet the people t h r o u g h to try to relieve scrce of
                                  pec.
                                   cne c r u s h i n g , forger tickets at that stage, I was dragging
                                  a eoale o v e r the tap c? the wheel a n d e v e n t u a l l y went cu.
                                  there.      it was horrific out              there



   Chief Constable;               Weil      fine,      whs: w e ' d gat is a re*! p r o b l e m outsit* the
                                  u*■«*w r*5 z — 1*5 ir. i-5p?i*5S            ,»C         & 2C av vtt- v .
                                                                             va talk about what happened
                                  op e n i n g of ths               r*i
                                                           V.'5-S 0?5
                                                                                    - . . «.   a.    . ' " i n   a            fi   I"’-   -   ^
                                  w h e n th
                                  t h i n g s , cr.e is Mr Sues
                                                  'cs 2 3 TohZ.5 “ -       chat the filsi just shows people
                                                                                                                  , «. 4 0% --
                                                                           . r* - '- Ti l r h a r s ~ » a a n d 2
                                                                          i—
                                  Vw   —  * .f-3 V-i-w—
                                            — r             ».*— £«■■*
                                   vhs g r o u n d anc.           a>r
                                  -**A "k••’^ c c -in g whccuzr.
                                  t “ “ y - ’’
                                  c s nln g vr.rsujh


    ;..nr                          There was a movement _of people who had been queuing in tr.e
                                   turnstiles, who ducted under the barrier, it's a sort o: a
                                   it's a ? barrier, they ducted under there and went into
                                   zhat gate.    It was ay itnarsssien and I ’ve agonised over^
                      j             I'-\s that there weren't chat “any people went through who
                                   did that*    It was-.' t an enornvous crush on the gate. ^


                                      W h e n we    talk about o p e n i n g    the g a t e , it's a concertina
    Chief Constable;
                                      gats.


     Su-'C Marshal' :                 It's a c o n c e r t i n a ga-.e but it w a s o n l y o p e n e d for about
                                      four foot o f its eight o r nine foot...



     Chief C o n s t a b l e :        Wow   was’ there a police h orse t h e r e as w e l l ?                                      ASRSS3 - YS3
HF S G                                      ® +0151-236-1936                    22/07 '99 18:17 0 : 1 2




                              Yes sir.       Ce-' X give y o u my p e r c e p t i o n from the c o n t r o l ' "
                              rccr. pcint of v i e v , We v/ers gett ing raessages in the
                              ccr.troi room to open the gates and c onside ring the
                              consequer.tss cf that and before w e ' d xade the derision to
                              o p e n the gate the gate was o p e n e d or burs- or whatever and
                              a n u m b e r of people jot into the ground, whoever was round
                              there.       That gate was not the one that was getting ail the
                              pressure, the pre~s„i& was n e a r the turnstiles.                Gate
                              was cos.” .. I ‘r. talking about gate ’C .



   Chief Constable:           T h at's right           butwhen y o u sai d the pressure was on the
                              t u r n s t i l e s .cr. the gate '=' basically, that cne , it .takas
                     j        ser.se . . .



   Supt .Murray:              We couldn 't see the gates sir o n the video ail you could
                              see was the mass but c e r t a i n l y the gate lC' there v/e* not
                              the tremendous amount o f press ure c n it.              5 s gate 'C'   u
                              o p e n e d sir, new L thought and I was only Looking at it on
                              the video because you can't see it visually, I thought a
                     1        gate r.s.d burst oisr.. It nisy well bs sorr.eone hsd cte.tsd iz
                              but that vs.s before the d e c i s i o n fro-, the control rct.Ti
                              cam* to open the g * c e - A m o u n t e d o f f i c e r recovered that
                              si t u a t i o n and out his ho rse outside a n d the gate then
                              closed.



    ’
    li'sf C o n s z s.b   *   So             ^^          sr*z3ri.n«£ i.ntw risrs *s £              j*’T,a'
                                                                                                         ,,','cn.
                              whe re   the gate .a*s?s^iLhte3 'rche g a t a / o p e n e d ’,and” t&ere -was, ric
                                       :    '' ‘                                          '    ‘ ":        iVand

                              awo'nrelesa' chain'1of action. ‘
                              a>.-
                                 -.
                     i


   Sutt Murray;               Y o u ’ve gtt desands.from, the ground commandsr want:!
                               gate open, the d e c i s i o n is being c o n s i d e r e d the
                               co n s e q u e n c e s from the c o n t r o l r o o m and the gate is then
                               o p e n e d or burst...'. It's then r e c o v e r e d by counted officers
                               and shut and the requests are s t i l l c o m i n g in from the
                               g r o u n d to ’open the gate o p e n the g a t e ’and getting             r.ore
                     ;         d e m a n d i n g and so the d e c i s i o n was taken to open the gate
                               again.          T h a t ti~e fro- say r e c o l l e c t i o n was a large r.urnbe:
                     !        o f people case in but a g a i n a m o u n t e d o f f i c e r was acting
                               as a sort of a wedge a n d a l l o w i n g ...



   Chief Constable:           A n d we w i l l ir. fact see the nu m b e r o f people who caze in
                               on the v i d e o ,



   Supt Murray;               A f t e r that I think the n u m b e r s s w e l l e d a nd I just can't
                     i        recall e x a c t l y 'what >..ur.bers same in.



    Ins? Sykes: j              Tne pre ssure on a.i those gates was tremendous and at
                               s tag es ill the gate 5 ’A ’ , '3 ' and ' C were ail opened.
                               No:        gat*          th» gates wgre opened,
HFSG                        f                  W   +0151 - Z 5 6 - 1936          22/07 '99 18:17 0 :13


•
•   <


           .


        St:p: MarshaiJ:          % ' a s k e d for the gate to the n ort h s t a n d to be opened.



                                                         ac-'ui gtc.«



        i-P" Marshall,:          that's the cr.e. yes. (ACTUALLY ML4.NT CATE ’A ’) There was &
                                 crus.i. ..- assise. *cr tn&t cr.s to ce o p e n e d a" a later jta<re
                                 b e c a u s e that rate wzs being a t t a c h e d ’
                                                                                   e y? that would have
                                 h a z r,c effect or. the terrace bs-.au.-e -.here is r.c access
                                 b e - w e e n . .,



        ihis? Cor.sca'tjile;     sjo'£h'e p o s i t i o n n o w is that becaus e c f the pressure on a l 3
                                  tfie"'-arees at some time a l l three gates we r e o p e n e d .  THIS
                            .    WAS A G a ‘£S.       New car. ws put any ti.ts cr. the conjunction
                            '    of, is the- a wall? v’p o i n t i n g to the plan)



        Cr. Suet Nesbit          It's a fer.ee, a steel         fence.



        Chief Consts/ile:        S o anyone going t h r o u g h there is cf no c o n cern because
                                 they are going to the n o r t n stand.

                                 N o w anyone who c omes t h r ough hep* (point ing to the plan)
                                 car. get through there as well.            A 0 ",iED. Can v/e put a
                                 c o n j u n c t i o n or. these ga:es at ail?



        ir.sp t o n ite :        Yes sir.          My a t t e n t i o n was d r a w n to che people coming
                                 th r o u g h gats ' C I was in the a r e a -e.rs.ed one to 1 6 . I
                                 co-id see t h ro ugh the gap in the wall the gate had
                                 obviously.opened.                I h a dn't heard an o r d e r for it to be    •
                                 o p e n e d but b e a r i n g in rr.ir.d the noise that is
                                 und ers t a n d a b l e .    I fought ray w a y out to see what was
                                 h a p p e n i n g because o b v i o u s l y there was a tremendous press
                                 of people out there and I f e ared pe ople were going to be
                                 c r u s h e d agai nst .tur-T'-iles a. to 5. »r.d X went outside
                                 there...



        Chief Consca&le:        ■ K o w did you get outsi de       there'



                                  _ v a n e out of gate fC ' , it was open.                  I went out there and
                                  we s t a r t e d p h y s i c a l l y p u l l i n g people out o f the crowd to
                                  re l e a s e Shat p r e s s a n d it s e eme d about a minute but it was
                                  p r o b a b l y four or five, s u d d e n l y the pres3 Just seemed to
                                  ease I r e a l i s e d gate 'B' then h a d b e e n opened.


        unief Constable:          Was che e n d product of ail that           that ail    this pressure
                                  that w a s here v e n t through?



                                  f e s . the whol e   pre ssure w a 4 released.       Sut can I say one
HF S G                                  © +0151-236-1936                   22/07 '99 18:17 0 :14




                       that if they burs- t h r o u g h or went in a deluge through
                       gate 'S' ’The n o r m a l place for t h e m to go into the north
                       steps cc the west sta nd wh ich there w o u l d be enough
                       sc s wa ris on there to prevent them, che nor-*I way they
                       w o u l d gi t h r o u g h w o u l d be to go r o u n d the corner to -he
                       e l e v a t e d sec cion w h i c h is or. the n o r t h e n d cf the tsrrE.es
                       the e l e v a t e d cr.e, they w o u l d really have to turn to cose
                       t h r o u g h 'ha. sate c...u che." go through.



   Chief Cor.sta'ol*   Are you ir. * p o s i t i o n   to giv* us a tirte for ti­  elee3e c:
                       the pressu re?    Is the        tine you took ycur priso ner out




   l.-.sp White:       t       back fro m the p r i s o n e r and n o t i c e d the t i m e when I
                       wa* in the p o l i c e r o o m was 2 .- 5 . I ease straight back
                       because you c ould h e a r there was e x c i t i n g things on the
                       radio hue c o u l d n ' t y.ake out what they were end I'd be back
                       aabout 2 - 5 0 wh en I r e a l i s e d that someone h a d opened gate
                        ' C anc y o u r 1re p r o b a b l y talking a n o t h e r two/chres minutes
                       before gate '3 ' happens.



   Chief Constable:    N ow all chat was pre-stick off,          A G R E E D Y E S . And so igfis
                       i^fions*.In'opening the gates took place a n d the- pressure
                       if&STrelieved
                       "u<\ . i.     b e f o r e the m a t c h started.



   .— r   «                   3   "C"   5"7»C T-“   "?U*,    - -   V ia"   “   SCIt l c   Z    w"£"
                       h a p p e n ? i in, & ».ir:u~3 th* rslsass cf that pressure.            I:
                       like a b o iler b u r s t i n g and th-y went t h r o u g h the gatss but
                       the surge of p e o p l e from the road o u t s i d e w o u l d take
                       several minute s to put ail those people through that gate
                       and whilst chat was goi ng or. there -..-as ?3S ^ ^ ^ I r 5 a n ^ u p ’'
                   |   iirside the g r o u n d a n d that a d d e d urgeif^yj^'-'ttii?'r l d v ^ t "
                       people inside the gate and I'm c o n v i n c e d that the cheer
                       from ths g roun d w h e t h e r the players were cut o r whether
                       the tnatsh h a d s t a r t e d was che c a t a l y s t that gave them that
                       e:\tra sour to get into the g r o u n d t h r o u g h the gate.



   Cnief Constable:     Again, I'm a s k i n g v i r t u a l l y the impossible.     The situaticr.
                        is that we have got ticket holde rs a n d n on -ticke t holders.
                   i    If the people' w h o w e r e there were ticket holders and got
                        inside the g r o u n d they were i n t e n d e d to. B S ® 8 ® # ^ * S ® . : a n y
                       ijjsrteptiori of. the n u m b e r o f p e o p l e who:^were^3eett~«s-;jnonv *.
                       ^Tcic'et"holders o u t s i d e L e p p ings L an e? .



   Supt Marshall:      M u s t have been at* least 3 0 0 / 2 5 0       p r o b a b l y more.

                   ■
                   i

   Chief Constable:    Sue r eally w e ' r * t a l king about 3 ,0 0 0 A , 0 0 0 of whoa - if
                       y o u ' v e got a ticket y o u ' r e not in the queue are you?
HF S G                                    ^    +0151-236-1936                  22/07 '99 18:18 0 :15




   Ins? Sykes:              Thsrs're milling around the area where the queues ars.                                '
                                    4- J
                                       . ~             w.      - .....s—a acrOSS t-T.erg tO
                   i        -iliJH ch* t          cr. the actual turns tils 5 .


  C" iefCo'.«- = ;le :      5* A$'rs rutting a nu~her cr, it which is only * -«- -?-r-v-*
                             it '3 only scnethir.s w e ’re trying to quantify, '   *"
                            .**cv CTv&r.y -Set-- cz        j1,CvC< vr.o .
                                                                        “£vs re*  =
                            ftr-ats a rta_ q u e s t i o n cut it's going to be a -.ajor




   Ir.sp .-.snc-js.v3.*s:    I -.vas cr. duty ir. that ar=* and I think there ars things
                             which need to be said that are crucial to th<
                            vVould say there were




                            listen, ch.ey dcrvc ssem                                    they're no:
                            ncrr.al in the: rssoect.            I think that we cr-.us- .
                                                                                        ta'
                                                                                          a s the'
                            Fci.-.t that drir.k pl*y»i a bis           ss.?z




  Chief Consrabls:                         ?- £ v‘ei a. tig cart that wil l emerge.                 W h e n the
                            to_i;* s.zzlz?.s *.vsr= csr.” * 1 ;; a.-, issue like this the las:
                            tr.ir.5 •.-.•* war.t t« ce seen to be doir.g is t r ying to bl=~e
                            «c-.«sr.e else ar.d I chink 1 «= other people find thic'eiift,
                            * —             i..T^ T s,-,..» *e-fi ^.y. - v e r y o c c y ‘s s aying i- and it's
                                                                                                usee,.


  .r,so r.ar.d-u'avies :    i 5,03 re ci ace         a; s                   now but if y o u police a
                            co r o n a t i o n witr. ^.0 0 , 0 0 0 people a polios horse would go in
                            art they w o u l d zove for hir. and r e s p o n d to the r e c c e s ; .
                            i*‘" =,r              ''«ren <. ^ s c o n c i n g to any r e q u e s t s cr
                            d i r e c t i o n s they were Just intent on g e t t i n g through'those
                                                as q u i c k as they could.



                            i\.,en *. put t r.e o o rton of polite h orse s a cro ss          -hers co
                            relievs the o r s s s u r e ...


  Chief Constable:          »"&t   ti.tie did you c o r d o n M r Sykes?


  Ir.50 Sykes:              Acrt
                            •-.cross turnstiles one to 16 (shows area cr. plan) and they
                            were even aivir.g under Stor-achs of police horses.


  <-hie: const a K L        H o w “.any people w h e n y o u put the c or don a c r o s s what aor:
                            o f r.unoers       in L e p oin gs Lane itself.
HF S G                                ® +0151-236-1936                 22/07 '99 18:18 0 :16



                                                    -




  (Ac this point someone said possibly 1,000, 5^0 at lea.sc)



    is: syKes:           More, prabebly mare, because v<e closed it of? to traffic
                         to reduce tiie aass of people.  It was virtually like when
                         -he ground empties, ycu'd get a r.sss of people there, At
                         least 7,000/8,000.


                         Cess it helo to estimate how ss.ny r.cn-cicket holders were
                         outside Leypings Lens when vs lock a- the actual r u b e r s
                         who have rone t h r e s h the computerised system which
                         indicated something in ^''-s region of 12,000/12,5-30 people,



   Chief Cor,stable:     So about 1,500...


   Ch Supt Nescit;       Precisely, so we're talking in terns I would suggest if
                         there's 3,000 peoyli.1
                                              ,cut sics and there's still 1,500
                         people causing in we are looking possibly...


   Cnee: uonstaDie:      -Mind you, how many of those would be for the north scand.
                         We're talking about 1^,000 fcr the west stand, we don't
                         know how many in "hat zrou? will ca for the north, ssand da
                         we.

            :;«sh£. =:   /-.gam, - think they car. tell ycu hew m a n y people have g:r.e
                                                 d bus also there is a d u a l access...
                         into the n o r t h star,1



    rhief Constable:      I think 1.-I'hat we n e e d to - this is t m a t h e m a t i c a l thing we
                          n e e d c: lack at but the real s i t u a t i o n is you have got
                          people I ;giti-.ately trying t: gain e n t r y in grave danger
                          cf their * 4va « .t ^ inj ury anc. a ctio n was ta^cen to r e —ease
                          that and eltjirly mZ 's obvious there was need that there
                          was need far action, and all we're trying to assess new is
                          the o:he r forces ch,at that allowed into play.


                          1 can give you a figure for the north stand - 9,500 and
   uo




     h Supt
     uckenfield           Mr Seal's print-out frees Sheffield..,


    Chief Constable       So there’s another 1,300 there who could have been trying
                          to get in there. Give r.e a little more so that I can,..



                          ■Ift"Ju£V3r wtt«ther anybody was aerIoualy in.jUr«d?


    Ch Insp Creaser:      The situation outside the section of the Leppings Lane
                          terraces standing area, the inspector there spoke to ase
                          and I tcld hir. to withdraw his officers who were stationed
                          two    a turnstile to search people cosing through. Those
HF S G                                        S +0151-236-1936                  22/07 '99 18:18 0 : 1 7

                                                    _   1,


                               o f f ic ers were at s e r i c u s risk cf injury.   S h ortl y after
                               they v/ers w i t h d r a w n there vers six. seven pec?.* passes
                               bo d i l y c v » : g r ound who hadn't fainted but who had nearly
                               f e i n t e d if -rise gives s:r.« idea. :f wh-t the situation v/as
                               like.        I diin' - see anyone ha'-'ir.r e-bultnc* treatment but
                               there v e r - a. couple cf 13/i^s bein g p a s s e d over the heads
                               w h o were s-cfferlnr from c r u e h - t y p e . . .



                               “z see.t,s t- r.e r.cw cr.s.t wr.s.c ~ust nave, i; ytu'u gst
                               an d you have & ticket cnee you're in all y c u ’rs looking
                               for Is y o u r place to go.               If you haven' t go; a ticket
                               you're i o oki n g for t c iscs to nice,              y-- a n ycocy see
                               a n y t h i n g that h a p p e n e d t h roug h the tunnel?



  Supt Greenwood:              I went r ound the inside c f the grour.c and the tiaescals j.
                               c a n put c.-. it is that 1 went to the area c f the U ? ? i n g =
                      !        Lar.e t a m c e s , w a l k e d r o u n d on the p e r i ~ e t e r crack and
                               w h e n 1 set to the Spier. K op it wa s n e a r l y kic.<-off tisie
                               ar.d I wen; to the players' tunnel.                   So the time span it
                               took tr.s to do that I can n o w relate to what the situaticr.
                               v;t5 in Lathings Lana i c r r a c i n j . it was a c arnival
                               a c mos pners .        In fact cnere were people, tnere was no
                               proble.Ti w i t h chat c r o w d at 'that ti~e , there were people
                               wh o were pushing a little bit in chs n orma l w a y cf things
                                and they were h a v i n g a g a ”.e witr. a ligncweign' ces.cn ca_ ^
                               w h i c h was heir.* f l i p p e d b e t w e e n supporters.       Ti.T.escale
                               wis* ^
                                - ®         — r y j w i t h every t h i n g , no prco-s.^5. wa-.-;ec rour.c
                                into the n o r t h s t a n d to the S pion Kop w e 'd h a d a proble m
                                there, c o u ld n't stop -ecause it ■■•e.5 n e a r l y k i c k-o ff ti-ne,
                                w a l k e d r ound to the p l a y e r s tunnel a n d shortl y after that
                                the p l ayers cane out.



   Chief C o n s t * V l ’ :    So now w h e n y;u got h a c k to che west         sta nd the at.-osphere
                                was still as you d e s c r i b e d it.



   Supt C - r e e n w c M ?     Well, yes. that's p r i o r to che kick-off.                    '.Chen I we nt to
                      :         C h e pl ay ers tunnel we h a d this p r o b l e m it was the strategy
                                 that was a r r a n g e d a n d we kne w there was going to be this
                                 p r o b l e m s w i t h the p r e s s and Brian C l o u g h in terss of his
                                 seat and the a r r a n g e m e n t was that he w o u l d co-.e cut after
                                  the referee and line sr.*.-. t h a t '3 after the players h a d gor.a
                                 o n t o the field a n d i n d e e d after the trainers what have
                                 you.         Ke car.e out Jiftsr the m a t c h h a d kicxed- off. in fact
                                 we had to clear the ?rs S3 p h o t o g r a p h e r s there.             I turned
                                  to one of them a n d s a i d 'what are you w a i t i n g far' ar.d he
                                  sa i d ’y o u k n o w d a m n w e l l what I ' a w a i t i n g for, we're all
                                  w a i t i n g for 5rian Clough* but by that tine the gaae had
                                  k i c k e d - o f f . we h a d to cl ear them off, C l o u g h cook his seat
                                  just b e h i n d the d u g - o u t and I w « n c bac k into the entrance
                      '         o f the tunnel, l ooked to ay left a n d at that stage I saw
                                  p e opl e clir.bing o v e r the fence in that c e n t r a l pen.             I
                      i         irr-tsdiately then wen t rcur.d :: tr.e s c e n e at chat sca^e.
                                                       i: was -I.’.'.;ult to c l e a r l y relate ir. tsrzs of
HF S G                                      ® +0151-236-1936                         22/07 '99 18:19 0 : 1 8



                  i

                           tt- sscale but my distinct i n p r e s s i s n is that the tunnel-"*:                       ‘
                           the ba ck o f the te rre: ir-g was no; full in o t her words or.e
                           v.'i 5 r.ct sugge s t i n g . ..



   Chief Constable;        Tha t   tile t u n n e l was     j e s s e d full o f people,



   Sjp; Greenweed:         Ex -ct l y .     The terracing was full but no; at the tunnel a;
                                   baol-: tc suggest         chat there ve rs          people...



   C'ni.-f Consw&bLttt                          2 5 3 --“
                                              prss


   Suot Greenweed:



   Chief   Constable:      I :tn't      unders tand, I've l ocke d a; how that pressure car.
                           b u i l d up to so niar.y deaths,
                   i

   Sup; Grssr.wccd:        £eer. it         sefore, if I car. co«“-er.t on that first -f X ray.
                            Ir. fact if I can comment on the L i v e r p o o l supporters, I
                            tr.ir*?: this has got to be v e r y r e l e v a n t end the problems
                            a.-.i the way i?.y serials arid inspec tors are beins talked cr.
                            ir. t a rz-.s of the Liverpool sup porters.              In I 9 v C / 3 ' „ we had s.
                   f       simila r proble~,                 That wes the “A cup m a t c h with Wolves
                            -v- Sours.           Spurs had the Lepoinis Lar.e end ar.d so its Spur?
                            s u p p o r t e r s a p p e a r s i cr. the opicr. Kcz for w h a tev er reason
                            they were t r a n s f e r r e d to the Leppir.gs Lane end ar.d as you
                            kr.tw we have the FI c o m u n i t y c o n s t a b l e s who sit or* the
                            frcr.t of those pens ar.d it was n e c e s s a r y c n that day fcr
                   |       us to ope n a gate.



   Chief Constable1
                  ,        How -any tisies durins the eoirrsa of a                            season...


   Supt Greenwcfed;        It's     the o n l y   ti.-e I've knew-           it.



    h Supt                 N?o , in 19 79      sir-       It's h a p p e n e d b e f o r e    in chat area.
    ucy.en fie ic;'



   Sgt Ccddard:             We have do ne         that before         sir w i t h L i v e r p o o l ar.d Man I' a nd
                             they are about the only two te&as.                         Not necessarily FA cup
                               ZZ‘7*l9Li,
                             Tii



   C h i e f Constable*.    A n d the r e a s o n we've o p e n e d the s a t e              is for the self 3are
                             prcbien?                         (


    S*t Goddard;            No.    w'r.en w e ' r e   talking about         t r a n s f e r r i n g people acrcss.
    HF S G                                             ^ + 0151-236-1936              22/07 '99 18:19 0 : 1 9


*

                                                          -   la -



                                  * 5 5 0 / 3 : i* i.-.tsrestir.s, it c e r t a i n l y is from rr.y jtir.c
    Sure Greenweed:
                                          be -a uss " a t i t a l l y it             o « s ~a ** ^ c h e r
                          y as;;ri&?                 tn 1 9 8 0 / 3 1 . C e r t a i n l y in 1 9 2 0 / 8 : « * its*
                              -■- - ■;&<z eacarsr.t chat                                screaking o u t ,
                          w i r * “ - r t i s « V tjiir.s': ....          ir.r, there were                    wi:
                          v e^ c-'-s e » - l v , thev ceer.ed the gates ar.i cr* tnat zzzzsic.*
                          : - \ r ^ . c " o " t!t t W o «               but it ■«* eteir. pressure frts
                           t h e " b a c k end I~want to make that point q u i t e clear.y -.-.it



                      l    ins&ec Lu^ 0                                                       . . .
                           $ u o e o r : e : s fro m ay experience of t h e m ir e v e r y w a y is
                           icing w e l l then there really isn't m u c h prco.em.                aviu .-
                           t m nrs a-* against thaa they turn, they are nasty, ar.c
                           t h e v ~ h a v e a n d this was experie nced d u r i n g the miners^
                                     2            V he?9 there was trouble o u t side the Leapir.gs lar.e
                           1-1= "a La--" R c v » r elmcst went ever o n that particu lar
                           o c c a s i o n ," a n a tnet was when 5=".* people I think were being
                                                    q r» that dav fram tr.e S p i o n Ko p again ar.c -••=/
                            b * * Sm - ♦ « » > • » -    w,>          w                                         _ , •
                           were net L i v e rpco . s u p p o r t . s    -•• ----- *- *■«•*> *•••
                           v,‘itr.srssd the change v/e r.a-                  s-,,--
                           hid rival supporter s r.eer to then
                                *z r.€ 2 S
                                           ar.d it v*s necessary ta get the s t a f f s out or. tha:
                            c,” '’s s Jon      so rr.v peocis were tr:e,ed cn w.ia. bs>$ie.
                            T h e v ‘rs o k a y when everything is t-^-Z ^or them.          tfcv
                            made a s p e c i f i c ctmr.er.c ta say that if the jams g;*s
                      *
                            t'-at i.-. ce rms c:* bac.-'.irouna cnat - c.-augr.. «.„«?■=                “*
                            m u c h .7.0re i nterest in Liverpccl b e c a u s e o f hew thirds *«r*
                                        * — w•    he'r aartiaular league run.        Ar.d we were
                            l o c k i n g and we had a plan and it was w c r s i n * we,^ cn ere _
                                       ‘6
                             ;? l c - -.'cp because we expected and d id i n d e e d gat L-.vertcc.
                                    ”            on c;-.« Saicn Kap and had a s e g r e g a t e d are* at
                      !       u p p e r ter s on che Sai:
                              he t : p . N o   N ow
                                                  w I
                                                    I expected
                                                       espec     that there w o u l d be mere of tr.em
                               - p a i r i n g on the Ssic:
                              .appened last y e a r ,   l c:
                                                          ^           •

                               her e was a thin blue   blue line and, the o n l y w a y that was
                                                            vs.3 when the o f f i c e r s gat their ^stJf:’*
                              lc t ual ly s c r t e d out w
                                                                 ,t agains t that b a c k g r o u n d ef the -
                              :ut. So X w a n t ta se
                              supporters and what have you-

                              X     or. r e f l e c t i o n P.ew. - cannot u n d e r s t a n d ,    I c a n ’v C Z - . Z v w
                              ter-s w i t h the fact that there r.ust have b e e n so car.y
                              -»cp:e that we tack cuc of there,                        a c a n n o t come ta terms
                              w i t h V r . e fact that there were p e ople t h a t w e r e dead in
                              *here p r e s s e d a s a i n sz the fencing.             Xu uas not e^-i-de.*- ^
                              t h e " f i r s t arrival-     What was c e r t a i n l y e v i d e n t on the
                              f*i«s t * a r r i v a l was that people w e r e a g a i n s t that fer.cir.g
                              and that there was pressure from the back.                             The officer on
                              there, the c o m m u nity constab le, h a d the g a t e o pen at c.tat
                              s t a g e 'w h e n I got there.         T h e r e u e r e p e o p l e c o m i n g ever the
                                                          • did try and a s s i s t us those people as
                                                          ,s ir.          a r e n a of, it w as total mayhem.
                                                                 «« W) .J I was w e a r i n ; cr.e , ene ccu^i
                                                          :iec*
                                                           it was a bsclut ely car.a nas if you like ir.
                                                           was           " \\ a ? that the pr e s s u r e was

                                                          ick .  Sa there we re 2 /3 of f i c e r s drwr. by
HF S G                                         & +0151-236-1936                                  22/07 '99 18:19 0 :20




                                                    -    1®




                                                                         W   4 >    I    * ,._    - _ • _             4   « M■
                     w *r.,       viw                   . « , . v —•*»   ^     *    «, .*                   -
                     g^-*<• " ;v*rw “ c t c ^ H m    s.*-- ^                _      t ■* ^
                     a:- J u t s l v no rsspcr.ss , a bsolut ely ncr.e,   People sntuia         _
                     •-” * T. . , w i e i the- thet'e ves somethin* s e r i c u s - y wrcr.r sr."
                     the tecpls             £: the        frsnt were ir, trouble                    tut         there was no
                     r e a c t i o n tc thet et ell-


                     ^Qn•the question of putting Liverpool at Leppings Lane, ar<
 Chief Constable.:
                      wi*’involved in that decision? AGREED - YES,


                      v—      .     This     was discu ssed with C h i e f iup t H o l e before Mr
 S u?: Murrey:
                       Duaker.fieli eaa« ^ d ’he sain rssscr.s are o b v i o u s l y
                       L i r ” r„O Q i cosie from che north end we st and Not tin g h a m
                     ■ p « s ? l* from the scuth end they head for those areas cf th«
                                        t f:L-S ; Mr         if ve could, if there was any
                       - -^                               -f tr.ir.rir.* i" artur.c,          ..s-----
                       t o T i c o k e d ’a c ' i t asein, we locked very c a r e f u l l y because -.vs
                       wer s g e tting p ressure not cr.Ly frcr* L i v e r p o o l roctta--
                                         frc“ S r i ’ish ?>£il v.t .o w&ritet. to ” *";s spec.s-
                              »      *,                         — » «a i**flr5* •^ ^ ^ «STS SvS-LCn
                        crains irsiTi .             s  e  t   *3 u**-                     -
                       rath e r         char, L i v e r p c c l    because         z'r. e r s   vsre    rr . ir e   seszar.gers


                       fixture last y e a r «.r.d last year Liv=rpc.c_ nad tr.e v.c--->-sa
                       L a " 5* end the n o r t h sc?,nd end Metcir«snasi F o r r e s t t .
                                                                                          “.s c-wner
                       t,c” sides cf the Srcu~d.           l*:« were e f _sh«
                       'Y£      ed ts change it rour.c, even got o v e r wiie - v j t - s -
                        p-cble.7,5 of c h a n g i n g it round, the p e ople w o u l d ccr,e to
                      ‘ *xa-:tLyVr.« sane piece as las: ysar, p a r k         in the sete
                        places, h e a d for thesame p u t s . and we w o u l d have had too
                        m u c h . ..



  Chief Ccnstecle:      We were i n v o l v e d ir. Che decision and the r«ason_t>,a^ wiint
                        b e h i n d it is the reason just pc. *o*.vard.    AG*\W—



                        Rirhc, I think. I've got enough cf a feel cf the thins to
                        b*~able to talk it through.   Is there anything anybciy
                         wan ts         to s a y a ’ccu:        it?



   Ch Supt Nesbit:         I think one t h i n g h»* to be said sir, I got there, Mr
                           Greenwood was there end it's fair to say Sergeant Cutcner
                           and Sergeant Morton had to physically- c U n b over bodies,
                           Chev we-3 four or five dee? against the fence and the only
                           wav we ’ got the pressure off was because they went to the
                           back ar.d started to pull bodies froa che back and then
                            they eventually started to sake a chain of people and were
                           pass ins ?«Iic*~e" bedies to each one and through to get
                            Cher. off.


                 t
HF S G                                              U +0151-236-1936                   22/07 '99 18:20 0 :21



                                                          -   'M   -




  Chief C o n s t a b l e :         H o w m a n y b o d i e s were in pen four.



  (The Ch ief Co nstabl e then r efer s to the plan ar.d p o ints '3 the per. w h i c h had
  had the ttesh culled off it ar.d ther. prints t- cr.s v h i t h h«* scr.e iar.ags to :
                                                  MW tV.< to • »€ y * II »*T?r HI •<* A r •»*
  01 I*




          • iftft or rigr.c is                      ~«cs.*^sf t..« .sr.c* -s £*«&,;,         v--®           *


  Chief Ccr.sia.ble:                Do we know. . .



   5gt .Moreen:                     Tfte -first five rows in three were dead.



    Su?: Greenwood:                 It's d i f f i c u l t t=» put this again intt per specti ve.
                                     C e r t a i n l y w h e n I got there I'r. sure there were people wht
                                     we re dead-           I'” sure cf that cn r e f l e c t i o n but we'd no
                                     impact of -hat at ell.                  I had r.o i~pact, no.     I think in
                                     ter.TS of that C^-ere were clet-rly p o t e n t i a l deachs ar.c I'r,
                                     s a t i s f i e d n o 7,! that they r.ust nave bee.-; dead.       i've seen
                                     chat h o r r i b l e photogr aph in the green, p a p e r that's been
                               i    ~ ~ i n t s d in one of the*— uncay paper's today,               1'tu convtncec
                                     at that stare because “he actual req uests , going there
                                     when thev were actually v>3 ~ s t-eau but i.- wasr. t un-iw anc.
                                     aga in tir.escale is difficult rut an t f f i c e r turned rcur.d
                               5    to “ e end s a i d 'these pscpls at the front are daad' end I
                                      lac ked at the,7,. t h e y ’d set the ?rey Itch and they were
                               i    zs-.i. st and in? up.            I"er. St ytu still can't relate it in
                                      terr.5 of numb ers bscs-use there nu s* r.'vs beer, people who
                                      were a c t u a l l y u n d e r n e a t h , Well they were stand ing up but
                                      r■*=re ~ust have beer, cecple v.hc we re cn the floor as wsi-
                                      but e v e n then the fact that w e 'd c r e a t e d a funnel end w e 'd
                                      get the.r. cut 1 can't re-ate tc tnat total ... i saw in tr.e
                                      gyr.nesiu".



          Chief Constable:          J;cr car, I.     tcokin-2 at the nature ar.d the site cf the
                                      enclosure     Z just c a n ... ar.d J S ^ y e - r e t h e r e ‘deaths--in’four?



          Ir.sp S u l l a s : :     A  lot of d e a d people be in? p a s s e d tc the b a c k of the
                                     terracing.            I was in the stand l o c k i n g d a w n and X think L:
                                     ties ir. w h a t vies said at the front.             At the ki ck-off ther*
                               j.   was d e f i n i t e l y a ,.consolidated p u s h tc the front.       It case
                                     st r a i g h t d o w n looking at thers, 3 a w the crowd, cou ld see
                                      the p e o p l e s c r e a k i n g at the front,   I r a n to the back,
                                      took sone o f f i c e r s dow n the back a n d w h e n X got to that
                                        tunnel.,,


                        i
          Chie;' Constable:         T h r o u g h the tunnel ?



                  !Uli3 S .*            Ic the tunnel sc the back, in c o n t r a d i c t i o n -
                                        G r e e n w o o d has s a i d that t u r . ? 'p e c ke d and we were
HF S G                                        U +0151-236-1936                       22/07 '99 18:20 0 =22




 Chief C o e s ~c.ile :   Was      the re a n y b o d y dead anc injured ir. the             tunnel?

                     t
 Ins? Bullas:             T h e y were s t a r t i n g tc pass the dea d ceccle                  c&z'z, thers was
                          a larr* r.u“ ber cf dead peop-e,



 Chief Constable:          1 d‘z   r e a l l y then'vs have a p o s i t i o n w h e r e tr.e terraces are
                           full      and "there is still a tur.r.el full of p eccle trying             to
                           Ses out.         AGREED     - YES.



 (Chief Constable ther. r e fers to plan r e g a r d i n g fence               in pens      t hree/ f o u r and
 the fact that he r e c o l l e c t s fence b e i n j same size)



 Chief Constable:         $> r e . t h e r e a n y dead bodies in four? W h e n y o u ccrce down
                           the tunnel in the centre cf the p a s s a g e w a y there's an iron
                             fence w i t h a sisilar sirs {att,                i t ’s in half
                          ’W & f y r e k s ions' I -gathered up to now         is that all the          dead were
                                   three' w he re the b a r r i e r went.



  Supt Greenweedj          I c a n ’t tell you that.          All I can say to y o u is that thers
                 i         was c e r t a i n l y three was where the na.'or p r o b l e m was.
                            T h e r e were o f f i c e r s at four and c l e a r l y there were people
                            celns ttjier, cu- c? four.           S e meno v tr.ey tnar.agec to get **-s.v.




  Chief Constable:.         Which      fence?



  Sus; U7.ssn«coc':          me     -ink ;er.ce.



   •u?t McKay:              O n e ' p o i n t w h i c h m a y be s U n i f i c a n t ^ s . s ^                      _
                            stS’il'had' all’“three sections, of their tickets.;wM'cft;’vb'uId'
                           .-indicate that they were the people who went through the
                            gftfce/and it's unlikely I would have thougnt they
                                 iVont *or1 that crush hsvinjj jjpne in.


   Ziz Ch Sup- Addis:        A l b e i t that quite * few of the injuries, f ac ial injuries
                             i n d i c a t e that these people have beer, w a l k e d cn-


                 i                                          ,

   (There is general d i s c u s s i o n here a b out M r A d d i s ’ co mment)



   Ch Sup*                  P i c k i n g u? vha z M r G r e e n w o o d said ar.d p e o p l e in the
   ;ucker.field:            c c n t r a l roosi m i g h t a dd to it, it was n ot e v i d e n t that
                                              a p r o b l e m in three at the k.
                                             :e a 3 far as I see. w h e n y e u
                                     «C ,    ■. any c r c v d ? rcbless. pushi;
                              .a i * * i     •rr. there s,r.i I have a retrl
                                                 y let t".2t c f fic ar cper.ei
                                             ;v itsvij        Jv 1 people Joi-'-S
      HF S G                                                 +0151-236-1936                      22/07 '99 18:20 0 :23

                                                                                                                                      4 '



                                                               -   22   -




       Si- G u t c h e r :           I- v/esn't r e ally a lens         csfcre that je-; we* opsned
                                     onto ;*e crack sir, "oe c £.- s s I ’.van 3 ir. t h r o u g h two , the
                                     gat s into pen two was ere- and I went In t h r o u g h the: gate
                                     Int o p en tv.-c end I must have taken b e t w e e n 1 C/ 2 G pecpls
                                     ---                       ^ s.Ilv rvsz*                               - -i
                                      frcnt cf 35" tr,r^= £*:                v*3 cr.Iy whs" it              is&rir.s
                                      *     *v ^^ ~ * * * 5.*15*       ir»$.ny         cut o v ^ r "Civsrs rushinx
                                      t.-.er. over d r a g g i n g then the t o ? . by chat tlse whs- it had
                                      c l e a r e d a little 'cit y o u could see I h a d a v i s i o n cf a
                                      w o m a n ' s face in a pile o f people ant shs was purple.               I
                                              ^ csa “rat vc~ an sr.i.hsd tt £et to h e r and 1 v'as one
                                      o f the rirst' offi cers who leapt Into per. three.                 At that
                                      cir.e the fats still w a s n ' t open.



       ■ Ins? Delaney.           j   M y i m p r e s s i o n sir w h e n I get cn the p i t c h w h e n I heard the
                                      r e q u e s t for assistance was not a prcblesi w i t h           the pens I
                                      thought It was a p i t c h invasion.



        Ins? rvhits:                  T h a t ' s . w h a t I was told w h e n X went on che p i t c h , _ i t was a
                                     •Injj'I’tfch' Invasion, that's what w e wen t o n t o the p i t c h for.



        Sgt C-utcher:                '.%‘h e n I got into pen three sir and I was trying to rive
                                         first aid what ever I could do and there was just no way
                                         tc get p eople cut.   T h e r e were office rs up cn the f s r . e s
                                         dra**ir.* oscole ov er the t:o but the iate w* * n "t ttsr.. you




        Chief Constable:               W e l l w h y w a s n ’t the gate open, does a n y b o d y k n o w why the
                                       sate was open, -fWho's '$ot the means o f o p e n i n g it?



        Ch Sue:                        T hs   g V t e is spring loaded, you press it d o w n and it flies
        r-'’iC 5 ?\" 1 5 1 - I
        ’                                    ,. easy.
                                       V jr * »<          Mj&v’bc it caught on the h o a r d i n g s restricting
                                       J .
                                              I don't know r 1rs just throwing that it, I T.ean that's
                                 s     c f f che top



        Chief Constable:              ■'veil y o u 've had a terri hie ti~e y e s t e r d a y and certair.l y
                                       thin king about It over          night to be I n v o l v e d in
                                       some thin g like that Is X       ~ai n d i f f i c u l t y y ou've   is
                                       •£na feel i.ng of not be in A & tie to da a n y t h i n g about ii.
                                       It's ju st happening.



         Suot Greenwood:               I'd Ilka to say sir if I m a y that, and I t o l d quite a few
                                       a f t e r w a r d s . X chink w h e n tha o f f i c e r s who a c t e d there In
                                       c l e a r l y e x t r e m e l y h a r r o w i n g c i r c u m s t a n c e s I w a s proud of
                                       thera.        T h e y really w o r k e d hard.



         Chief C o n s t a b l e ;     io. w h e r e io we go fr.-vT! here n o w , v.’e
                                       M i n i s t e r cc-inc at *ur.ch” <_ra together
                                       :hs: ’3 i '-at e r i s l : h a t ’s h;v t r.?y    5           i z* 7hi5 i 3 cits
* *
> *                                    c;-ges: d i s a s t e r in a footbal        ^rcu" ^
HF S G                   © +0151*236*1936                      22/07 '99 18:21 0 :24




              .. z t * - *-v ves tsrie-y;        ••<’■= cic wh at vs    ££a as assentis.-
         in o r i s ? to' des. 1 w i t h t."s s i t u a t i o n a n d v— e
         e f f e t e is fate in a sense ar.d we d e n ' t n e e d to harrcv.
         o u r s e l v e s o v e r it.   At the sa.~>e ti~,e w e ' v e i:t to be
         c r o f e s s i c n a l in tr.2 way that we puli, toga-.ner uh_s            ^
                           e -d asfeir. v e ’va s?" t = thin* a b o u t that end w a ’rs
         > e -." ’we era centra l to the issues w h i c h e-tersed yes terday
         a n d we've got to be very c a r eful about w h e t h e r we're seer,
          to be central ir. polling the c t n c l u s i o n s o f this together.
          ■•Jew at the* crtser.t ci.?.e. ycu'va a n s w e r s i the questions
          abo ut the gates ar.d we vers t«-jvi“ g a t o u t tr.rst gates t.'s,*

         i_» Y c Q f o ressura that was Snare arvc tne r.stura and scais
         of people.         It r.ay be that w h e n we j; t s. _ict:.e c-cser w
         c e c p l e ’vhc were in c.-.e areas rtarked one ts 16 er.d a. :: *■
                     ~»t- sc^e rsal ices cf the n o v e m e n t ccwr. that tunne.:.
         i n t / t h c s e -vc sactic-s.   X d o n ’t see t h a t t h s r s 's :r.u:h vs

         i u r s u s first and tc find cut w h e t h e r g e t s ‘S' had beer,
         opened.             W* knew gate ’5 ' had t e e n c p e n a d , we sr.es frsa -          ”r
         W h i t s and Mr SyV-.es the: gate ’A ’ was o p e n e d as well, so
          t h e r e ’s no m y s t e r y about it the real i s s u e is the ti-ir.j
          a n d the effe ct 0 " those actions.                       W e ' v e got the enquiry ut
          to now.            I ’m just £ little bit d o u b t f u l about w h et her we
          s h o u l d purses it tr.i that si“ ply is a q u e s t i o n cf trying
          to starve bacs fro" it see what e t h e r p e o p l e mijht shir.lt cf
          it later.                    have jot the C o r o n e r ' s e n q u i r y which^he has
          s o t to pursue.                 The q u e s t i o n c f all the a s pe cts we *ve
           v slk sd d/CvU*                            rr*3C"5-s Tor tns Corsr.sr ocj*n zz
          k n o w s.boLiz sc s.”                     sts-gs wa will C3nti.!Vw3 v*_«»n tr.s
          e n q u i r y as we w c u l i ’3* cc?ncjc:ir.s a C c r c n e r ' s *nqjuiry and
         • s'irr.ply* g a t h e r i n g all the ev ide n c e t o g e t h e r instead of
           p u r s u i n g p r i o r i t i e s and a s p e c t s w h e r e the
           resconsibility/bla-te lies.                         It will be w i t h us for a long
           ziosiT Th e s c V : d i s t r e s s i n g and h a r r o w i n g cf situaticr.3
           an d I c o u l d see it on the faces o f tha o f f i c e r s last night
           e n d I can still see a p r e s e n c e to an e x t e n t today and
           t h a t ’s as it s h o u l d be.               We canno t a c c e p t these things
           lightly.             T h e r a ' r e not easy, they are t e r r i b l y hard and
            the events w h i c h fellow on...                      I t h i n k we'r-s over the
           w o r s t in p u b l i c i t y tarss g i v e n the p r e s s ha ve had a run
         ' a n d we'v e trie d to be as o p e n as p o s s i b l e yet at the same
            ti~e not sive too “ uch away.                         I d o n ’t t h i n k there*s auch
            el s e we can p ursue at this stage 'out y o u d i d s good Job
            ar.d X feel             for y o u ir, :erx.s cf w h a t y o u h a v e to deal with.
            ¥ M y
                       ~ •3
                     m ■*  &
                                             w:i:'r.
                                              "* * w
                                                      are fcrrei on us r a t h e r than scrt
            out.          r-<jra.ti:r.al ’j:i 3 icr.s are taker, in the light cf
            all z'r.t' ir.:'crr.zzi:r. a v a i l a b l e and I
HF S G                                                  ® +0151-236-1936                                         22/07 '99 18:21 0 :25

                                                                                                                                                                         i   >




                              that those o p e r a t i o n a l d e c i s i o n s era cuestionar.-s.
                              w e 'v» jst is a s i t u a t i 5- w h i c h v/as p r o p e r l y rest;y:si
                              T h a ir-suntsc b r anch k n c w - e d g e of e v e n t s , yo ur k n * ir e cf
                              a v e r t s ar.d v:h£- h*;           before.        W v e b e e n cr. that
                              Ls;;iri»s l£ne sr.c ?cr years ar.c s = sr- -                 " i n i s zr.tz 5: ;
                                 * »,     »* ^      ^ ^ p               »r •» ,*
                                                                               ■»
                                                                                                                      •
                                                                                                                 £ »»«» H *
                                                                                                                          ”
                                                                                                                                      »,
                                                                                                                                     * *r
                                                                                                                                               «^   •
                                                                                                                                                        i   m
                                                                                                                                                                •
                                                                                                                                                                ^
                                                                                                                                                                    ».

                              w itiT 'iV e a ir.?’ ? r s f s s s i s r . i l j s o p l - v* are ar.c j i v s cur
                              response in the p r o fe s s io n * ! way t h a t i s exyeccei cf u s , ^




                                                                                                                                      .»i i»
                              T h a t 's not zo say shat ve c.cr/t s i v s a ; r v
                              >.vha. ■ 3 sew chsrs tr.tc i t - - “ - ”“ -~± ws'v*




                                                                                                                                     t•
                                                        *    _   __«*      to •     —* » * # • • »   T»ir   ■   Te        E      w
                                                                                                                                 i
                              yOC       3 £V     y ;u       V?   e -v      V-       r -     C - -    -•»    4   -=■           *w '
                              re s p o n s i b l e way, not nice i-t, b -      U'. - r. ternis c . z ^ ~c — ,^
                              it p ubli c l y 1 d c n ’t thir.k that ve w o u l d ~ - rig-t r.cw :s
                              fcs talking esout the eni.-aiistic b e h a v i o u r of fans, the
                              lev el of crink.          W h o e v e r is l o o k i n g et it overall will
                              f i n e that without eny prcbles.



  Chief C o n s t a b l e :    A n y t h i n g else anyone vsr.ts to s a y ?
 HF S G                                                                        ® +0151-236-1936                                     22/07 '99 18:21 0 :26



’' .                                  i
  NOTES OF M££Ti::C H - L 3 .0 M M O N D A Y 17 A P R I L                                    1?Z?

                         . . . . , .,                 3 f s-'sctitors o c c u r r e d o u C 3 ide
  CC. - Mee d to e s s a o i i s n h o * t.*« c- - Jy a*   .                      p o l i c i n g that
  Leo?ings lane. why it occ u?r«a, a n a was                 *ny a - ? e _
   caused the bull'!-up.
                                                                                     : --r-'- -i La^e to be c l o s e d b e c ause of ths
   Ltg at 2 . 1 7            P = snows a r e ouest                         io-       u c - p — a- -=-•*
                                      r.?♦
                                                                   ,             _          v,   i         ->   T         f   1   rtw o f
   CC - Were we s e a r c hing p eople                                    - w e - - V|S h ^ n _ . ----

   M arshall -                  -tc ses.rc.~i*j               o   ^c   s i m    ***.« *--»* ---            -          -

   CC --Our view                      is. that the turnstiles cope with the volume of people.

       Murray's p e r c s o t i o n - 2.30 P * n o r t h s t a n d atou" n a i f           ^ / o . O O O peo^
                 4 r e . ^ W e s t s t a n d was q u i t * full - « r . It w o pens f i l l i p .            St__i
       g3 — i W *                                        .*       Us in’1' r"       n ffV2 to SO in CO o*«5
               a bit of r o o m at L a p p i n g s Lane.          ,'>a,o..t, ./o— c        13
               -6-.a - g turn st i l e s end the o c h e r 15. serv ice t.ne weat S*ar.d ana w..e_
       r '-oai^rLl-.e c e r r a c e / m e r e - r w e r e - . a.lot,of'people- who h a d to go. t n r ouga c a * ■
       n o r t h ’stand t h r o u g h tne o tumsrlletf.

       CC      - -.nat       cc = 3 the tic-:*c say                            to ir.dicats                 t;the h ol der v h a r a               to go? c i t i e s



       CC         i s « . . C o w l mml>« o f people t t a t « = a i 4 ; o ^ a?p c o ^ n ' r U j p t o s s
       'Lt-» co g5; i !*(■ a t!\3 V.'esc Sti.^c s~a - --- ~ - -1   J 3-----., ............... ■ *
                                                                                                                                                              *   .
                                             »«         ,_.       m *». . •<                ^n — * 3 ^              w&s                     u»istw S ty cc i ■ t***®
        'v-w    .                                                                                         . ^                      B v.rf *»*-* »*-» *-, r^affli&r.ir
                                                          ^et.b twJ              3 wrr.5 t i - 5 S                                 w-y s         ---------------------

        CC - How many .people -ere in ch* g roun d ac 2 . 3 0 pa.           az_Z.30                                                         pa          . . ,o
        chs: i gs.ce ”,ar. on his cwr. i n i t i a t i v e o?er,5- cr.s gate -r.ers.                                                         ~c a../ ?-
        c?ri:er knov/ a n y t h i n ; about                              thac"5

        McrUy - fPCfa'icV.•.,

         CC - We need to i d * n = i f y p oli te                                o f f ice rs        a r = - n i jate         3.      S h o u l d be able «            do
         that       from o u r : de p l o y m e n t                plan.

                                      a„..        to   =-*        rne aarials            that w*re              tr.sre.           S o m e b o d y aiaor.gst cheti
         'vV        -I   I   • -' I                       -       --•'
         r^st have know n what was h a p p e n i n g                                    then.

         CC - t v s *&3 e n c i f e l v o u t s i d e police d i r e c t i o n but it gives an indication
         t ^ t t ^ s t e ward had r e c o g n i s e d the p r o b l e m that c a u s e d h i m to tase action.

          v.-‘
             < ay - Not ?aken s t a t e m e n t s f r o n anyone.          I n t e r v i e w e d the PC y e s t e r d a y
          about 2 . 3 0 .pip the s t e w a r d was c o n c e r n e d a b o u = _ t h e p r ^ s o n g a t e S        O* h - ^ . n ,
            I'nitiacive t'?e s t e w a r d o p e n e d the gate, e&-*.«ates a o o u p . * p
            through but the p r o b l e m was then that those inside were (passing -..tne^tiCA.e,*
            over the wall and u n d e r                            che gate.

            CC - What time w as the ra dio down'?                                         Were you r e c e i v i n g s p a s m o d i c
            communication?'

            Murray    - S e v e r a l m e s s a g e s case in "we cannot read you. b r e a k i n g up at
                    ,u      m •*                    * ; j_     -'-.j r      »'«'            o f f i c e r w h o was at t.*-
            control . 2 a : ore w* c ou .c ring vie co                      -------------- ------
            , , n ^ ,*.,™                                •.,„ : tee*.
                                      —...i ^ up. .ie r.au       u.,., *-»■-».
                                                                        i .■j -j -
                                                                                 ,—-•- - -
                                                                                         **- c-t*
                                                                                             v,.* T-iaio  w a n d knew tna.e
            was      sor.eti'.in^ w r o n g witr.it.                           Time a-out                                 P-3,
HF S G                                                         ® +0151-236-1936                           22/07 '99 18:22 0 :27


                                                                      -     2


     .....w&s
CC - hwr.  c— *.0-—a-
                   catlcn
                                                                                     -an    f-*o^ ne~5c-ns.i raii.02
                  - ___                        ? fi T.-:n"T* 3 .            0?ar*,-aa i-o - *<*---


                         - * « - - • » •            ...i---, * « » y                 *•*»»*        ~ i4s * 5 * “ * * - ,J * “ *

 CC - Did th« f»i’
                 -ur« of                            the c o m u n l e M i O M h*v« s                      «ff.s;?

 ..          ... w        -       i •;•-<           -• ? ' / « * • * I'r-2-s was           sti-1   wii*- s e s ^ v C -   be a
                 delay'te^ra                5 ats    'C     was      oper.ei after.

 CC      - H o w d i d we get the rcessage o v e r to o p e n tae gate?


 Murray         - P a s s e d ovs r p a r s e r a a ^ o .
                                                          ^— » « rraa' o f i ".Va S t 1 ga t lO fl ££ tO h O W                  &;>C. by
 rr        - It           seems to be          an a r e a    for a great cea_ 01          .*-•
 wT.c-i the gates .*; i.e??i" S3 Lane w e r e ooer.ee.


  OuoK.nfi.li -^on.ciou. «f                                          ; c‘
                                                                        ^ !                                                       ll"'
  a-c. in the process 01                      a-SC-iSa.^*, c..s
  •went through.                                                                ..     -      ■

  CC      - u-       w     SS=      If « y i « 4 y '*” «s ■■"at ,Jsl5 s=in! c " ;‘‘ r ! '

  H.XW -           S . r i . . .f                            which «ho« . «                 l«*'o£ P . ™ V < W =           ts» « « •
      v/as u n d e r .
                        „ ‘                                               e -**.^re                 cf barrier      the'    ssoaratss
      Marshall        - Gate no; nor-a-ij                   -■■---         * -------
      rites A and 2.



                                                                                                             Fnsi* ° F u tri
       chart ww a                                                                          and why does not see* « a a u t t r ,
       irr-acariaj. a o c u t ,,.e ^ . ^ . n                                                 . h,_     t o . be thought-about,




        CC - RSrgates between pea?. * / . 5                       -d        2 '-3.   D u c k e n U e i d said the gates were cper.
        and Nes'bit said they were shut.

        Mesbit" - T h i ;sac« o a . t h e . t o ? of the fence that runs r i g h t angles to the pitch
        was ciose’d ’wher.' 1 'got there . •
                              !


        CC -         Whose responsibility is is. toopen the gates:

         Mole        - Inspector i/c of Che sectorwho has a padlock key, andit is checked
         before the catch that the gates are open.

         CC . w,       to 60 « M . CO W who o p « « i It.
         sstes were, opened or closed and be able to supply the identity of the,
         individual w-ho h a d the re spo n s i b i l i t y *

                                                » f ,u A tA P in irtfffi I i r ,:>t S ’'^aCSS •                                 l.UC'Sd h ^
         Me I*-' Inspector, Wn.ite;.always woes.® the u a ^ p m g a Lar*,
        <rriwould*hotv®'^hlocicsci it.
HF S G                                                                            ® +0151-226-1936                                           22/07 '99 18:22 0 :28




                                                    c o r.tro i In s id e CM tu n n e l.                               Viho». resoonslMlit, 1»                         U


tnsre            uy                           y


 onwthe^Ortier, a t / p b a * * ^ * w * M « » » ’*

             t ?i, j 4.;:;:              fifclM e x p e r i e n c e d individual-

             „    Vr*       w7 » 5 .2 5 r     AC.S
                                                        «* a
                                                        v-**      »,-3 ^              "
                                                                                           vr*2 vrcr*.

                               ,    -^                                                     ^ s 7-»j ~* vvs $ rs - —                           ■’■«—'                               1
  Nsscit - At .the c r u cia- t-" e                                               *               “
 ■,'a n ••.&£?*s ’ • *'
                                                                                                t- v>b -                            ir^-O^-^xsdl'Xs.Sw y e a r .
 ..Top of the tunnel solid with horses - w a w p                                                                                              ?*■ ■       - ■

  CC :- W&s there any . l e a n t of that control put in the Order?

                                                                 <4*i- *»’ +..*«   a LCUI'S^ —S ^6                                           tKsiC WS tlStVO &■
  CC - d i , u .                 .ttw«*».                        -fh. f « w r that •■•*“ « «                                          _.                  t, „ i i e .
  "of officers who have seen                                          rr.c.   done It ill “

                                            tv, o f f i e . M                 fop various duties                          in «!». f c » w l . 4 *. « a <               «*•» h ‘4

   crve knowledge                    .


   CC - O c h e r art k cf c o n t r o v e r s y                                  is plann-ng.
                                                                                            •   = -        ,.J f - a a a r i i - f * n a l      a .T.C    h o w W C U ld     V/S
         ,              i    '*m.A   V -f r ^ > »     • ""*-V Jft ^      C S Il       W8    G » £--!■     W i V*» «- 5 e ‘t l -       —
   Hois -       A--.< 3 3 V t . . e 4 - O J r i - , . c - n    s                   t                                                  r j 3 - . . - a -gd        t : =c = 3 2 t 3 -
          v f - h -•-          ' He p l a i n s        che m a n n e r c i a i i . 0 v a . - 0 n .                                    ...                            7       -
   C-55.^           - *- .                                                              ,«■_ -.4                                     ♦.*, -**/*-s« « J          ? o W 3 CS.„C*.
             ,          .  •_■   _  r ^ / , - '             f “ ^ 2. Cr.£^& 5           v» C — *-»                t                  * - , c *«□ i •
   1"Q •       —          ~ ^ —C rifw 5         , .%»!•<    i ** • *—        3
                               iC 5 - 5 v i- 3         — =
                                                       w ;.       C .e .---* » ,          «~sccst;rs
                                                                                          - J-       sco.
    - no v;



     —                                                                2 - 2 0 ffeu V Everyt h i n * seeded to c
                                         f"- c o ncr c! r o o a abouc ,
                      I'-•%'■-■ 'Thers'were’not m.W of the Liverpool r » . i n a t t w . »;e,. but
                                       Tiler usually U . « It until the last B t n u f .            M
                                                                 - no x-^re c r o w d cns n !, j 3 , i a i .

     C C - Is it                     true that they com. a t ' t h e iaat                                                             W h y i, ic wich . h e ^ ^ e
     crowd, che                      sane factors, what h a p p e n e d chis year                                                 coc ^ - ^ e  i„.  2 ..t
     L«?pin*3 Lane-.                          What           U        the u n k n o w n j_actr.r?

     ■;: '<a v         - ' . v h t l s ' t we t h o w j h c             we h a d l e a r n e d                Tro^i a g o o a . m a t c h l a s w j e a r ,
                               su do o ^— - 3 '~ = v e                  a ls o le a rn e d -                  v u l n e r a o U i t y 01 t n i s a r e a -                  a .^
      ‘r * ' ■ V / f :                                                                            W« ^cr.'= have the same situation a5 la*c
                                                    _■ a  ___r-.-,.a                                 the drunke n r o t a t e s c o r n e a up. a
      vear wnen a u r m *                           cr.e -saw i^ve                                                                    __„,
                                                     :u rn *:ile s            can         ccpe.         T h is        y e a r u .. e c e     *are        fa r s » --       p e .j,--.


                                                          minds         same ingredients, satce crowd,                                                           sa.~e ciuts
      CC -            is s u e       co     address
         sar.e factors,                     sa ’,e level of p o l i c i n g - all gone soar

         Mole         - C o v e n t r y v. Leeds m a c o h                            two years ago put hack                                 15 m i n u t e s b « c a u « of
         tne 3ane problem.

         Mole - Sheer weighc of numbers was extreme in my view.                                                                                Where did i f a l l co«e
         from.

         CC       - p u r p o s e c f the r . « c i n 5 - not s i t t i n g back,                                                 need to k e e p           calkins ahout it
H   f   S G                  j                                      ¥ +0151-236-1936                                     22/07 '99 18:22 0 : 2 9




Halifax Roaa to r & „ * 3 i.* w O ~ s                       ana
                                   ..^bl'5"                                wh--«          the c r owds ce=«             f r o m earn ing the
''C - Division to try a n a s s ^ o U j -                                    —
build up w h i c h f l o o d e d down.

CC - Cot to e s t a b l i s h h e w ms,-;-' cf %-cse                                                                        _ *
..     -->3'— :d ar.i h o w nar.y wer e c p e o r c u n - , . •




    isie'.’^iSSnt t h r ou sn tne t;j r"s»*-ss • ^

    CC - P r o b l e m at 2 .1 ^ p n - L e p o i n g s Lane c los es at 2 . n                                      pm.

    Marshall - Mas H i *                                  ir~.ediately get chreugr..                           \.aa*cle* s„--- c ^ - . . s
    tr+e rouaCaoouv
                              r    «       ?  -i= o n w a r d s out side                                       to try and alleviate             the
    Oes     --What was ;,aone f r o m aoouu Z.-s on./&--»
    problem."

     Mole ” Hew           did iwe d e c i d e            to de al w i t h          ...

     n. ■->»- f-'oi 4 - F"'7? th* vid eo it didn't leer, t-oo c?- ■».**-*•
     Duv...3 .ti x-.d f--.                     -                       traffic f l a w i n g on Lepcir.gs La,.=
     Leeair.gs Lane to te c^es eo.             s e ^ — «-         ---* ^
         9 %’   *   *     J J P .'j    • ■ * * n <TA 'w ” “ f t ?        *
     ana £ ous aav-n ? a : u - C U i w / , in                   *

                              ...^                       rw-   To-         - naz'-^-ig after 2.21                   pm, don't       know why.
     Murray ”R e s p c n s - o t e i C -                 t„e   -o*           ,ia
                                                                •   . _?    _   , IA v*     ” ift   •" " r • *^ ' 25,
                      J          w « ■   r U ' t   3




     rC<2'^''J’hera jw&4 a p r o b l e m a n d what were we doing :: addre so                                                it        sa,.— - v C
        'cs adding   to iix.

        Marshall - The practice is to get people into the ground as quic.<iy a;
        possible to S53? the" loitering.

        CC - Pr e s s u r e ' a h a problems around the turnstiles and we seem in terms e:
        responding : ; !" u.at. .. .

        Nesbit -            told me. that the problem with the turnstiles was that                                                              fro®
        Live:

                                     ;ying to gei

         CC - Can we get h o l d o f that ev idence.

         Mole - Same         p r o b l e m last year.                      Publicity                to   say den't come           ir you haven't g=:
         a ticket.

         Marshall - Instructions to che Inspectors ..ac the checking                                                         points ana
         Tankers ley a n d O u g h t i b r i d g e 'to 'be "vigorous about checking                                          t.ie tickets.
         -iler.ma if half have                         - i “.<ecs a n d na~-              eon       t-




                                 i
HF S G                                                       W +0151-236-1936                              22/07 '99 18:23 0 : 3 0


                        ■                                               —   —




       .   .. ^             si                        a -'=r. c l a a r l y s a t out in. ths p r s s s - d on 't csr.a if
                    --           a -w„.-            Spo.-.a =r. Radis Trsr.t a n i Raci o Mersa y s i c s . lexers
 you ha* an c                                                          ■„*     irt           orzzvz^,
 --.                    &"P                           i'-*, *■ -    yw **'r '
 ;a;-»j5 tO                                   '•■— ® : '-«— w „^--.w -

                               .                  i* *.•*-- •-«■■ -a- ?                            oeoOwS in t'r.s is.sc
 v-,5- / '      - Mv s ^ s r i s r . c *          1* t.-a-            &                         -- ^     ,
 •— •*------        ' i           -                                         - v-             —- ■-•fr«± * - a l a s : I.' ,T.i“\iT2s .
                                                                                i *-1-


                                                                                                  is-        wo   v Tt? z   -irr.s    ~s

 and dig g i n g u^ the s/st**.

 Nssbit - Which gaza was C h e iwUntsi offiCs? across - p.sSaU^a ol4 G.iJ:.

 .CC ••--*'& boss ■£;. t ; 'C '-'v:-

   .,r>*nfi«ld - V/hat actitn. did we taha about the build u? at the srour.a.
  &




   *c=Ila = tiQn o f l c o k i - g at ths crowd situation cr. the tarrace .ar.ctnLnxm;
   'J ^ JpC, .1T. § ,., . =-,-
                    Lie   “4- W-<•
                                 U•- a.
                                   W C    —-*ww i for =eoois
                                                      .       to dispsrae,  Car
  u*




  l3udhs.il*-.
                             v

  Marshall - Messag-i br=a:;tast ou, -e.r-2                                                  n-. .— —

  CC - wnat mass|aga was he sending cut?

   ''!=■*sha1 ’ - Tannoy about -ha turnstilas to get pecpla to stop pushing.                                                         A I eo
   '                                       - -■-     -                              ‘a-.drovsr wit*          a double        rA systs^i
   asV:ad control :t3                  ssnz .’li.-ta cu-'---sr.:
   v/.-.izH wa u s ;        3.t m a ' s h s s

  'MC!-"&■« '■" ”.ftar» |“ 6 SS 3 s 3 C U I i i w s > •

   ” « ”ai's.ll - ’’i^nt ir.t^ -'“5 c r o w d t 3 *2A                                        t - s^op ?--•*•--^3 ■

      :«V:*nfia ld -|z,!t2 pa approx. c=r.al-iir d a U y l n £ the klc^c-off b ^ a a s e ^ f tha
                   TVi'i '.>33 g,r, £33«35r.a“ t that ws sr.cu.c gat Enese pscp-a -n.
      KMl*rcon»idpIns                  k i ^ - c f f the      ca*5 out.   K  last push c a ^                                                  at
       '.;0 pa whan ^ha                 *3ams     C5.~e out...

  ; :?Cl^Waich^2.?e,\f i r s t ? ;'

       Marshal! - '.'a>;er savi gat* 5 open.

       CC - Sykas?          said A. and 3 ware               ape*.

       .--.arsr.a__ -       .-j       r.c .      ----

       v«r,sha11 - A t t 5T.pt bains =>ad« to st3r- the gat3 ar.d the gate was :9 ir,g shak-sr.
       vigorously, ‘Mot* worried because tr.ay ctr.'t go ar.ywhers under the r.crch i:aaa

       Marshall - Concern about injuries from being pras3ed up against t-*a gate,

       Di'c*“^field - When you sent the r.assaga Hog^r, I' resp.onded.-.L thought., tiwee ..
       s u siio a ir.e33asa fro^ so~ebody in diffioulty - give us permisllbn .cq.;.o?en.;
        the gate or | U g o i n g                   in any      w a y                    '
       .'•■.arshall - T h a t was XiC -                 Thor?     vars      p'Sopl* c.i'oir-g o v e r          the par-? 1.3,
    HF S G                                       ® +0151-236-1936                        22/07 '99 18:23 0 :31




           -'Shall - A s k e d for sacs A to be oper.= d.             Sgt H i g g i n s ? o p e n e d the ga.se.
                     I
      Mes sage every aval :*.h* * o''*"iter cr» to the c o n c t u r s s cf the n o r t h 3 t ^ d v

      CC    * On gate $ 15 an c f f i t s r who        says it was o p e n e d at 2 -3 C pm.‘           .-orget jet* =
      the officer will r e s p o n d -5 that aspect.

       McKay _ Ct'-t” s    -ZZTS whit;-. are sLzr.LfLzz.-z.   I? the f irrt few pstpla are
       giir,g down th± tur.r.el e v e r ybody =_se who ct-es t h r u s h gate C follows cr..
       Viher. y o u gst to the vu.~r.sl ar.d IccV. down you c an't sea the pittr., yeu s b s a
       little bit cf the grass,         retple ntt able to get or* tt tr.e terrace.    r.ug*
      .nusbers of people who car.r.ct see ever the heads.

               -^'ViTiiat d i d we do about the. f e n n e l and peop le         s eeing   it ana going for it?

     "M u r r a y •*:T o t a l lack o f   information,     apar t    from Mr M a r s h a l l ' s   infornation.

      Mole - S o m e b o d y has a g r e e d to o p e n gate C.         What we have done           to a c c o m o d a t e
       opening     'C'.

       Murray - A lot of people             in the centre      pens.

       DCC - Who     is o p e n i n g e nd closi ng gate      'C?

       stewards     cut cciicsr.sn are        tnere.          .           • *

       CC - (looking! at phot ograp hs) It was not open at l ^ o : -                       "1^.52    c l e a r l y ’'show 3
       the g ate shutf.- W h e t h e r it was coen and shut a 5 s.i r..

       Marshall - Ves it was.              N ; ; throurh r.y dire::ion bu: stunted ”.en vcr-Li.-.r
       ir.-« 1 11

       D<:Z - After y!cu had ch* szaal gatss closed wzs it ther. you said ist’s get the
       pressure aw a y j

       Marshall - Cate C was opened and then the stunted closed off the perir.eter
       gates.  Perimeter gates under attack ar.d shaken.
       <\Cfi.
       Qps * Thau b a r r i e r was       broker. and v anes        loo king at.

       Mole - If we opened gate A and expected a rush, r.obilised officers to r,ss t it.
       the same question is going to be asked about gate C.

       Murray - Nobody ever said open gate A, 3 , or C - request for "open the sate,
       open the gate" - hb 'specific gate. Gate C carte open and the gate was shut
         sin. *
       again.

        Ducfcenfieid t T h e O r d e r has off icers listed, and once that c e n t r a l tunnel
        cecci7.es full er.- o f f i c e r s c o n t r o l that and it is shut o f f a n d people directed
        off " t o 'the w i n g s .

        CC     Sjp’it'ajfact that -1; '
                                        regardless
                                            ,    4 ,,    of che    experience
                                                             * ^iSMe<r,-W *
                                                                          1 1     they * will'sciii'ttavfe”'the
                                                                                                              >k t
        propei
             i p 'brief i \z In a c c o r d a n c e wicii'the O twep ?      }7r Whi te w h e n brieiir.g his team
        will as' pare 1cf the briefing say in the event' of 'etc?

        D uckenfieli r B r i e fings were a r r a n g e d for F rida y m o r n i n g in the north stand.
        Serials w a l k e d a rou nd the gangways a n d locked at the p roblems,            -very
        Sup erint endent :00k his ter. a ro und ch-2 ground ar.d p o i n t e d cue and- talked




I
H F S G                                                                                   ® +0151-236-1936                           22/07 '99 18:23 0 : 3 2


                                            !


       through the p r o c - e s s .
       V - t i    _       5 <          f-   -’ a - -      - ■          ,v   •'!   v;her\ the terixicter rates were                     closei.


  '’                                                            s k ’i - 7 5 .r S 3 s $



       CC - understand the business abouc the log but it is a factor that scseooay is
                                                                                     Ncc c r i t i c i s i n g       (Murray.1.




        •,’=•;r.ar5"''tvtsA^.cW £cz±3" ....-aker.- c.n-'^hs.;'.' 'You vers’ well aware z'a& z there wt;«
        .ontingencies'1
       contingenc            to ceal with th s ' f i l U d etaiid, i.e. the shutting off o? the"
       VuArtel ".*’

        Marshall - Inspector White was believed ir. difficulties through the
        turnstiles.  inspector rerr.ett cii'bed ever the zzz cf “he parapit. Inspector
            ^ ^-a p ** a !,■                             a ^       ^                      ^ M1      S w»fCS«kiii5w       £ C*■*«*   S ^ ® w71« 3 £*C 0 .!>S,*:.
                                            S
        Eizht serials                           d e p l o y e d at 2.30 5s.

                                uJ«5        r< Z Z     .7 .5 * “    C* a i        W ’d    5 i-! O   \        be se-Hir.r to find che evidence arid

         ' f t " i ” S'                                '■'j.zn c '*■- vicKw vS                           15 w3 *e - -^ ^        Vr.ke ^     v^nd 5 wv




                                        -t-
                                             v-i I’.*’;* i-:%r"i4v;s :             :r w : z *;p le ?^ 4 7;hT.-eh’~■■Taken
         sitate.r.encs.    Z\J  L Cl_ c d    U.     e n q u i r y tsar. is c o n c e r n e d - set o,o:.vn your
         T ,..,.... ....,t                                              . . . . . . .
         r-acolieSv-ons! e v e r th-a n®:*": few days^.                l\e shoi-.if ;e dcing “hat w i t h ;:’ri
          - the *2.-5.       P r e p a r e d a prefer-.* :: ell officer*.

                                  good point                       - *11 of ficers                      at the   §a~e    :t “ ake      records of -heir
                                 iensj.                                                                      ■

                                 ny ob'her era a Z sh ould be taking a;-i= .-.?

                                 •” t;*,e fiotur* •if .vhac was caking placa in t'r.e 1 irsc x n 3 v&nce ~
                                  those •  W*<* ■
                                                I
                                                *"'~
                                                *  • ->«
                                                       ~i^
                                                         «s in the are* ** as^c tr.e c f f i t e rs to puli together
                                  ■     ~ rot only in terr.e cf v;na: they di — z u               w n at they saw.
                                 ■- •• ■ i

         y.rle - Value cf stew ards ’
                                    r eins ,s?e',......

         .
         ’•i’Kay - N e s d to ce doir.r h o u s e - t o - h o u s e enquiries, pubs, a m b u l a n c e                                                      ;ren at.:,
         s h o u l d get earl y c o n c a c : w i t h w h o e v e r is r u n ning the erujuiry.
                                                                                        Vi,
         CJ - I d e n t i f y 'the p e r s o n s who were o n that tur nstile and a sk the questitr, wha
         vere your p e r c e p t i o n s of it, c a pture thac, a nd d irect the a t t e n t i o n c f the
         enquiry team.

          V.oXay - S h o u l d we be                               circu l a t i n g M e r s e y s i d e a s k i n g           for o f f i c e r s who were at
          the club?

          CC - The e n q u i r y                        t saa w i l l c l e a r l y do that (see the i n j ur ed persons). Rather
                                                       •* T  J44      2 i n j u r e d people.  Neei to p u l l out the evidsr.ee
F S G                                           f ? +0151-236-1936                 22/07 '99 18:24 £3 :33


        c.                1                             .   3    „


& n a a ttitude of p e ople         in W a d s l e y and L e p p i n g s   Lane.

 Mcl*Iay - .','s do n e e d to sar.ure the e v i d e n c e of the stewards.
"Ccug Locj: and Saeil J c n e * s h o u l d have uhe n a m e ; of s ; s w a r d s .

Cv    - On the Leppings          Lane   terrace,       you can go in any pen can't you?




 CC   - Ho c o nt rol where        p eop le   go inside         the ground.

 A ill 3 - W hat he w o u l d li>e to do but don't feel it prudent                     until stxsbtdy in
 '.vest Midland* {_5 dstidsd, i.e. set up a satel lite incident                        roc?. in
 M ers eyside - most important.       I^ad an o f f e r f r o m  For;,                 to use -heir HCLMI
 equipment, and to use their indexes.          We s hould be g e tting                 on w i t h the:.

 Duckenfield - Computer printout situation..„, Is it .right..and, proper that.we,„
 seeV; the information before the enquiry team comes.    Tt wo u l d ’help us to kno*-f
 whet the printouts say a- 2,^5 e t c /

 Mole        - 7 has then l o c k e d   in his safe".

 CC   - How m a n y p e ople     ir. pen r.usber 3 ?

 .^ccis - H e a l t h ar.c S a f e t y L x e : u :ive nave got ersc'-ins cn vma: tney         « do.
 Don't w a n 1
             : H i S to di g up the b a r riers and ca>:e them away.            T h e y have carried
 out sose stress tests a n d one be.rrisr removed.

 CC   - Has no i n d i c a t i o n o f where      the death*- a n d        injuries occurred.




                           aching in the sunns 1 to ind icate w h i c h            w a y the spectators
 snou-id go,it, is a m a t t e r of choice.       Clear from         the d a m a g e d b a r ri er in oen 3
 indicates -'r;( is the. ~ a i n a r e a £ n d ; i j ? s » w i t h Mr N'esbit that it was net a
 s u d d e n 'surge fro m the -cack '           1

 CC - We are in no wa y s e e k i n g to interfere in any way v/i:h the enquir y but
 simply the p r o bl em of r u n n i n g 5 V? and p o l i c i n g events in the future.       We need
 this type of d i s c u s s i o n and to know what a c t u a l l y happened.         The focusing of
 e .„„ence -na.           a s s i s t in “ ~.i3 is o u r s r o c i s m arc we c ann ot ignore it.
 Identify and feed into the system.

 .-.c.'.ay - Report       to the C o r o n e r has    to be done by us.

 Addis        -   It is a s udden d e a t h 9 - times.

 McKay - Had assu med r e s p o n s i b i l i t y for C o r o n e r ’s e n q u i r y buc due    to asoacts
 arising from the m e e t i n g w i l l leave that to Wt- Sleach'-' '

 CC - What is ;he n a t u r e c f the e n q u i r y ?         Jhe e n q u i r y is the g a t h e r i n g of
 evidence.  The J u d i c i a l r e v i e w w h i c h ' i s goin g to ba a n n o u n c e d today is going
 to review the; e v i d e n c e that is g a t h e r e d and if v/e leave'it to W e s t ' M i d l a n d s to
 provide the evi dence we mig ht not get tne b r o a d scope of e v i d e n c e flowing in.
 -e nave to be the a u t h o r s o f most of th» i n f o r m a t i o n fed in. We have to be
 aottva ana find the a r e a s where th=» evide nce c a n be found.
F S G                                    & +0151-236-1936              22/07 '99 18:24 0 :34




     How are v.'a jcir.r i
                         V"- '**'■»&—-;^^ a u . u £ .   Identify the turnstile people ar.d
when we heve na~es s«« the people conce:




                            ~“   i          I Ii




                  1




                  i
HF S G                                                        © +0151-236-1936                         22/07 '99 18:24 0 :35




                                                  DE-2P.IEF WITH SUPERVISORY OFFICERS
                                              DEPLOYED AT LZPPINGS LANE ON 15 APRIL 193?

                                             HELD IN LECTURE THEATRE, POLICE HEADQUARTERS
                                           BETWEEN 4.0C ?:■!/£. k o PM WEDNESDAY 1 ? APRIL 1 9 ? 9




  Deputy Chi»f Constable                            (Chairman)
  S up erin ten den t                      Greenwood
  Ch^sf insosc3|
               5X*5                                    6.nc r,\£pi.r■
                                                                    “
  i n s p e c t o r s J a n n e t e , B u l l a s , D a r i i n z , D e l a n e y , K a r . d - D a v i s , P u r d y and Sykes
  serg e a n ts E c c t.i, Eurman, S u m s , C ra w fo rd , K iz g ir.s , M o rzan , P avn*                             o - o C- , - -
      T hor .a s a n d W h i t i a m                                              ”                  "            * “ ’




  The below is a precis of’ the notes taken.


                                       I
  rL’NN'EL CONTROL

  i:    is  p o s s ib le t h a t ^ s p e c t a t o r s ' rush through                 the tu n n e l im p a c te d in t o           the
          e * 'a '-n"3S- y r a c k s a s t a n d i n g s p s ^ t a t c r s a n d       c a u s e d a s u r g e wh->'ch
  in    the d i s a s t e r .                                                                             ‘ ”       v" “


  On* police uicnesa (S g t -ffifenan) says that p ^ three and four.were fiiied by           ,
                           Witne^ (2 upc Gfissnwood) ^ssys that © S T p e n s at this t’-»
  were not    tightly p a c k e d and refers to a spectator c l u i n g into the West’st a-d
  ar.c tr.a n o u c a g a i n i n r . o t h e crowd.


  Or.s officer (Ins- Sullas) in the V>st Sts"r i                    ^~          _
  i*,,,-               -■       7   , ,                    -v-c,..+..4 Cv*.i over pens tnree and
               t • f      **" 1 ™ * Xn oor'h ? « " 3 whic*          forward but didn't cans, back
         ...i-^iaers hearing aoout this cisi« the whistle blown and a roar of th«
  cror .vc l,o i*aic(ate tr.e start cf the ga.™.s.


                        Cf -Jha tri5*dy thfi 6urihel was ci5a-                              '
  ! ^               ,t'un’
                         n-el =u5 casualties were evacuated this way.       The s*n« colice
  ■>,.1.3 ^ ( i j , i-.orj a n ) wr.o alter tr.e tradssjy moved from ths track th,'"uzh she
  tunr.3 , founu tnat spectators there, including police officers,’ were cocra-stsly
            c i vft&c n&a occurred.                                                    "

  vhere is nothing in the operational order nor at t h » -b r ie fin g -s -about
  contingency for police protVctior^ftyWe-tunnel to restrict or ,-event
               enCr^* Officers reot«-nb«?*d (particularly Chief laao Creaser) Chat
            wlj* :y?ar! th* above has      *>"« by the use of horses and static
  ? o * i w l*nes (reierred to as Supt Precisian's policy).


  COMMUNICATIONS


            general comment that because o f crowd noise on occasions i t was
  impossible to use the radio e v e n ^ t r e a r p f e c e i ; ' ' 0CC'*sl0 M ^ was

                                             C3^ 5-  £h? : ? * nor!5al nod* cn * * * » • o c c a s i o n is -talk
             ................- C . .          soon overload the system.
HF S G                                                        ® +0151-236-1936                              22/07 '99 18:25 0 :36




                                                                    _   7     _




 Officers are outside the turnstiles checkins re, offensive weapons,
 q ,r ^ c 3 f     t but -heir duties ~ever interrupted tne iu&xz.r^ium tnrcvgr.pu'
 flaw,

 Secondary Searching Inside

 T h is    o p e ra tio n     became      im p o s s ib le .e iro a         2 ,1 5     p(R c u e    to   crsvd    d en sity.


 throughput Problems

  *.        Non-ticket holders;
  s.        Wrong tickets;
  c,       A ttem pted         u n le v/fu l    en try    -    c iia b in g       over    e tc .;
  c.        Crowd c o m p a c t i o n ;
  a.        At some point turnstile ' C becomes j&awisd due to physical distortion
              .caused by pressure (Sgt Crawford) (unique);
  f,        Attempted corruption at. .turnstiles .
  g.        A, "point “ I.- have teen reached towards the end with turnstiles being
               freed .




  .
  ’■LATCH DELAY

  If      sp ectato rs       had been          in fo rm e d    th at    the       match w a s t o        fee d e l a y e d   this may h a v e
  reduced        th e ir     fru s tra tio n .

  One officer (Chief Insp Crease?)Rising police Land Rover radio requested that
  consideration be given to delaying start of the match.



  HAN7CWER (rCCT)
                              S
  Manpower deployed at the ground fro^i circa 11.CO an:-

            a.        outside the turnstiles and into Lappings Lane - four
                      serials and supervisors;

            b.       ir.s i’= the turnstiles - 2 : serials initially, reinforced
                      by a further serial (Ins? Delaney/Sgt Higgins) circa
                      2 .^5     st C-ata 1A ' .

   Plus      13 u io u r . t a d   o ffic e rs     (see       'M ounred'          s e c tio n ).




• CROWD BEHAVIOUR

   The c r o w d started entering the g r o u n d at 11.00 as. By 12.30 pm queue 3 were
   forming but were orderly.      The queues over ti.“e ex-ended all the way back to
   Leppings Line but no problems experienced.

   5y 2 . 1 5 pm the queues were lest and spectators were new packed outside the
   turnstiles in larje numbers extending bacx to the pe rise ter gates ir. a solid
   “ass.      The "r^in contingent arrived and spectators were entering the ground ■
   in an injured and distressed condition.
HF S G                                                ^+0151-236-1936                             22/07 '99 18:25 S :37




  £gt Higgins ve.3 the sergeant in charge of Ins? Delaney's serial deployed
  is sics gate 'A' and it was definitely 2 . W pn when he get there. Ir.sp Bennett
  wes not on the turnstiles roof.        Higgins was at gate ’A ’ about_10/15
  minutes taking abuse frorn people about the crowd outside.   He ‘Sonfed into the
  turnstiles and three people wars stuck in the area whe-re on* should pkse
  through. That was like that for sass ccn.sideraM » tim« and this was b""s.-«3 ^
  the    pressure
                was so great one perssr. could not snt«r the turnstile elons.

  I n s ? S y k e s sa_L ir wa s a b o u t 2 . 5 0 / 2 . 5 5            wh e n he     wa s    o u ts id e     and g a ts     ’A'
  opened and h u nd red s w en t th r o u g h .

  Chief .I n s j ,Waring .said he was -. there, about,..2,50/2.55.. and .the*,., the, .operan^ of
                       appeared' to "make s ' t e r r i f i c d iffere n ce in rele a sin g the
 'pressure o u tsid e.

  Sgt H ig g in s s a id t h a t        a t 2 , 5 0 / 2 . 5 5 pm h e r a d i o e d a n d s a i d        " i f th e 'g a te is n 't
  opened t h e r e   i s g oing         to be s e r i o u s i n j u r i e s and p o s s i b l y         l o s s ' - o a M f e " a nd
  T f c e Ive'd a reply to the, effect‘thet                     If that is the', css® .open the
  ?ir s c o f a l l      th e s t e w a r d w o u ld n o t open th e        g a ts and a f t e r         a fe w more m i n u t e
  h is o f f i c e r s   a s s is t e d in o p ening t h a t g a te .        Ks * r f n * d ' t h a r    c u r i n g ths
  p r e c e d i n g 10/15 m i n u t e s t h e     gate   had besn       bouncing        and     it l o c k e d a.s i t       if    was
  53 i n j c o come o f f t h e w a l l .

  Insp    Sykes      went    through      th at    g ate.
                f                           »
  I; was agreed that it was a negative rush through gate                                        'A' in terms cf the
  happenings on the West Stand terracing.

  Sgt Thor.as was at the perimeter fence further up Leppir.gs Lane. He did net
  5-33 gate 'A' open end there were still many surrcrters outside turnstiles ' A '
  t; 'O'.

  Insp Purdy said that gats 'C' was opened a second time tut was unable to
  supply an exact tirae cr sequence in relation to the opening of the other
  gates,

  §ft;'Morgan believes that the numbers '&oing through gate *C' were-not                                                  massive.
  Towards the endj.;     ss*-s 'frjEghljr likely all th-rss gateS^vei-e'opened. This nmy?'’-
  have result 9 $ ::from the m'essage- from force con tr            o          ~ n « -t<



  RECOMJ-iSiXNATION'S RE. PUBLIC SAFETY

    1.     Consideration should be given to fS?e«,ter use- of lo.tid:'U’
                                                                       iile:rs'.

    2,     S u g g e s t i o n made t h a t a l l t h e 3 g S ^ t r i'« s : ; - |g ||e i^ ^                      rep la c e d w ith
           a s e m i - c i r c l e o f n ew o n e s .       T h ere a re gaps*'in t h V ' a r e a where the
           t u r n s t i l e s a r e c u r r e n t l y a n d t h i s i s w h e r e p e o p l e a r e g e t t i n g c r u s h e d a nd
H FSG            j                   I f +0151-236-1936         22/07 '99 18:25 0 : 3 8




                                          - o -


        At normal matches entry re the U’est Stand is by way of turnstiles sever,
        to io and 'A' to 'G ' . On 15 ■“ •59 c-r.ly turnstiles 1 0 /1 6 and 'A' to 'O'
        used. Again this i s i.-.sufficient.

        ?sor siting and insufficient numbers of indicator boards showing the
        routes to the stands and terraces.

        Design of tickets very poor - "hey were all the sar.e type of print and
        would have benefited fro.u being colou'* coded to match the indicator
        boiards (at 5- abtve},

        Many of the supporters en-routs to the /-'est Stand tended to go via the
        tunnel.   Suggestion was roads that as sr. alternative in future tile tunnel
        be closed thereby making supporters go'Tound to the Stand via both sides
        and easirj- conjsstion in the tunnel.

        No incentive for crowd to get to ground early - pre--atch entertainment
        could be provided.

        More horses to be deployed at big capacity games than on 15.-.39.

        ?.e. finring of the match - wotrld' have beer, good idea to hold game on
        Sunday morning thereby pubs/off licences being used'less by supporters
        before start of game.

        suggestion .T>ade tr.at pubs near to the ground should have been closed
        prior to tr.e match or. 1 5 .--C? hut general feeling re. this was that if
        near-by pubs had been closed supporters would simply visit iiesnced
        premises further afield.

        Suggestiop made that there is no need, for the fencing on the terracing
        which forms the actual pens.

        suggestion made re. the removal of the vail which leads from the r*rr”of
        tlie West Stand to the rear oi the turnstiles alJrowrng greater freedom in
        the area or the West Stand terracing,
                    , j        . . .
        ;.?g» = -:oa .r.ace tnat ir . ■uture ■roraatien of queues would benefit fro*
        'z * 1ri£ i i k s z r.o $ u s «'i *'ri " '",
                                                   i•*” C f ^ * *A s

        bu^o^stion made   Z&y-oiiu o£ £*13 ground is not     conducivs to & la^rg1
                                                                                 ?
        crowd, tr.erafore  we have always had problems with teople securinz entrv
        into tns grcunc.    Because of. this the police have had to do too ~,u:h
                      . which turnstiles supporters go through.
                                          +0151-236-1936            22/07 '99 13:05 £3 :01




                                                                                     S U p 'g tf'
                        Hillsborough Family Support Group
                *



 TO:          G                 ■ (I * C R a S ^ ^ /
 FAX NO:

 FROM:                           Ann Adlington
 DATE:                          2 2 ^ ^
                        V

 FAX NO:                         0151 236 1936

TELEPHONE NO: 0151 236 1919

NO OF PAGES TO FOLLOW: ^

MESSAGE:




                      fax is conf}denti* f- K* contents are not to be disclosed to anvone
other than the addressee except with the authority of the addressee U n ^ n H ^

                                                       transmission.

                                                                       1
      ^             ^       0   , 0   .                          P?




            Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151 236 1936, E Mall info&hfte
          lit Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street L lv e ^ o l 1 $ 6RR
HF S G                                        ® +0151-236-1936                 22/07 '99 13:06 0 :02



                                                                                             < > ^0Ro%
                                                                                                •   *


         Sup?Q &

                             Hillsborough Family Support Group
    George RCroston
    Prosecution Team Leader
    CPS Central Casework
    United House
    Piccadilly
    York
    YOl 9PQ

    22nd July 1999


   Dear Mr Croston,

   R v. Duekenfield and Murray

   You will have heard that this case has been committed for trial. We were not able to call a
            ° fth ®™tnesses° n ^ hom we relied because o f the problems caused by the timetable,
   but the magistrate was able after three days and a retirement o f under an hour and a half to
   find a case to answer on both charges against both defendants on our core material.

                               l6tte[ tl?at Lhf Ve today written to Mr M«calf o f Hammond Suddards and
                             ! mS $h° “ld be »ratefU1 for y°ur          on the custody o f the archive in
   l!,             ? ^ rcurnslajlces o f the case. The prosecution invites you to give advice to the
                       J °C rw       p7 “ slon of me arc“ ve- sndrequests you to d t t l •“ *
   ^      Z ? m I-        n       T ” I T PrePam i° ns f° r th« trial as soon as possible. We
   expect tnat Mr Justice Hooper will wish to set a tight timetable.


  Metcalf If vn Uh* ^           f8miu ar W!th the arguments we have summarised in the letter to Mr
   s z g s z ts x s z x                                    1wouldinvi,e        inthe“ few« * ■

  Yours sincerely,




  Ann Adlington ;
  Solicitor




             1Jw01” ^ 51 23 6 1919' F ai 0151 236 193€*E     info®bfss ore
               Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool |S $RR
                                         ® +0151 -236-1936               J 2 / 0 7 ' 99 13:06 0 : 03




     SU p p O*
                                                                                          S tjp y tf? '
                         Hillsborough Family Support Group

    Your Ref: PCM SB.CHI.057-9

    Hammond Suddards
    Solicitors
    2 Park Lane
    Leeds
    LS3 1ES

    22ndJuly 1999


Dear Mr Metcalf,

Ji v. Duckenfield and Murray

1         Tlie defendants in this case were committed for trial on 20mJuly on charges o f
           manslaughter and misfeasance. The stipendiary magistrate, Mr Nigel Cadbury had
           heard five days o f argument, and sworn oral evidence from me, before rejecting the
           defence argument that the prosecution was an abuse o f process o f the court and
           oppressive, He then rejected a defence argument that there was no case to answer
          after a mere three days o f evidence and argument.
                     I
2         We understand that the Presiding Judge o f the North-Eastern Circuit, Mr Justice
          Hooper, wishes to hold a preliminary hearing soon, probably on 3"1September but




3         for w lT 't T have,bee"             for " w ly a year now that there is no lawful basis
           W 80^                  lcc “ hoW the W « s % ™ a » o f the fact that on 16* April
          the West m T h I L h 1!         ?outh Yorkshire p°lice " to d the Chief Constable o f
          the West Midlands police to conduct an Inquiry into the policing at the Hillsborouah
          W       he V    " ,h“ *o f! which,
                     information,      ^     it hasb“ " m*imainKi
                                                    been            * * “principals”
                                                         said, they are  Solh n S S S S ?

*                     “ aPP^®m'y «rgued, <he South Yorkshire police were the primary
          cornmiss.oners o f evidence and inquiry, and other investigative and legal bodies were
                                       " r Sou,h YorksWre * * » ^
                                    f ^theOSprosecution
          x- yu, and (b) to deny it to      Cm t* rU* * °in,he bereaved «“* “« “ the
                                                             1998-9,




          iH m Z ? o 51 ^ L 1519' F“ 01S1 23619*>- E Mas info®hfs* o n
          In Floor Central BafldiDgs 41 North John Street U v .^ o T S ^ R
H F   s G                                    ¥ +0151-236-1936                22/07 '99 1 3 :0 6 j3 :04




                For the same reason, the South Yorkshire police was, on your advice, able to
                influence, in its own favour, the supply o f information and evidence to the CPS in
                1989-90, when a decision whether to prosecute was under consideration, and, no
                doubt, to influence the supply o f information to the Police Complaints Authority.

                Although we have repeatedly deployed these arguments in the course o f the various
                applications by the defendants to have the proceedings stayed or discontinued, and in
                the course o f their applications for public funding, we have never heard an answer to
                them. Neither have you offered any rebuttal or contradiction at all over the last twelve
                monti^
                       \

             A conspicuous feature o f the case in the last twelve months had been the support that
             the South Yorkshire police has given to the defendants. The Chief Constable has
             urged the South Yorkshire Police Authority, successfully, that it should pay the entire
             legal fees and out o f pocket expenses o f the defendants on the ground that they acted
               reasonably and in good faith” at the time o f the Hillsborough disaster, and that it was
             necessary to do this to maintain the morale o f officers who have to take "split-second”
             decisions.

      8     it is obviously absurd that the Crown, in whose name the prosecution will now be
            conducted, is denied access to evidential material which is obviously relevant to the
            case by a body which is actively supporting the defence. Furthermore, as you will
            know, the. prosecution has duties o f disclosure to the defence, namely, to disclose any
            material m the possession o f organs o f the state that may arguably assist the defence
            subject to public interest immunity considerations and legal professional privilege.

            We shalj raise these matters with Mr Justice Hooper at the first hearing. We invite vou
            meanwhile to explain in writing;


            t      h       e   $    S     ;y0U rontend ,h“ ,lK " " " “ « « *       - «1—

            (b) whether the Chief Constable is prepared to hand the archive over to a neutral third
            r     v>


            Crown&t ° thCr StepS thC Chi6f Constable Pr°POses to take to co-operate with the

      10
                                       t0 aSsi8t th* Prosecution We believe that this refusal was
            influenced by the mistaken view expressed by Mr Daines in 1998, before the
            E  S ? We invite him now
            hurdle.               ^ to
                                     “ take
                                        y ^ this case
                                                  Pr° SCCUti0n WasSince
                                                       seriously.  IikeJythe
                                                                          i arguments
                                                                                  the are
                                                                                      firstwell

            August^ y° U’ ^              that we can reasonably exPe<* a comprehensive reply by 6*




                                                      2

                                                           s
. HF S G                                     fg? +0151 -236-1936        22/07 '99 13:07J 3 :05




      1      In the light o f that reply, we shall prepare for the Crown Court bundles o f
             correspondence and compile a skeleton argument, and consider the legal options
             available to us should you refuse co-operation. No doubt you will wish to attend the
             first hearing o f the case and be represented We shall keep you informed of the date.
             We sh?ll send a copy o f this letter to the defendants and to Mr Croston o f the CPS,
             from whom the Chief Constable may wish to seek advice under section 3 (2) (e) o f the
             Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985.

      12     I look forward to your reply.



     Yours sincerely,
      (    H l i . ' 4"


     Solicitor




                                                   3
    >SB °R O fy                                                                       vSBORo^r.
V




                       Hillsborough Family Support Group

    George R Croston
    Prosecution Team Leader
    CPS Central Casework
    United House
    Piccadilly
    York
    YOl 9PQ

    22nd July 1999                                                                       RATE



                                                                        YORK DIVISION
    Dear Mr Croston,

    R v. Duckenfield and Murray

    You will have heard that this case has been committed for trial. We were not able to call a
    number of the witnesses on whom we relied because of the problems caused by the timetable,
    but the magistrate was able after three days and a retirement of under an hour and a half to
    find a case to answer on both charges against both defendants on our core material.

    I enclose a copy of a letter that I have today written to Mr Metcalf of Hammond Suddards and
    copied to the defendants. I should be grateful for your views on the custody of the archive in
    the changed circumstances of the case. The prosecution invites you to give advice to the
    Chief Constable to surrender possession of the archive, and requests you to deal with this
    matter swiftly, so that we can advance our preparations for the trial as soon as possible. We
    expect that Mr Justice Hooper will wish to set a tight timetable.

    You are of course very familiar with the arguments we have summarised in the letter to Mr
    Metcalf If you disagree with our legal arguments, I would invite you in the next few weeks
    before the first hearing to tell me why.


    Yours sincerely,




    Ann Adlington
    Solicitor




                Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151 2 3 6 1936. E Mail info@ hfsg.org
              1st Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 dRR
VSB° R O u                                                                               VSB0R0(/




 SU p?$'
                        Hillsborough Family Support Group


Your Ref: PCM.SB.CHI.057-9

Hammond Suddards
Solicitors
2 Park Lane
Leeds
LS3 1ES

22nd July 1999


Dear Mr Metcalf,

R v. Duckenfield and Murray

1        The defendants in this case were committed for trial on 20thJuly on charges of
         manslaughter and misfeasance. The stipendiary magistrate, Mr Nigel Cadbury, had
         heard five days of argument, and sworn oral evidence from me, before rejecting the
         defence argument that the prosecution was an abuse of process of the court and
         oppressive. He then rejected a defence argument that there was no case to answer
         after a mere three days of evidence and argument.

2        We understand that the Presiding Judge of the North-Eastern Circuit, Mr Justice
         Hooper, wishes to hold a preliminary hearing soon, probably on 3rd September, but
         possibly on 20thAugust. We shall wish at that hearing to raise the important question
         of access to the Hillsborough archive.

3        As you know, we have been arguing for nearly a year now that there is no lawful basis
         for South Yorkshire police to hold the papers. By virtue of the fact that on 16thApril
         1989 the Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire police asked the Chief Constable of
         the West Midlands police to conduct an inquiry into the policing at the Hillsborough
         disaster, it appears that the fiction has been maintained that South Yorkshire police
         “own” the information, of which, it has been said, they are “principals”.

4            Therefore, it is apparently argued, the South Yorkshire police were the primary
             commissioners of evidence and inquiry, and other investigative and legal bodies were
             subordinate. Accordingly, the South Yorkshire police has been able, upon your own
             advice, (a) to decline to disclose material to the bereaved families at the Inquest in
             1990, and (b) to deny it to the prosecution in 1998-9.


                                                  ,   1

                Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151 2 3 6 1936. E Mail info@ hfsg.org
              1st Floor Central B uildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
5    For the same reason, the South Yorkshire police was, on your advice, able to
     influence, in its own favour, the supply of information and evidence to the CPS in
     1989-90, when a decision whether to prosecute was under consideration, and, no
     doubt, to influence the supply of information to the Police Complaints Authority.

6    Although we have repeatedly deployed these arguments in the course of the various
     applications by the defendants to have the proceedings stayed or discontinued, and in
     the course of their applications for public funding, we have never heard an answer to
     them. Neither have you offered any rebuttal or contradiction at all over the last twelve
     months.

7    A conspicuous feature of the case in the last twelve months had been the support that
     the South Yorkshire police has given to the defendants. The Chief Constable has
     urged the South Yorkshire Police Authority, successfully, that it should pay the entire
     legal fees and out of pocket expenses of the defendants on the ground that they acted
     “reasonably and in good faith” at the time of the Hillsborough disaster, and that it was
     necessary to do this to maintain the morale of officers who have to take “split-second”
     decisions.

8    It is obviously absurd that the Crown, in whose name the prosecution will now be
     conducted, is denied access to evidential material which is obviously relevant to the
     case by a body which is actively supporting the defence. Furthermore, as you will
     know, the prosecution has duties of disclosure to the defence, namely, to disclose any
     material in the possession of organs of the state that may arguably assist the defence,
      subject to public interest immunity considerations and legal professional privilege.

9    We shall raise these matters with Mr Justice Hooper at the first hearing. We invite you
     meanwhile to explain in writing;

     (a) the legal basis on which you contend that the papers belong to, or are possessed by,
     the South Yorkshire police;

     (b) whether the Chief Constable is prepared to hand the archive over to a neutral third
     party;

     (c) what other steps the Chief Constable proposes to take to co-operate with the
     Crown.

10   In the past you have failed to assist the prosecution. We believe that this refusal was
      influenced by the mistaken view expressed by Mr Daines in 1998, before the
      summonses were issued, that any private prosecution was likely to “fall at the first
      hurdle.” We invite him now to take this case seriously. Since the arguments are well
      known to you, we suggest that we can reasonably expect a comprehensive reply by 6th
      August.




                                             2
11     In the light of that reply, we shall prepare for the Crown Court bundles of
       correspondence and compile a skeleton argument, and consider the legal options
       available to us should you refuse co-operation. No doubt you will wish to attend the
       first hearing of the case and be represented. We shall keep you informed of the date.
       We shall send a copy of this letter to the defendants and to Mr Croston of the CPS,
       from whom the Chief Constable may wish to seek advice under section 3 (2) (e) of the
       Prosecution of Offences Act 1985.

12     I look forward to your reply.



Yours sincerely,


Ann Adlington
Solicitor




                                              3
21 - J U L . ’ 9 9 (WED) 1 3 : 3 1       S. Y. P. C H I E F DEPT                    T E L : 0 1 14 2 5 2 3 4 8 1   8481                   P. 001



                                     S o u t h Y o r k s h ir e

                     'ill'   '       P O L IC E
                                     JUSTICE with             COURAGE
                                                                                        Ian Dames, bachods) Dip.Ed.
                                                                                                  Assistant C h iefConstable



                     Ref: ACC/ID/VE

                     21 July 1999


                  Mr G Cnoston
                  CPS Special casework
                  Crown Prosecution Service
                  Ryedale Building
                  60 Piccadilly
                  YORK Y 0 1 1 N S


                  Dear Mr Croston

                  Private Prosecution by Anne AdHngton of David Duckenfield and Bernard M urray

                  rrn«fntlPr ndSry^ ma5 iS1trate 3t Leeds has committeci Mr Duckefield and Mr Murray to Leeds
                  5 ™ " ?°urt f0[ tnal on sieged offences of manslaughter and neglect of duty. The
                  prosecution has been brought by a private individual, Ms Anne Adlington.

                 Now that the matter has been committed I wonder if the Director of Public Prosecutions will
                 h fm M l'r"09               m atter<Ie,e,T,'ine whether       wi" lake I W the prosecution and conduct it


                 In the months leading up to the commital I have received numerous reauests fro m




                Ms A ^ f o n .
                                                                       ^                     ~
                                                                ° r*SPOn<l '° ,h® "Kluests ‘ a m          * *
                                                                                                                   w sss:
                                                                                                                   to r a e o i v ® Z m

                Yours sincerely

                 V


               lan Daines
               Assistant Chief Constable

               Copy to:               Peter Metcalfe, Hammond Suddards


                                 Police H eadquarters
                                 Snig Hill
                                 Sheffield S3 8LY
                                 Tel; 0114 2 2 0 2020 F ax: 0114 2 5 2 3243
                     CROWN PROSECUTION SERVICE

                                     Casework Directorate
                                        United House
                                          Piccadilly
                                            York
                                          YOl 9PQ

                                  Facsimile
                                    DX: 65204 York 6


Attention of         Ms Ann Adlington
Fax No              0151 236 1936
From                G R Croston
Tel                 01904 456595
Date & Time         14/07/99 16:27
No. of Pages        7 inc this one


MESSAGE

As requested, attached is copy of Stuart R Thorpe's statement of 30.4.89 which is at
pages 67 to 72.




   This fax must not be read, copied, disclosed or used by any person other than the addressee
                               Unauthorised use may be unlawful
                                                                         STATION

N7“ n5:        STUART   ROLAND
               THORPE

ADDRESS:


AGE / DATE OF BIRTH: 58           01061930

OCCUPATION:     PORK LIFT TRUCK DRIVER


Who states:- This statement consisting of 008 pages, each signed
by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and belief and I make
it knowing that if it is tendered in evidence I shall be liable to
prosecution if I have wilfully stated in it anything which I know
to be false or do not believe to be true.


DATED: 300489                                               S R THORPE (SIGNED)



           I have been a Steward at Hillsborough Football Ground, the home of

          Sheffield Wednesday Football Club for the past twenty two years and

          the Chief Steward in the West Stand for the last fifteen years.

          On Saturday 15th April 1989 (150489), I reported to Hillsborough at

          1100 hrs (1100), to commence duty in connection with the F A Cup

          Semi- Final to be played there between Nottingham Forest and

          Liverpool Football Club.



          I, together with the other Chief Stewards, had been briefed regarding

          the match about a week before by              who is a Secretary at

          the Club.   She advised us of the tickets to be used on the day of the

          match and to assess the need for temporary Stewards.



          At about 11.30 hrs (1130) on the day of the match, I briefed the 30 or

          so Stewards who were warking that day and posted them to their

          duties. Amongst the duties I posted Richard BEADSLEY, Malcolm BAINS

          and Ian MARSH to 'C' Gate at Lepping Lane.   This gate is used mainly

          by the Police to allow them access to the ground and all ejections
THORPE                  STUART   ROLAND


are done through this gate.      All the Stewards posted by me worked in

the vicinity of the West Stand.      I have no responsibility for the men

working in Pens one to seven or the turnstiles.



Other men (ie.                                 and Brian RIDGE) were

posted to man 'B' Gate.    This gate is only opened for emergencies and

at the end of the game to allow a swift evacuation of the ground.

The other gate in this area, 'A' Gate is not my responsibility, and I

do not know the procedure or operation in respect of this gate.

At the briefing I do not go through the evacuation procedure because

at the beginning of the season each Steward is given an internal

cortmunication by the Football Club detailing the evacuation

procedures and all Stewards are familiar with them.      I have handed a

copy of this document tc                      (Mkd SRT1) (Ex No        )



I have not received any formal training in connection with my duties

as a Steward, but I have qualified as a First Aider through the St

John Ambulance Association as part of my full-time employment.



I only wark as a Steward at Hillsborough as a part time basis at each

home game for which I get paid #15 per match, however for the Semi-

Final I was paid #25.



During my tour of duty, I patrolled around all areas of the West

Stand.   During that time I was in the area behind the West Stand and

the turnstiles.   At about 1345 I witnessed gate C being opened to

allow the Police to eject a number of supporters. At that time there

didn't appear to be any problem.
THORPE                   STUART   ROLAND



 I next witnessed gate C being opened at about 1445 hrs to allow the

Police to eject a number of supporters who had climbed over the wall

onto the top of the turnstile and into the ground.



A large number of Liverpool fans did this so much that the Police

Officer on duty in that area didn't appear able to cope.      Hie police

officers were also involved in searching of fans entering the

ground.      Most of the people who climbed the wall evaded the Police

and ran off to mingle with the fans who had produced their tickets.

On this occasion the Police Officers and Stewards had difficulty

closing 'C' Gate because the crowd outside the ground appeared to be

attempting to force the gate open.



Just after the kick-off, I was again in the area between the West

Stand and the turnstiles when I saw 'C' gate shaking and I got the

impression that the crowd outside the ground were trying to force

than open.     Then the gate was opened and I found myself in the path

of a crowd who surged through the open gate and ran towards the

tunnel under the West Stand which allows access to Pens 3 and 4.

I managed to get out of the way and went to stand by the perimeter

wall adjacent to 'C' Gate.



I was unable to direct the supporters either towards Pens 1 and 2 or

5, 6 and 7 because they just rushed forward 'en masse'.      If I had

tried to direct them I would have been trampled under foot.

I had previously witnessed gate C being opened at another semi-final

w h en   the turnstile couldn't cope with the flood of people coming into

the ground, but on that occasion the Police were on hand to ensure

that the fans were directed towards Pens 1 and 2, and the Stewards
THORPE                STUART    ROLAND


were on hand to check the tickets, but I have never seen the gates

opened as they were on that day.



It was not until about 15 minutes later that I realised that a

tragedy had taken place.    I received no catmunication regarding the

incident up to that point over the personal radio that I had with me.

I first became aware of the extent of the disaster when I saw two

Police Officers (I do not know their identity and cannot describe

them), carrying a body of What appeared to be a dead man from the

tunnel under the West Stand.



Whilst this was going on, the Liverpool supporters were obviously

very upset by what had occurred and were swearing at the Police and

the Stewards calling them GESTAPO amongst other things and blaming us

for the tragedy.



I   began to busy myself helping Liverpool supporters. One youth who

was a white male, about 16 yrs old, about 14 stone and about 6

feet tall with blonde hair, was lying by the steps leading up to the

seating area in the West Stand.     I checked his pulse and discovered

it to be shallow. As I was doing this a woman approached me and

identified herself to me as a nurse, she took over.     She was a

Liverpool supporter, white, about 5'3" tall and quite plump.

I then directed a youth who was about 18 yrs, white, male with black

hair, wearing denim jacket and jeans, who appeared to have a broken

arm, towards a First Aider who took him away.



I was then approached by a man who was white, about 6'4" tall, about

17 stone, who was crying.      I asked what was wrong and he explained
THORPE                STUART    ROLAND                                    5


that he had seen his brother lying on the pitch unattended, so I took

him onto the pitch to see his brother.



All this time I was subjected to swearing because I was identified as

a Steward by the bib I was wearing.      Eventually I was advised to

remove my bib by a Police Officer for my own protection.



I saw one of the Stewards,                |, cone off the pitch, having

been helping with the injured, and a group of Liverpool fans grabbed

hold of him and pushed him up a wall calling him a BASTARD.       I

believed they were going to assault him, so I intervened and they left

him alone.   I then advised          to remove his bib also



During these events I saw what was like rain falling from the West

Stand.   This was in fact urine where supporters were too lazy to go

to the toilet.   They were urinating at the back of the stand and it

was falling onto the people below.



After about an hour from kick-off the ground was still not clear and

I could see somebody or persons smashing the louvre windows to the

toilets in the West Stand.     Again the glass was falling down onto

the people below.   There was no one trapped at this location and the

damage was merely vandalism.     I did not see who was responsible for

the damage because I was outside.



Whilst in the West Stand I saw a snack bar which is normally staffed

by young girls, being looted.     The girls had gone to help with the

injured and there was a group of about seven youths stealing the pies

and other food frcm the snack bar.       (I can't describe the youths
THORPE                 STUART   ROLAND


involved, except to say they were all white and in their mid teens).

I told a Police Officer who chased them off.      Then the officer went

and the youths returned as I was tidying up.      They then shouted

after me and I feared for my safety and ran off, chased for a short

distance by them.



I had spoken to a Liverpool Steward who had cane to the match to

assist us, before the game began and he said he thought some 'IDIOTS'

might came, because last year the St Ledger Race was run on the same

day as the same Semi-Final was played between Nottingham Forest and

Liverpool.   On that occasion everything had gone very smoothly and

we were expecting the same this year, but the Liverpool Steward (he

is one of two brothers called LLOYD) believed that more people would

ccxne because the St Leger wasn't being run, which subsequently

appeared correct because there were a lot more people around this

year than last year.



I am willing to attend the Inquiry, if required.



I have handed to                a map (Mkd SRT2) (Ex No     ) which shows

my position at the time gate C was opened.     S R Thorpe
•   gMgi Office of H.M. Coroner
                         The Medico-Legal Centre, Watery Street, Sheffield S3 7ET

    HM Coroner:                                                       South Yorkshire (West)
    Christopher P. Dorries                                                 (0114) 273-8721



                                                                                   08 July 1999
    Y o ur ref:
    O ur ref:

    Mr G R Croston
    Case Work Director
    Crown Prosecution Service
    United House
    Piccadilly
    York
    Y01 9PQ                                                                  YORK




    Dear Mr Croston
    Hillsborough Inquests
    As you will be aware, I have been asked to comment by Ms Adlington on the contents of
    her letter to you dated the 3rd June.
    You will appreciate that I was only appointed coroner at the end of 1991 and that Doctor
    Popper was the coroner at the relevant time. Therefore much of Ms Adlington’s letter is
    outside my knowledge and remit.
    However, I was made aware that ACC Daines made a statement (apparently dated
    18th May 1999) in which he says that the police archive holds papers which (inter alia)
    “were generated by the 1991 inquest (and are held on behalf of the coroner)”. I found this
    somewhat puzzling and have discussed the situation both with Doctor Popper and Mr
    Daines. I beiieve the Mr Daines’ statement is in error on that point.
    So far as I am aware (and obviously this is outside my direct knowledge) the police took
    statements in 1989, and subsequently, for a number of purposes, only one of which was
    the coroner’s enquiry. Doctor Popper was subsequently provided with copies of some or
    all of these documents for the purpose of his inquests. Those copies were then held by
    Doctor Popper and are now held by me. To the best of my knowledge the South Yorkshire
    Police have not been asked to hold any documents on behalf of either Doctor Popper or
    myself.




                                          Fax: (0114) 272-6247
                                                                                     CMJ7881A.DOC
When I queried this point with Mr Daines he accepted that his statement was incorrect.
Apparently he had in mind documents which were generated by the inquest in the literal
sense, such as requests by the coroner for witnesses to be warned etc. I pointed out to
Mr Daines that such a document sent by the coroner to the police is not really held on
behalf of the coroner. We did however agree that the police hold the originals of the
documents used by Doctor Popper and indeed Doctor Popper has confirmed to me that he
only ever dealt with copy papers at the inquest so far as he can recall.
In speaking with Ms Adlington today I think that she may have misinterpreted the final
substantive paragraph in Doctor Popper’s letter to you of the 21st June in which he refers
to “copies of various documents which they held but which had been specifically prepared
for the coroner". I rather anticipate that he was referring to the copies having been
prepared for the coroner rather than the documents themselves. However, one would
obviously have to ask Doctor Popper about that point.
Whilst writing, Doctor Popper has explained to me that there has been some
correspondence and discussion about a statement of Inspector White. I am having a
check made of our archive and will let you know the result.
Yours sincerely




C P Dorries
HM Coroner




                                      Fax: (0114) 272-6247
                                                                                CMJ7881A.DOC
            S o u th Y o r k s h ir e

            P O L IC E
            JUSTICE      with   COURAGE




Mr George R Croston                                     Our Ref:         D&C/AMH/LJO
Prosecution Team Leader
Casework Directorate                                    Date:            6 July 1999
United House
Piccadilly                                              Recorded
YORK                                                    Delivery           RT 0793 3496 6GB
Y01 9PQ




ADLINGTON V DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

I refer to your letter of 25 June 1999 addressed to Mr Peter Metcalf, Solicitor of Hammond
Suddards, Leeds, relating to the above prosecution and in particular to a witness statement made
by former Police Inspector White on either 25 February 1990 or 1991.

On the instructions of the Chief Constable I have today carried out an extensive manual search of
the Hillsborough Archive and in a part of the archive dedicated to the Inquests I have found a hand
written original and typed copy of a statement taken by West Midlands Police from former
Inspector White on 25 February 1991. I enclose a copy of both for your information.

I would like to emphasise that until today I was not aware of the existence of this statement, nor is
there any record of it on the HOLMES database relating to the Hillsborough Disaster.

I am responding to your correspondence with the agreement of Assistant Chief Constable
Ian Daines and Mr Peter Metcalf of Hammond Suddards in order to expedite your receipt of the
copy statement.

Yours sincerely




Mr A M Hepworth
Hillsborough Archivist

Copy to: Mr Peter Metcalf, Hammond Suddards
         ACC Ian Daines



             Discipline and Complaints D epartm ent
             W indsor Road, Sheffield S8 8UB                T
                                                            The person dealing   with this correspondence is:
             Office Hours 8.30 am to 5.00 pm Monday to Frictaj
                                                          l% r A M Hepworth
             Answerphone: 0114 296 3094 (Out of office hours]
                                                          irs;
             Fax:           0114 296 3020
                                                       (0114)296 3084
                  /AOUVi                                                                           ‘ C^J"   /   FR3 (26.2.91)
                 t ^                                             </*^ / ^ y Z c v V                 ^ ^                  HG 414
                                                                                                                          (Amended 8.90)
                 L^tt<J? O*            West MidlandsfPolice
                 /Z/w-fi " fr z p « £ y
                 '                /    STATEMENT OF W ITNESS
                          (C.J. Act 1967,3.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Name         Harry WHITE
Age          Over 21         (Yrs)       Date of Birth
Occupation Retired Police Inspector

T his statem ent, consisting o f 4            page (s) each *signed by m e, is true to the best o f m y know ledge and b elief
a n d I m a ke it know ing that, i f it is tendered in evidence, I sh a ll be liable to prosecution i f I have w ilfully stated
in it anything which I kn o w to be fa lse or d o n o t believe to be true.

Dated the            25th       day of       February,                       1991 .

Signed        H. White                                          Signature w itnessed by

                                                                Officers N am e

                                                                Rank          PC
I retired as a Police Inspector from South Yorkshire Police Force on the

10th of December 1989, having served 27% years.

I came to Sheffield as a Police Inspector in February 1982, and first

worked at Hillsborough Football ground in that season, up until the

1984-85 season.              I worked outside of the ground, generally in close

proximity to the ground but at various locations.

At the start of the 1984-85 season, I generally was posted to the West

Side of the ground.                   I worked on this position for most matches,

circumstances permitting, ie, if it was a low category fixture and I was

not on duty, then I would not work the match.

At normal league matches with a 3 pm kick-off, myself and the Serials

which came under my command, would take up position at the West Side at

between 1 pm - 1.30 pm.                   The Serials under my command would normally

consist of 4 Serials, upto kick-off, and a further 2-4 Serials from

outside after kick-off, depending on the fixture.

The duties of my Serials were to search for offensive weapons, to make

sure the supporters had paid to come in, to check for drunkenness and to

distribute the supporters onto the terraces and into the West Stand.

With regards to distributing the supporters, my normal way, depending on

the anticipated numbers, would be to fill the centre two enclosures first


S ig n e d   H. W h ite                                    S ig n a tu r e w i t n e s s e d b y



* Delete as applicable
                                                                                            FR 2 (26.2.S 1)


                                    West Midlands Police                                          Z Z L '" ™ '
                                    STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                         (C.J. Act 1967,8.9; M.C. Act 1980, a.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation of statement of   Harry WHITE



and if necessary the enclosures nearer to the South Stand next.

I would do this by placing barriers across the building line of the West

Stand at its ends giving access to Pens 1 and 2 and at the other end

leading to Pens 6 and 7.                 These barriers would be manned by a Police

Officer who would direct supporters to whichever direction they were

supposed to go.             At the same time, I would have Police Officers on the

gates at the rear of the enclosures on the radial fences, they would have

these gates closed and bolted but not locked and they were there for

evacuation purposes.

When the central enclosures were full, I would close the blue gates

leading from the concourse onto the tunnel, to show the incoming fans that

the central enclosures were full.                    These gates would be manned by a Police

Officer, who would then re-direct the incoming fans.                            These gates could

not be kept closed for more than a few minutes, and in any case whilst

they were closed they were always manned by a Police Officer.

Prior to the semi-final on the 15th of April 1989, I had worked two

previous semi-finals, the .Leeds Utd V Coventry City semi-final in 1987,

where I was posted outside the ground, but I cannot remember where, and

the Liverpool V Nottingham Forest semi-final in 1988 when I was posted

again outside the ground in Penistone Road at Neeps End.                              In neither year

did I enter the ground or the West Side of the ground.

On the 15th of April 1989, I worked the semi-final at Hillsborough between

Liverpool and Nottingham Forest, I was posted to the West Side of the

ground with two Serials.

I took up post at about 10.45 am.                     At about 11.25 am, for the first time I

briefed Stewards as to their duties.                      At about twelve noon, the turnstiles

were opened and I saw that the Serials under my command were in position.



Signed    H. W h i t e                              Signature witnessed by
                                                                                            FR3 (26.2.91)

                                    West Midlands Police

                                    STATEMENT OF W ITNESS
                         (C.J. Act 1967,8.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation of statement of   Harry WHITE



On this occasion, there was no filling of the pens as I have previously

described because firstly it was an all ticket match, and secondly at a

league match in April 1988, Superintendent MURRAY had observed me filling

the pens as I have described, and he told me that I was not to do it in

this way and that the gates of the rear of the terraces in the radial

fences were to remain open bolted against the wall and that the fans would

find their own level on the terraces.

Once supporters started to enter the ground, I monitored them as they

entered by walking along the concourse area behind turnstiles A-G, and

10-16.      I would also have gone around the side of the West Stand and I

climbed onto the steps of the Police Control box to get an elevated view

of the West terraces as they began to fill.                         The central enclosures were

filling quicker than the outer enclosures, this was quite normal and I

could see no problems.

Throughout the afternoon, I continued to do a circuit of checking the

turnstile areas, the terraces, and also the refreshment bars, because at

the semi-final the previous year, there had been a cash snatch from one of

the refreshment bars.

During the course of one of my circuits, I saw a young Policeman having

difficulty with a drunk, and as a result I assisted the Officer to take

him to the Police Room.

At 2.45 pm, I left the Police Room, I know this because I remember

checking my watch.

There was some radio traffic at this time, concerning incidents outside

the Leppings Lane turnstiles, so I returned to the concourse area behind

turnstiles 10-16 via a route under the North Stand.




Signed    H. W h i t e                              Signature witnessed by
                                                                                            FR4 (26.2.81)
                                    ...    . ■          _i        ■-                             WG 415     (SO G22)
                                    West Midlands Police                                          (Affiended 9 81)
                                    STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                         (C.J. Act 1967,s.9j M.C. Act 1980, 8.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)


Continuation of statement of   Harry WHITE



Upon my arrival, the situation was as I described it in my previous

statement.         It -.-ould have taken me a matter of minutes to come from the

Police Room to behind these turnstiles.                       Whilst at this location, people

were coming to me complaining about the situation outside the turnstiles

and as a result, I attempted to convey a message to the Police Control

outlining the difficulties, I was still in the concourse behind the

turnstiles 10-16.              I got no response from Control.               I then became aware of

a determined movement of people from the A-G turnstile area towards the

South side of the West terrace.                   As a result, I entered the concourse area

behind the turnstiles A-G, because it appeared abnormal to me.                                   Having

entered this area, I saw that Gate ’C* was open and the situation was as I

have described in my previous statement.

I have been asked about the deployment of Police Officers to the tunnel

area and the gates at the rear of the radial fences on the terraces.                                        The

situation was such that although Police Officers had been identified to

take up these posts they never did because circumstances did not allow it.

I have also been asked about the gate in the dividing wall between the two

concourses, to the best of my recollection, there was no Police Officer

allocated duty to this area but it was quite possible that a Steward was

present.        However, his duty was to assist and direct the crowd and not to

prevent movement.

As for the direction for the opening of Gate ’C ’, I did not give an order

for it to be opened and I did not hear an order given for it to be opened,

I just saw it open.

All my recollections from then are as per my previous statement.




Signed    H. W h i t e                              Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                                                                                               WG 412
                                                                                                                                                                                         (Amended 4.90)
                                                                           West Midlands Police
                                                                STA TEM EN T OF W ITNESS
                                                (C.J. Act 1967. s.9; M.C Act 1980, s. 102; M.C. Rules 1981. r.70)


Name                                                     ........ L j ,H •

Age ..........                           (yrs)                          Date ofB irth ...........

Occupation                               ...                      < > .£ £ > ............. P o L . ^ e . . . . r X k i

This statement, consisting of                page(s) each* signed by me, is true to the best of my knowledge and
belief and I make it knowing that, if it is tendered in evidence, I shall be liable to prosecution if I have wilfully
stated in it anything which I know to be false or do not believe to be true.


Dated the                                                     ly of                                                                           19

Signed                                                                                               Signature witness

                                                                                                    Officer's Name .

                                                                                                     Rank

                    '^ C ............. ..................................................................... ■? -............................................

  .. .                                                                       ^OfJ.                       A -........... . . . <?•>.. .
         / fit                                                             .*?                          T .......... / .        . ^ j f . .........................fv'. 'a .j.

               * ? .7 v ! V . . .                                 ............................... ...................................
                                                                                                                                                                                        . . . <sr-rJ.

  ....                                                                 x jl~ .................... t-vw..... / j r . ^ r■A^^sr.
                                                                                                                         i r y ^ . ___
                                                                                                                                   . . ( ■ ‘f.tr Z -
  ....                      .                                                                                                  f c 'f .   .. .p. .                                          . ....




                                          (        f     . ..-.                  .....                                                                            T^ez.^cSs         . . .


           ^                                                                         .} .       ,       <                                                       &w ....

               fy rt*                    d p ? .                         '/ t o ..........                                                                                       ■...             ..

                                                                  tr '.o

 .......... A -r . . . .                                          .... .Jo?4?-:< f r . .                                                  O ^ r:             . / f it s - .      .-*r.
                                                                       .......                                    ?Z                                                             ....
                      .............. 1>J                                         . . . . . . CpC.                                                                             .^ x .. . . .

                                              ..... £*y>. . . .                                                                                      /T*

 ..... S t / t j c j L , - .y                                                                                                 ...................... .y ..,L*r-.

                 j S            y    v         ^        - -        . A /S s A                         ^ ............                                                                        ......
 ............................................                           ^ rV T tf^ ............. ”r-rT .............................                   f\rA ^ T . . . .          ....

 ..                                                < C ....................................................                                          ,4 /< W £ . ...                                    ■

 ........................ / f r t . ____ KJarCc-4. & / . ' ............................................                                                                                                 .

                  ............ ................................... k   ^ .C K . . .                     ................... . . .                                                              ....

               2 e * .iJ A                                    u        i^ c l                       C       ^ c ^ / . . . . to c ^ d b *. . . .< e K ^ ..

                 U * id d l.                           fa h k - tZ r .                       .................. & A - .. . . J & - . . . . A J & c S Z J / * .



Sign,                                                                                                 Signature witnessed by

 * Delete as applicable
                                                                                                                                                                    WG 413
                                                                                                                                                              (Amandad S.S7)
                                                         W e s t M id la n d s P o lice

                                            S T A T E M E N T OF WITNESS
                                    (C.J. Act 1967. s.9; M.C. Act 1980. s.102; M.C. Rules 1981. r.70)

Continuation of statement of . . .                                                               f" X t~ ................................................• • • • .........
         jd r .                                     ...... //fV?                                                  r-Vt .■»....                   .... ^4-f
                         ....                                                            ........                                                                            .
          C o ^ S i^ ir ^ . .             ............
                                          ........ / f i
                                            . . . ^ .     .-d^fs-^4__ ...I ^ T - . O . --- A-o C j k                                 s


         . 0   /- f._ . . a ^ r J L ......... «i-.......£Vwr^«K/!........2 . r r - . 4 r. .          ^

         .. pr*?v?                                               .............                            k + .c /<r.... < ? /f..........
         . ,«W. .. .d z* ~ .                    J< ^ ■k ^ r '-s i-           .......... ................................
                                                                                                                      ....                             .........
        b l* rr* -r.             r^>................................                                                                                                                 .<..

 <h                      r           J^w.xa                 ...                            ... /'wdkL                                        ... </» .
. . .   .t-W   . y . .                                                                           p .         tfV .                                                           . . .




                                                                                                                                                                        .
..                                                                      * r.< ^ 3 ^ ................................................... . <£W-^p, .                     ..
.. .                     <^--4...... «Vv*/£....... f r r t h ? .                         ■ ■ ■                             L > ,4 - A L .           . . . S fo rJ ?              .
.................                              f<? ^                     ..... -r-j-Vd.......................... j ■••                                                       ■
. . . . * $ .<           <      1 ^ ..................................................                                                   iyJ^K yj., ......... c J i&      rf.

           ^y. ./&. .                                                ..... A 4~ryC&*-r. f ..                               L jc^ -C J L                   /^?-=---
... ,.^o....\ ......... ............. h r g -.                                                         ih r-J a             ■^ruC-C^X%i^r. &r4.
         ^.t^rS?/........... .....                                                                                   ■••.'I^C*-..... <2yVC,W^v;?^
                             . . . . . ..s'fcb .                                                  ...................................
                C2T             U < ^ c^ .                       JL > ... .J tU *                           (r y r                                   .. 3 ^ c ^ %
..                        ___ s jt A -                    G rr^dJlc+U **                               L u ^ r^ .                           ................
        .L) &-£k. ....                            .... *dr.                    i(rJ? ........ rv jL %............... ••<^<5^42^4
                              £ . . . J, "f". .2-...... .........A't ...                                      ..... ........................
                                       <fa . . . . .. . . .<£.'£ . 7 r . .’. . . .                                          A -...........l/7 * ^ s:rL * ~ r. $■ • •
         fc /< rv u /&                          ..................                                       / r ^ .................... •.....
                                                        tJ/C o .. L t& rt* c/sl. .
...... .-/p.... lj.4 -.                 ‘r-'Co^. ....                                                  ^esj-c^r-..... ...
                                          __ -/•..... « » . ........................                                                                             .                   r^?

.... ^X- • ■ ■•                               ..... ^               .. . . J             U             ........... .....................
           <s~v               J jZ & ,                                    ...... ......... ......... rr^rf.                                          ..              --------

                                                                                                             .f>9-                            ^ .< ^ .c ^ 4 .}....
          s fljZ s y                                                X^vr^r. ...< j/Z z^ 6 .^ ............... ... C . ^ e j i
.......... I                 r z *             .
                                               /....                                       .... s \ ~ t £ .... t< ~e~j£. .••&u~rt& ■ ■
          dX & y                    L s-^ r^ -..... r</^u*2u                                           /F^v:.... < *x sf« rf:6rA . .
......./?                           *4<$. .........................................................
                                                                --------------------    b c * rj2 -

Signed ^xlgw. WS?VrV'Sr ,VT..............                                         Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                                                                       W G 413
                                                                                                                                                                 (Amended 9.87)
                                                         West Midlands Police
                                           S T A T E M E N T O F W I T N E S S
                                   (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980. s.102; M.C. Rules 1981. r.70)


Continuation of statement of ...                                                                U .k t. '.X . ^             ...............
                      ......... a : . . . .                                                                             ....            r jt*                                          .
                                 ....................                                     f c tr n * _......... ..
                         .... •      ;     .......................................... . . . f • • • / P . ........... 'W O rO M j .                      .......................

..... /n<v                                     ..... ■£'........... ............ ..........                                                . ..
                     C ? h r r i.                                                    .... P.*xC /.'.... i.
                                   .... (rfr-.                  h ^ . *?w<v                 .... .. 6 r* y......./& ....
          .          ^       /                 id             ..... U>-                            ----................

                      ............^>A                                     ........ ^?VfV-r.'. . . . .                                  ----- ------------------------
                                   .... A       '# /. .... .........                                       ...    .£ .& 4 r* J L .... £ * * r . ....
          /      |       W                       ................ . . .                       ............jfe€<sf/\.                            , . ..                    ...
          JhA-                       ..                                                   {■? .£ , . . .                       . . . lu r^ C ^ r- .........
                                                                  ......jLr4-f^~..... ^v ^ W. ^ r ^ . ' T .----

       ^rvjr               ft... .fsr^*i<3C. . .
                                                                                                                                                                  -^■4-C
......... ^/&£<&-r. j* .                  rfZ t^                 i^dA<y<t.L. *-.                                           .4 ^ .         M .                 (?
                ....A        fr r U ...                                       2 T ......                                            6v;

      f        £rJ.<*€n+*\.............................. .-.                                i, y.......... /fir * -                                              ?. .

.....I/. ...£T<2 \/.4-rdm -y.                     . . . d - if a - i .... ^ &*?•*.<*£ •— ./r-*-*>-.«rr^f......... ■ ■ ■ /.& & ’& ■
                                         _~X~ .                                                                              ....                 ...^
....... Irryyf. .... C C .................                                                    C^rr^f-. &T-r4-.                        .• • .&~J/r°rV~. ■<....
                     #-                  /^XL/jtsrp&T&S- . . &• • • .                                                      ••.fi’.e(~y.C^f.'f:........
...... .<2n**i-.is.          r?.                                              .^>-.............. ..... I'd'&r**-.... .........
              IrJ.a-A                                            .....            <ss^                  ..... <?rttud'<SArJl-2~                    .. r 7 ^ -----
                     r* * * ~ 'd l ...... ^                 ..... v -                                                                                ■. A ^ ^ z A .
    ..tt                  ......                  •■••y!^.4-;^^*T-r'..... ^#?^?TeVr..... ..                                           .^ X ..
          < ^ V . ...                             f> .... .«5v .-.. . , ^ C                         ...u         ^ s :J U                                                          •

                                    ..............................................................
                                                    ^        .... / f ^ .... ^                     ..... ^ . ^ f . ...

   i r b c v k ^ J L . . . . ftt?-.                       «S*A^'u/.                                                            .^...                f=v:<=v-^^. . .

                                                    ±O.Ji-cfcr£lf.                     fVrv^f-               A   J                                . . . ^T.^rr^C&4/~
          ^/T.........                                                        r^h>...........                                                                              ....
      ^ Z h~.                 Ci.C&T^K-A                       Isjfr& r. ... 7 ^ ^ *                                                   A . ^ .. ..... ......
 ......... j/T"".. ..<^tki^G
                           r.                               U -.f?...... ............ j d - . ....                                                       ... /&■'£?■&
 .... ^uvs .^ ....                                      &<dr&z*%s£'......./ f t ■ J? - S " ....... ^e^<. . .                                                       ..... .
              frirrQ r                          v\-tL                ;C-...........                              irrcv&/E.'?<<$. .                           .               Jr $
 ...... 0i A. , .."/^rv. .r ^ C ^ r T                            ^        j      J       * ........                                                                           T-g-

Signed                                          ^ :~ r r ............              Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               WG 413
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (Airlanded 9.87)
                                                                                      West Midlands Police
                                                                        STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                                      (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C. Rules 1981, r.70)

Continuation of statement of . . . . . .IriA A fiyj............ •. f jg . .......................................................
 ..fsJ&Tr^                                                                 'rtw 'y .                                           ..... £jH zrCiLr .....
 .. . .^            ?J L a                              .’rfZ * d r.                             'A & -................................................................ ....................................
                  .


                                 .......................................« ^ .......................................                                                                   W>. .. . . .                            t~<r.
 .......... &sy.                              ..                              C            .             C             ............. ..............
              su a                                                         .....................                                                                        ^2ft-v.4T.............. &-A. — XT.
              /^^sSSjrfr'• ................................................................................................ .........................................................................................
 .....j ^ x y ....                                               C t ....... .............<?‘- W ............. .                                                                                                          ■&**£......
                  ./Wvi^r i£<^...............                                                            • £              , ................. &<4'.                                                                     <*»....                 "C-»-
                  / V f r ^ C                                                 ...............................................................( S                                                         ' • A              ' * - Air^~
              .   .fy/.lA.£'$-Ac\*n...... X-/V£^..... ? rf. 1                                                                                    / ...........AC&r.....p.c<$c*C*~K
              d Z jL r                            (
                                                  /^4fS >r                                                                  .err.....                                                                   (^(£fh£GS'*<£'~4—*&.
                    Sl^nJL,                                    /^-4-.......... . . . . . . ^<<4-........................ ........................ ^2T.. . . kf&SS. .
                       /v*>/ . . . . .              ,<k> .... *^<9...... < ^ . ..,,6fS ...                                                                                                                                    ,,. AfVtv.
.... 'jfhA r                                               r                                                      ...... ....                                                                              />&-?■**><-..
....                                                                                       ....... C--K? ....                                                                         (?&-*/£                       .....
           Lpe^r&r. ...-4-*!                                                    «^2-rrr<fV>o                                                                          ..... !r#r& :-r«-r^. ...
                              ... L               ^ f j/- . .....<?Vr*/                                                jfiL d r .                                r^*-%                                  f v m £ . .U *% d< A
              P ‘-*'r/'(. ...</'$?<«♦<“....... .............. ..... <?w. ...                                                                                                                               .................
                                                               .'                                                                                                                    ^                                                         •■
..........                       0<^C j2~A ..............................                                                                                                                      £h^r.(r<r*^> .-Jr*.---
             &vJr<z-*-. ■•.                                                                                                                                                                           t2T.                .....
.........                                                            .... J     & Z y t ^ ( r ............                                                                             C j.4 ,//c     ■■■■
      dZ*-* . .                                                           £ -* -........................................                                                        ^4 -K k^ . j C. .. . . .< h^-/s,f¥.t*{j2--S
. . . . / ^ . . T .*7*..................................                              /jQ ,-r.                        ..*... .I ^ r . . . . . . Lif.S-&d-c£ ................................... . . -r'Cr'-K -*L

 ...... <-^VvA-............. <5Wf*rW ^                                                              ..................                                                                                         .... ^ ? . .               .. - ^ V - •.   U
 ..............................................                                   6&_............... < T ................... d?.                                                           .... . .                w     / <3* .

                   S     t e - f i s ... ^                              .... ............ . .                                        ,£& rx                                                                                                     ..
 ..               ....        G               j                       £d/< . . . .                                       <>?£.-*■? d -,...... If                                                    ..... ...■'T^                     ’9-. .
 ...                              . ...'A'.^T<:er'.<r^rA ...... ^>r<4......................                                                                                                                                                      .. r£ \> .
                  p-.ZW. .*                              < < fjL x.                               diZ ^.j'SV rf?                                                                        XS*r*r?4                           IfiS^rrfr. ...
 ..... f^'///^-rK'^ .....                                            £f                                                                        ■/■ ...... <^^<?-..... ................
                                  (^rJLksC                                      . y                     ^tZf£<>                                       C<sS^r4.                    . . . . . .


                                                      a : .................                                                              / ^ w - r .... /vf*?....                                                                         s.\ .. •
                                                                                    . . . . <& *-.                                                 *<r^cxxrr±                                      /^T....
                                         t& ...                     ££........... & C v r e ^ * .......................                                                                     .j^T^A                                 ...■
                                                                                                                             Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                                                                                           WG 413
                                                                                                                                                                                 (Amandcd 9.87)
                                                                  West Midlands Police
                                                        STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                         (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980. s. 102; M.C. Rulss 1981. r.70)


Continuation of statement of . .                              .      .       n          L ).                ..................................................................

....                                             ....                     ..,..                     .<£’                                                                         .....
                            . . . .                                                                                                                                                           .

...      . t U ..                      ...... .          . < / £ * . . . . . / .
...                        .... /         ~        s ....                                                        CIat-AA                     . . . S s is d : Cr■£. .... fiorrT
                           ..... & £..... r ^ 6 e , ..... rr£ j£ r.* ^ /'. /vr*i-*w‘
                                                                                   tf.... /^/vrT'f. .•...........
                                                    .                                                       * f . .. . . .<?&.. - ^ y -
. . . .^rV<7                              ....... ^ T~,......... < 5 ? W O ... C*. ■                        ■ ■ .^k'SpJT"!U*.
. . . . J \ /V\/                                                             A<-    ..... ............£«.(                          ^        W       "        ...........
             / k i                       ^        ......                                        ^:.....        <(*Jr& Z4rh.-^JL..                                                     —

                                      . . . .<h>... .< h fy k -&                                                                                                                  -------
                                 ..................................................................
............ 4t: ... .2 .L f..< zp ^                                             rz:.... ...........<?&-....                                                                 ......
....tyZX0>y*-                            ZC                ^TK*rt/rO.                                                              A.                  ~^C-. .
                  9r< r^r'rr^                           f^ * -y ._____________ .................................... •
.............................................................................                                                            ....                   (fT^ ^ < o . . . . r
.................................                                                       < 0 . CSc-r-^V.C"'’-^..<£^£_^*V^T"4 ..........
           ^?yl^0?{~TP .                         .... .......... ...................^<f»JrvA_ ...                                                                                                 .
                    ..... ”"-C..................... ..f-Zn?.... ...........' A - C r 0 r C ~ y * ' .                                                             C-&~. . . .
          ^Nrr?-i#v . ..                                          .... ...................Jx*<~rs*-!$.-£p&ro...... /.o . t .L £±.

          (/ on. . . . .                                \fi~tirfd 7 jL . .../L*r±c&f-r:■ ■ • <4^*-. ....                                                                                  ...
                                                                         .^ur>r.«'U’
                                                                                   .*?V'4^.......... -....
        A / ^ . .... <s^... rf                                                                 ......£>£-..... .^.                           ...                        ........................

                                         ....                                J ^ rU        Jf/. ... .U <nrJ^T..                        .. / > * * ( .& ■£ * + . .
             /yiifi—             A.              ? y( ed^.ttr t~. . . .            ...... rf. ..... ,</p ...                                                                      ^s....
                                                          ^                  r. ...S?~£rfryyr^                          .... /■?■/►                             .t/^. • ■
                                             ^                l^yCc^^J-                        ...............                    L& cs*-4~t*r*....
.... ^J. <2>-f^-. ...                                                    . . . ,J-».... ........... ^Zdnrvlp.hj*s^
           'fX& r. . . s4v£r*+ -M dr-Tr                                         -e^v^-T2^r^r ...d lfe -. .••.'T^VT<V^?4<^tV...‘rVf^
........ ................................... . . . .                                ........ . . . . r-A). . . .<£Zr-!*4/a-j
                                                                         ^                                                                                                         ............
                                                                    .....
            ^a..... ...........C. <5!-*-or^-r<C— ..................... £&                                                                ■ ■ ■ rJ^C&-, .
.............. f.(2. r~. . ( C> . ,*r. . . . 'T7~~.........................                    A^-Cy.......... t> A C ^ c ^ S '-/? -........... £-.0?T T ?. . .
               (2.<>f\‘l r r v r ^ \ .....................                                       frfA-C-.<<**4«G-.......................
                       ..... .^.                                                      ^2^                                                        <**.'£’. ---

Signed .>^ | l y > ^ v < ^ r V : ..........                                           Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        WG 413
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (Amended 9.87)
                                                                                      West Midlands Police
                                                                      STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                                        (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s. 102; M.C. Rules 1981. r.70)

Continuation of statement o f ....................... .< 4 4 ^ ........ ! J.
                                                 .......................... . . . .                                     . . . . <d rr .<r i . . . .                                                                 ....
                                                                                            ............................. £*&Lr-*-r.......... .<^S . . .                                                                        . h f A-ii/f .
               <                   r               f         ..                    A         i.                       *k . . . . f ? e ~ - £ k < U -                         .... ^ u . ..... ^2*                                *            .         ■ ■

                                        ........................                                                                          <?yr-?T's.. ....                                                                                        ....
                                                                      . . . . A                                                                                                                             U       r   .. t x f f a y : - .< J (

                       #   l   ( /t                                                      'f p .       . . . J ( \ C s i ~ . ............................................. & n td r? --y rr< -& c . . .

                   < /£ « > > ........ < *:.< ? -**............... 'X ...............S # ^ ..........'f j& r .......... ^ r y f.- ^ r ----- C - / . ..
                                                                                                                                                     ....

                                                                                        J2-.                       d & A € rf.                                               ..... ........
                 s J tb *J rJ lrr* T ^ w f> ........................................................................................ ..............................
............ :^?r . . .                                                                               Ir& Z r^ . . .                             . & x/& n*rJ L ......... . . •
...............................................

...                            . . .^/zf'VVV Q r^ ..........( V r A * . .........................                                                                                                                                                             .
                                                    /> e ^ u rr:.......... ^                             .......................                                                                                                C-'P-r'A . . . .
.........................jtf - v v . . .                       . .    . d& C T :                                           »................... ........................ .................................................................................
                                                                                 •■ •■                                                                                                                                                             ....
.............^ ^ 3 t^ 4 < ,S .............^V<V-£S^-............ /r^.^i-rv-........... C-*sZ~4>*d-.                                                                                                                            . . ■ t /& . . . .
             d & d s -g -                                                    --- /£*-& & * ....................                                                                                                                              AjZ~U-a~r. .
                           d L zJ c                                                                              ....... ............................ ..
                    / l ^ r ^ ......................................... . . * ............... . ............... ........................................... . .............
............................. ^                          . . . . . J L vS * .                                                                        ...........^ ? r ^ V ........... ...................................
                                                              '7?Ct7-...................................                                                        C*<S..         .         ....                                                          •••
                           &^Jjt                                                                              . .'JXz—                                                        .. .C7«^a^ C <si* ^ S ^                          h4             ..........
                                                                            (r& $Jh                                <^T.                           fr P 1L/                      / > ^ . < ^ ! < ^ - & A ^ v .......
                                                              L s).c S \............... /V.<?___ ..............................
                        t& .ittd 'is i............«?^i?. . . . - r ^ fe r * . . . . .                                                                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             .


....... ^ 0 L .^ 4 rJ i-..................... .L & r(& -r. . . .                                                                                                                                                                      . . . b x * -£
                 (* M                   < £                       .(Jt& -l j .Q^r. P n r.                                           ls ^ >                                   d U ^ .y                           A^.«sra...                               ...
                                                   . . . ,‘fvot^r-.............n -c -J r. . . .                                                                              ........ £ V r^rw x^                                                      ...
                                                       <^fc                       /^ V -                         ^ ............................................ ^ •* ................ * ......................
 ....................................../is   .   . . .. f a r .   ........................................................................................................          fr'fVT ................. -rZ ^ V . .
                            .......... *n<*r&-.. .. \ C .'................................... . . ✓ t t r /                                                                                              .<-              ^fw. . .
                    £nf                      c               pO *r . . . . L t^~ .......................                                                           /- .<?-. . . .                                       .........
                            ................                                                                                    J * j2 -s £ r* ’'.           . . . ..tfW . . .                                                          1£-vT-<r»rs.

 .... /rc-~r. .%
               £^                                   ■ •■■-/■* ■■■                                                                                                 4 ^ - . ...                                                                       .Q.£*e->v

Signed \^ r p ffl.\J ^ S ~ s s j!;& . .                                                                                          Signature witnessed by
                                                                                                                            WG 413
                                                                                                                      (Amended 9.87)
                                     West Midlands Police
                              STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                       (C.J. Act 1967, s.9; M.C. Act 1980, s.102; M.C, Rutoa 1981, r.70)


Continuation of statement of . . . . H m a <^                    I      ............................................. ............
      <4//. .... fat**. .. , / ^       r   C        ..... /vtbs-t*.   ...                                R ' f A - .....

      A-<d ....   .p& -ir.         IsyZ j....




                                                      Signature witnessed by
36-JUL. ’99(TUE) 16:23                                                   TEL--01 14 2963020                     P. 001




                                                                Discipline & Complaints Department
                     South Yorkshire
                                                                50 Windsor Road

                     P O L IC E                                 Heeley
                                                                SHEFFIELD S8 8 UB
                     J U S T IC E w i t h COURAGE


    TELEPHONE: 0114 296 3094

    FAX: 0114 296 3020

    INTERNAL FAX: 3020


                                    Facsimile Transmission
    Date:                           b                     my
    To:
    For the        tentionof:   A                   A        C J ? e X fc M        j/


    Comments:
                                              Y o+J        i/


    ( b ib *
    fi& lc f                    c r j H G s fA 'H L c J jt
                                                          # 4    'C y A & d -
   ^ C n r^ J t>                        ^C O jL c ^Ss .    < i* A        * t 2*5




   From:                                                  H 4 & 4 > /> C J y * r        *   /b d u > t 4 '£ %


   Telephone Number:                          c P f/fy . & £ >


   Number of Pages (including this page)                             ^

   llLthe event of a poor copy, please contact;-
   South Yorkshire Police - Discipline & Complaints Department
   Telephone Number - Direct Line 0114 296 3094 - Internal Extension 3094
36-JUL. ’99(TUE) 16:25                                                             TEL:01 14 2963020                                   P. 006

                         South Yorkshire
                         PO LIC E
                         JUSTICE        with    COURAGE




           Mr George R Croston                                                  Our Ref:            D&G/AMH/UO
           Prosecution Team Leader
           Casework Directorate                                                 Date:              6 July 1999
           United House
           Piccadilly                                                           Recorded
           YORK                                                                 Delivery                RT 0793 3496 6GB
           YOl 9PQ




           ADLINGTON V DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

          I refer to your letter of 25 June 1999 addressed to Mr Peter Mel calf. Solicitor of Hammond
          Suddards, Leeds, relating to the above prosecution and in particular to a witness statement made
          by former Police Inspector White on either 25 February 1990 or 1991.

          On the instructions of the Chief Constable I have today carried out an extensive manual search of
          the Hillsborough Archive and in a part of the archive dedicated to the Inquests I have found a hand
          written original and typed copy of a statement taken by West M dlands Police from former
          inspector White on 25 February 1991. I enclose a copy of both for your information.

          I would like to emphasise that until today I was not aware of the exlstehice of this statement, nor is
          there any record of it on the HOLMES database relating to the Hillsboro•ugh Disaster.

          I am responding to your correspondence with the agreement of Assistant Chief Constable
          lan Daines and Mr Peter Metcalf of Hammond Suddards in order to expedite your receipt of the
          copy statement.

          Yours sincerely




          Mr A M Hepworth
          Hillsborough Archivist

          Copy to: Mr Peter Metcalf, Hammond Suddards
                   ACC lan Daines



                         vaL,>uM and Complaints Department
                         W indsor Road, Shaffiald S8 SUB
                         Offica H o u r,                 M onday to                                       ^      C O r» * P « K * n C e IS:
                         A aaw arphoon. 0 1 W 296 3094 (O ut of office hour*)           H e p W O rth
                                         « » » » »                        (0114)290 3084
6-5UL ’ 95(TUE) 16:23                                                TEL:01 14 2963020


                                                        Discipline & Complaints Department
                      South Yorkshire
                                                        50 Windsor Road

                       P O L IC E                           Heeley
                                                            SHEFFIELD S8 8 UB
                      J U S T IC E w i t h COURAGE


   TELEPHONE: 0114 298 3094

   FAX: 0114 296 3020

   INTERNAL FAX: 3020


                                  Facsimile Transmission

   Q a te

   To:                           C .ts .                                                 /


    For the attention of: ^                                                 f Piy'& etxdiA A.
    Comments:
                                Ity u /J G iM          sj                                    h ir fM   */




                    /* S r9 9

   ^ c n h rtJ i*                    ^ C c ^ e jie ,                      £1*5   f              h ^ * 7 l.




    From:

    Telephone Number:                                  296

    Number of Pages (including this page)                            ^

    inthe event of a poor copy, please contact. -
    South Yorkshire Police - Discipline & Complaints Department
    Telephone Number - Direct Line 0114 296 3094 - Internal Extension 3094
                                                                  TEL:01 14 2963020                                   P. 002
(TUE) 16:23
                                                                                                      FR3 (38.9,91)
                                                                                                                WG 414
                                                                                                                (Ameadsd B.90)
     & & * / pr&ttUM        <-*' .      W e s t M i d l a n d s Police
                                            ATEMENT OF WITNESS
                           (C.J, Act 1967.a.9; K.C. Act i960, a.102; M.C. ftul»a 1981, r.70)


     Name Harry WHITE                                                                       S. /o .
     Age    Over 21    (Yrs)      Date of Birth
     Occupation Retired P o lic e Inspector
     77>wstatement, consisting of 4         page (s) each *signed by me, is true to t’ie best of my knowledge and belief
     and I make it knowing that, (fit is tendered in evidence, Ishall be liable to pro, ;ecuHon if I have wilfully stated
     in it anything which I know to be false or do not believe to be true.
     Dated the        25th        day o f     February,                1991

     Signed    H. White                                        Signature witnessed bf
                                                               Officers Name
                                                Rank PC
     I r e tir e d as a P olice Inspector from South Yorkshire P o lic e Force on the

     10th o f December 1989. having served 27% years.

     I came t^> S h e ffie ld as a P o lic e Inspector in February 1982, and f i r s t

     worked at Hillsborough Football ground in that season , up u n t il the

     1984-85 season.           I worked ou tsid e of the ground, geneir a ll y in close
     proximity to the ground but a t various lo c a tio n s .

     At the s t a r t o f the 1984-85 season, I gen era lly was posted to the West

     Side of the ground.             I worked on t h is p o s itio n fo r moat matches,

     circumstances perm itting, i e , i f i t was a low category f ix tu r e and I was

     not on duty, then I would not work the match.

     At normal league matches w ith a 3 pm k ic k -o f f , myself and the S eria ls

     which came under my command, would take up p o sitio n a:: the West Side at

     between 1 pm - 1.30 pm.                The S e r ia ls under my command would normally

     c o n s is t of 4 S e r ia ls , upto k ic k - o f f , and a further 2 -             S e r ia ls from
     o u tsid e a'iter- k ic k - o f f , depending on the f ix t u r e .

     The d u tie s of my S e r ia ls were to search fo r o ffe n s iv e weapons, to make
     sure the supporters had paid to come in , to check for drunkenness and to

     d is t r ib u t e the supporters onto the terra ces and in to nhe West Stand.

     w^th regards to d is tr ib u tin g the supporters, my norma!, way, depending on

     the a n tic ip a te d numbers, would be to f i l l the centre uvo enclosures f i r s t

     Signed H. White                                        Signature witnessed by

     * Delete as applicable
6 - JUL. ’ 9 9 (TUE) 1 6 : 2 4                                                       TEL:0114 2963020                              P. 003
  «
                                                                                                                     FR2(M.2.B1)
                                                                                                                         WG 415 (SO G221
                                                            West Midlands Police                                         (Aaendad 9.(1)

                                                            STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                                (C,J. Acc 1967,s.9; M.C. Act 19S0, a.102; M.C. Rule* 1981, r . 70)


                      Continuation of statement of Harry WHITE


                      and i f necessary the enclosures nearer to the South :>tand next.

                      I would do th is by placing barriers across the build;.ng l in e of the West

                      Stand at i t s ends giv in g access to Pens 1 and 2 and ut the other end
                      lead in g to Fens 6 and 7.                These barriers would be maimed by a P olice

                      O fficer who would d ir e c t supporters to whichever d ir r c tio n they were

                      supposed to go.              At the same time, I would have P o lice O fficers on the

                      gates a t the rear of the enclosures on the r a d ia l f e r c e s , they would have

                      th ese gates closed and bolted but not locked and they were there for
                      evacuation purposes.

                     When the cen tra l enclosures were f u l l , I would clo se the blue gates

                      leading from the concourse onto the tunnel, to show tjhe incoming fans that

                     the cen tra l enclosures were f u l l .                 These gates would ae manned by a P olice

                     O ffic e r , who would then r e -d ir e c t the incoming fans.                      These gates could
                     not be kept closed for more than a few minutes, and i:i any case w h ilst

                      they were closed they were                   always manned by a P o lic e p f f i c e r .
                      Prior to the se m i-fin a l on the 15th o f A pril 1989, I lad worked two
                                    t
                      previous s e m i-fin a ls , the Leeds Utd V Coventry City s <smi-final in 1987,

                     where I was posted ou tsid e                  the ground, but Xcannot remember where, and

                      the Liverpool V Nottingham Forest se m i-fin a l in 1988 uhen I wasposted

                      again ou tsid e the ground in Penistone Road at Neeps End.                               In neither year

                      did I enter the ground or the West Side of the ground

                      On the 15th of A pril 1989, I worked the se m i-fin a l at Hillsborough between

                      Liverpool and Nottingham F orest, I vas posted to the Vest Side of the
                      ground w ith two S e r ia ls .

                      I took up post a t about 10 . * 5 am.                  At about 11,25 am, fo r the f i r s t time I

                      b riefed Stewards as to th e ir d u tie s .                 At about twelve noon, the t u r n s tile s

                     were opened and I saw that the S e r ia ls under my commat d were in p o sitio n .


                      Signed     H. W h i t e                               Signature witnessed by
•JUL.’W(TIJE) 16:24                                                            TEL:0114 2963020                                   P. 004

                                                                                                                  FR3 (28.2-81)
                                                                                                                       HC 4X5 (SO G22)
                                                  West Midlands Police                                                 tAmended 9.81)

                                                  STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                     (C.J. Act 1967,8.9; M.C. Act. 1980, a.102; M.C. Rule a 1 9 9 1 , r . 7 0 )


             Continuation of «atsir>ent of Harry WHITE

                         1
             On t h is occasion, there was no f i l l i n g of the pens as I have previously

             described because f i r s t l y i t was an a i l t ic k e t match, and secondly at a

             league match in April 1988, Superintendent MURRAY had observed me f i l l i n g

             the pens as I have described, and he to ld me that I vsas not to do i t in

             t h is way and that the gates o f the rear of the terraces in. the ra d ia l

             fences were to remain open bolted again st the w all ani that the fans would
             find th e ir own le v e l on the terra ces.

             Once supporters started to enter the ground, I monitored them as they

             entered by walking along the concourse area behind tu:rn stiles A-G, and

            10-15.      I would a lso have gone around the aide of the West Stand and I

            climbed onto the step s o f •the P olice Control box to got an elevated view

            o f the           terraces as they began to f i l l .                     The cen tral enclosures were

            f i l l i n g quicker than the outer en closu res, th i9 was q i i t e normal and I
            could see no problems.

            Throughout the afternoon, I continued to do a c i r c u it of checking the

            t u r n s t il e area s, the te rra ces, and a lso the refreshmedlt bars, because at

            the se m i-fin a l the previous year, there had been a cash snatch from one of
            the refreshment bars.

            During the course of one of my c i r c u i t s , I saw a young Policeman having

            d i f f i c u l t y with a drunk, and as a r e s u lt I a s s is t e d thje O fficer to take
            him to the P o lic e Room.

            At 2.45 pm, I l e f t the P olice Room, I know t h i s becausie I remember
            checking my watch.

            There was some radio t r a f f i c at t h is tim e, concerning Lncidents outside

            the Leppings Lane t u r n s t i l e s , so I returned to the concourse area behind

            t u r n s t il e s 10-16 v ia a route under the North Stand.




            Signed    H. W h i t e                                  Signature witnessed by
6 - JUL.: 99 (TU.E) 1 6 : 2 5                                                   TEL:01 14 2963020                                P, 005


  -   •                                                                                                         PR4 (ZB5.81)
                                                                                                                     WG 415 (SO 022)
                                                        West Midlands Police                                         (Amended 9-81)

                                                        STATEMENT OF WITNESS
                                             (C.J. Aet 1967,».9j M.C, Act 1980, *.102? M.C. Rules 1901, r.70)


                     Continuation of statement of Harry WHITE


                     Upon my a r r iv a l, the s it u a tio n was as I described i t in my previous

                     statement.          I t would have taken me a matter of minutus to come from the

                     P o lic e Room to behind these t u r n s t il e s .          Whilst at t h is lo c a tio n , people

                     were coming to me complaining about the s it u a tio n out sid e the tu r n s t ile s
                     and as a r e s u l t , I attempted to convey a message to the P o lic e Control
                     o u tlin in g the d i f f i c u l t i e s , I was s t i l l in the concou rse behind the

                     t u r n s t ile s 10-16.      I got no response from Control.               3 then became aware of
                                   I

                     a determined movement of people from the A-G t u r n s t ile area towards the
                     South sid e o f the West terrace.                As a r e s u l t , I enter ed the concourse area

                     behind the t u r n s t ile s A-G, because i t appeared abnormal to me. Having

                     entered thi9 area, I saw that Gate *C’ was open and tlie s itu a tio n was as                                   I
                    have described in my previous statem ent.

                    I have been asked about the deployment of P o lic e O fficers to the tunnel

                    area and the gates at the rear of the r a d ia l fen ces on the te rra ces.                                The

                    s it u a tio n was such that although P olice O fficers had l>e@u id e n t if ie d to

                    take up th ese p osts they never did because circumstances did not allow i t ,
                    I   have a lso been asked about the gate in the d iv id in g w a ll between the two

                    concourses, to the b e st o f my r e c o lle c t io n , there was no P o lic e O fficer

                    a l l o c a t e d (duty to t h is area but i t        was q u ite p o ss ib le th a t a Steward was

                    p resen t.         However, h is duty was to          a s s i s t and d ir e c t the crowd and not to
                    prevent movement.

                    As for the d ir e c tio n for the opening of Gate ’C’ , I did not give an order
                    for i t to be opened and I did not hear an order given for i t to be opened,
                    I ju s t saw i t open.

                    A ll my r e c o lle c t io n s from then are a6 per my previous Statem ent,




                    Signed      H. W h ite                             Signature witnessed by
6 'JUL.: WlTllE) 16:25                                               TEL:01 14 2963020                     P. 006

                         S o u th Y o rk s h ire

                         PO LIC E
                         JUSTICE      with    COURAGE




           Mr George R Croston                                    Our Ref:       D&C/AMH/UO
           Prosecution Team Leader
           Casework Directorate                                   Date:          6 July 1999
           United House !
           Piccadilly                                             Recorded
           YORK                                                   Delivery        RT 0793 3496 6GB
           YO l 9PQ




           ADLINGTON V DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

           I refer to your letter of 25 June 1999 addressed to Mr Peter Me; calf. Solicitor of Hammond
           Suddards, Leeds, relating to the above prosecution and in particular to a witness statement made
           by former Police Inspector White on either 25 February 1990 or 1991.

           On the instructions of the Chief Constable I have today carried out an extensive manual search of
           the Hillsborough Archive and in a part of the archive dedicated to the Iijiquests I have found a hand
           written original and typed copy of a statement taken by West M idlands Police from former
           Inspector White on 25 February 1991. I enclose a copy of both for yoUr information.

           I would like to emphasise that until today I was not aware of the existen>
                                                                                    ice of this statement, nor is
           there any record of it on the HOLMES database relating to the Hillsborjnlugh Disaster.

           I am responding to your correspondence with the agreement of Assistant Chief Constable
           Ian Daines and Mr Peter Metcalf of Hammond Suddands in order to expedite your receipt of the
           copy statement.

           Yours sincerely




           Mr A M Hepworth
           Hillsborough Archivist

           Copy to: Mr Peter Metcalf, Hammond Suddards
                    ACC Ian Daines



                              u im   «nd Complaint* Department
                                         ™                       The person dealing with this correspondence is:
                          Onio* Hours 8.30 tm to 5.00 pm Monday to Fnduu a m
                          Ab«w«xp&om 0114 296 3094 (Out of elBca houraf^ M M®Pw Orth
                                         « » * » » »             (0114)296 3084
 Tel:
 Fax;
                                                                   Crow n Prosecution
                                           gS                      S ervice
                                                                   C entral C asew ork
                                                                   U nited House
                                                                   YO RK     Y 019PQ




Fax
  To:      Ann Adlington * Hillsborough Family     Fronts   Hazel Kitson, Csework Directorate, York

           Support Group

  Fax:     0113 2444700                            Pages; 7 including this one

  Phonei                                           Dates    5 July, 1999

  Re:      Affidavit of C W P Newel!               Time:    1530


  □ Urgent       □ For Review          □ Please Comment     □ Please Reply       □ Please Recycle



  e Comments:



  EXTREMELY URGENT


  Fao: Ana Adlington, courtsl3 and 14. Should there be any queries regarding this fax
  please telephone the sender on 01904 4S6568.




 Z0/L0     9Z L‘ON ££:H 66, Z0/S0                                                         jooij       SdD
                             THETREASURYSOLICITOR
                       Qiknhi Anne’s Chambers, 28 Broadway, London SW IM 9JS~——                          ^

            D X 123242 St James's Park   Direct Fax;    Switchboard 0171 21 0 3000 (GTN 210)

                                             D irect Line:

Christopher Newell                                     Please quote:
Director, Casework                                     L98/L98/8265K/SX         v /c n m v
Crown Prosecution Headquarters
50 Ludgate Hill                                        Your reference:
London EC4M 7EX
                                                       Date:                   22 M a r c h ^ 0 ®




Dear Chris,
                                                                         o<~    Vu.£
Rfe: tx p&rte Duckenfleld & Muray


1enclose a copy of your affidavit with the signed j urat attached.
                                                                                     Ll             ^ M / 2

Yours sincerely,




B M Smith
for the Treasury Solicitor




   m /Z 0     ft/r0N   ££:VL 66, zo/so                                                         J O O l d m * 7 SdD
./~ \-




                                      THETREASURYSOLICITOR                                             _Wi .
                               Queen Anne’s Chambers, 28 Broadway, London SW1H              S d & S : 'W f'*f"' •
                    DX 123242 St James’s Park   Direct Fax:    Switchboard 0171 210 3000 (GIN 210)
                                                    Direct Line:
                                                                                        f* ■ **rr*              "’'k'
         Christopher Newell                                   Please quote:                      /j'
         Director, Casework                                   L98/L98/8265K/SJl/ir/CHjf/$l51 : ....
         Crown Prosecution Headquarters
         50 Ludgate Hill                                      Your reference:
         London EC4M7EX
                                                              Date:




         Dear Chris,
                                                                                o<~   K £    .         w


                                                                                       |^U ,
         ftfe: tx parte Puckenfield & Miirav


         1 enclose a copy of your affidavit with the signed j urat attached.
                                                                                                           ->-q /2
         Yours sincerely,




         B M Smith
         for the Treasury Solicitor




           Z0/20       8ZL‘ 0N ££:VL 66, Z0/S0                                                         JO O U   Mi*? SdD
Tel:
Fax:
                                                                  Crown Prosecution
                                                                  Service
                                                                  Central Casew ork
                                                                  United House
                                                                  YORK     Y019PQ




To:      Messrs Winckworth Sherwood                 From:   George Croston

         Your Ref; 24332/1 /SBE/jet

Fax:     0171 593 5099                              Pages: 2

Phone:                                              Date:   07/01/99

Re:      Adlington - v - Duckenfield and Murray    -Time:   14.20PM


Urgent For Review                     □ Please Comment      □ Please Reply   □ Please Recycle




Please see attached a letter which is self-explanatory
                                                                       Crown Prosecution
                                                                       Service
                                                                       Central Casework
                                                                       United House
                                                                       YORK     Y019PQ




Fax
 To:     Anne Adlington                               From:    George Croston

 Fax:    0151 236 1936                                Pages: 2

 Phone: 0171 273 2437                                 Date:    07/01/99

 Re:     A dlington-v-D uckenfield and Murray         Tim e:   14.00pM


 Urgent For R eview                  □ Please Com m ent        □ Please Reply          □ Please Recycle




 Please see attached a letter which is self-explanatory, the original will be sent to you under hard copy
Tel:
Fax:
                                                                   Crown Prosecution
                                                                   Service
                                                                   Central Casework
                                                                   United House
                                                                   YORK     Y019PQ




To:      Messrs Hammond Suddards                    From:    George Croston

Fax:     0113 284 7001                              Pages: 2

Phone:                                              Date:    07/01/99

Re:      Adlington - v - Duckenfield and Murray     Tim e:   14.10PM


Urgent For R eview                 □ Please Comment          □ Please Reply   □ Please Recycle




Please see attached a letter which is self-explanatory
Tel:
Fax:
                                                                   Crown Prosecution
                                                                   Service
                                                                   Central Casew ork
                                                                   United House
                                                                   YORK     Y019PQ




To:      Messrs Walker Morris                       From:    George Croston

Fax:     0113 245 9412                              Pages: 2

Phone:                                              Date:    07/01/99

Re:      Adlington - v - Duckenfield and Murray     Tim e:   14.15PM


Urgent For R eview                 □ Please Com ment         □ Please Reply   □ Please Recycle




Please see attached a letter which is self-explanatory
Ms Ann Adlington
Hillsborough Family Support
Group
1st Floor, Central Buildings
41 North John Street                                                      YBF/GC/3341/89
Liverpool L2 6RR


                                                                          1 July 1999


Dear Ms Adlington

RE: ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

I have just received a response to my letter of 25 June 1999 which was sent to the
solicitors for the South Yorkshire Police.

The Chief Constable has accepted the CPS guidance that a further search should be
conducted in order to locate other statements that may have been made by ex-
Inspector White. It is considered by the police that if such a statement exists and is in
the archive held by them, then it would be found in documents received from the
West Midlands Police. The documents officer has therefore been instructed:

        1.     To search the database for any reference to further statements by ex-
               Inspector White.

       2.      To search the physical bundle of statements provided by the West
               Midlands Police on the conclusion of their enquiries.

        3.     To search any other bundle of documents which is specifically
               identified as having been provided by West Midlands Police and is in
               any way associated with the Generic Inquest Hearings.

However the police also consider that if another statement does exist it is more likely
to be found in the archive of Hillsborough documents held by the current Coroner. As
the CPS is not a party to these proceedings you may therefore wish to consider
making an approach directly to him on the matter.
I have copied this letter to the solicitors for the two defendants and the Chief
Constable.

Yours sincerely




George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
H am m ond S u d d a rd s                                                                            2 Park Lane
                                                                                                     Leeds
                                                                                                     LS3 1ES
                                                                                                     Telephone (0113) 284 7000
                                                                                                     D X No. 26441
                                                                                                     Fax (0113) 284 7001


 G R Croston Esq
 Prosecution Team Leader
 CPS - Casework Directorate                                                                                                                 “ 1 JUL 1999
 United House
 Piccadilly                                                                                                                                WIETTto
 York                                                                                                                                       YORK
 YOl 9PQ


 O u r R ef:                                                          Y o u r Ref:                                                      D ate:

 PCM. SB. CHI. 57-9                                                   YBF/GC/3341/89                                                    30 June 1999


 Dear Mr Croston

 Adlineton -v- Duckenfield & Murray

 Further to my letter of 28 June the Chief Constable accepts the guidance of the CPS that a further
 search should be made in an attempt to locate a possible further Statement from Ex-Inspector White.

 However it is noted that if a further statement does exist, the place where it is most likely to be
 found is in the archive of Hillsborough documents held by the current Coroner. See numbered
 paragraph 2 on the second page of Dr Popper’s letter of 21 June. Presumably you will be raising a
 request to the current Coroner for access to this archive.

 I should also make the point that the Coroner’s enquiries and investigations in relation to the
 Generic Inquest were supported by the West Midlands Police rather than by South Yorkshire Police
 Accordingly, within the archive held by the South Yorkshire Police, it is only in documents received
 from the West Midlands Police that such a statement (if it exists) might be expected to be found. I
 make this point because to carry out a physical examination of the entire archive, which is estimated
 to contain over one million pages of information, would be an extremely time consuming operation.

 Therefore the documents officer has been instructed :

          1. To search the database for any reference to further Statements by Ex-Inspector White.

          2.     To search the physical bundle of Statements provided by the West Midlands Police on the
                 conclusion of their enquiries.




           London                        Manchester                           Bradford                      Lloyds of London                                   Brussels

 A list o f the names of the partners and their professional qualifications is open to inspection ill our offices. The partners are either solicitors or registered foreign lawyers. This
 firm is regulated by the Law Society in the conduct o f investment business.
                                                                                                                               2

                                                                                                   30 June 1999

    3.   To search any other bundle or box of documentation which is specifically identified as
         having been provided by West Midlands Police and is in any way associated with the
         Generic Inquest Hearings.



I will let you know the outcome of the further search as soon as this is communicated to me.

Yours sincerely




P C METCALF




                                                                            c h i.0 5 7 -0 0 0 9 .c ro sto n .3 0 0 6 .p c m . doc
                                                                                              |1||||§|||
From: Stefan Popper
Sent: 30 June 1999 16:25
To:    'G.R. Croston'
Subject:   Hillsborough

MESSAGE         30th June 1999

Thank you for your communication re the undated statement of Ins. White. I have to say that on
looking at it there was no immediate recognition that I had seen this before. I have to stress
however that I may well be wrong. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith showed me a hand written
statement which I said I had not seen and then subsequently discovered a (I think) typed version
of it in one of the body files. Memory is not always reliable I am afraid.

There is however another point which perhaps I should mention to you. You told me that you
understood that these additional notes had been prepared specifically for me. In the light of what
I am about to say I think that is unlikely.

When I looked at the undated additional points the second paragraph looked familiar for some
reason. I looked at LJ Stuart-Smith report (Cm3878) and on page 208 you will find this wording
set out with LJ Stuart-Smith comments that these words were ommited from the officer's original
statement. If this is right then presumably these notes were written very early on.

I hope this is of help to you.


Yours sincerely,


         >per

                                              CASEW ORK
                                              m A g .iu e
                                                    - 1 JUL 1999

                                             ■m b
                                                     Y O R K
                                    ERROR REPORT           |

NAME.CPS 4 t h          F lo o r                                                                                W   j u   -

*    E:29/06'99 10:31

    T R A N S M IT :   901159879002                                 DURATION     PAGE       SESS      RESULT

    TYPE     :    MEMORY       TX        MODE                  24   OO'OO          00       036      NO ANSWER




                                        CRO W N PRO SECU TIO N SERVICE

                                                       Casework Directorate
                                                          United House
                                                            Piccadilly
                                                              York
                                                            Y O l 9PQ

                                                   Facsim ile 01904 456577
                                                     DX: 65204 York 6


              Attention o f           Stefan Popper
              Fax N o                 01159879002
              From                    George R Croston
             T cl                                      H
             Date & Time              29/06/99 11:14
             No. o f Pages            3 inc this one


             M ESSA G E

             Your fax o f the file note b.as been, received. In accordance with your w ishes I w ill
             only copy the note to other parties i f I deem it necessary in the interests o f justice.

             Attached is a copy o f band-written statement made by Inspector White and said to
             have been prepared for you. I f you remember seeing this at the tim e o f the inquest I
             would be grateful for any comments about it.




                                                                            lit- ( U . Pj>i~



                 This fa* must not be read, copied, disclosed or used by any person other tlisn the addressee
                                             unauthorised use njay be unlawful
To:                  G.R. Croston CPS
Company:
Fax number:
Business phone:


From:                Stefan Popper
Fax number:          +44(0115)9879002
Business phone:
Home phone:


Date & Time:         29-Jun-99 09:59:12
Pages:               2
Re:                  Hillsborough


I am sending you a fax of the file note as I think this might help.
FILE NOTE                                                                           ^

TUESDAY,5 MARCH 1991

RE: INSPECTOR WHITE

I showed Mr Manning th e paragraph on t h e 3rd page of Mr White's
statement of 25.2.91 r e f e r r i n g to Supt. Murray ( f i r s t seven l i n e s ) .
Mr Manning s a id t h a t his c l i e n t would emphatically deny t h a t .
He also i n d i c a t e d t h a t he and everyone e l s e , includin g Mr I saacs,
was aware of Mr White's i l l n e s s and he would not t h e r e f o r e put too
much credance on any statement anyway.              I s a id I was i n t e r e s t e d
in a s c e r t a i n i n g whether Mr Murray would agree with what was sa id
and he had answered t h a t p o in t.




SLP.
              Kings Court, 12 King Street, Leeds, LSI 2HL. Telephone 0113 283 2500.
        Facsimile 0113 245 9412. Document Exchange 12051 Leeds 24. E-mail info@waIkermorris.co.uk
                                    Web: http//www.walkermorris.co.uk



Crown Prosecution Service                                                         Our ref            RBM/BQW/MURRAY
DX 65204
YORK 6
                                                                                  Your ref           YBF/GC/3341/89


                                                                                  29 June 1999


Dear Sirs

Adlington -v- Duckenfield and Murray

We acknowledge your letter of 25 June with the various enclosures. We would certainly take
issue as to the second sentence of the letter. We would suggest that the Crown Prosecution
Service do not have any duty to make disclosure to the private prosecutor.

 ours faithfully



R B Manning
PARTNER




   A list o f the partners'nam es is open to inspection at the above address. Regulated by the Law Society in the conduct o f investment business.
                                           \\Walker\data\WP\CRIM-MATOBM\REVIEW2\Murrayl5.doc
tfAM M OND S u d d a rd s                                                                               2 Park Lane
                                                                                                        Leeds
                                                                                                        LS3 1ES
                                                                                                        Telephone (0113) 284 7000
                                                                                                        DX No. 26441
                                                                                                        Fax (0113) 284 7001


   G R Croston Esq
   Prosecution Team Leader
   Casework Directorate
   United House
   Piccadilly
   York
   YOl 9PQ


   Our Ref:                                                             Your Ref:                                                          Date:
   PCM.SB.CHI.57-9                                                      YBF/GC/3 341/89                                                   28 June 1999


   Dear Mr Croston

   Adlington -v- Duckenfield & Murray

   Thank you for your letter of 25 June 1999 with enclosures.

   I have passed this on to my clients and will let you know their response.

   Yours sincerely



   P C METCALF




                                                                                                                                                   chi.057-0009.croston.2806.pcm.doc

   O ffices also at:

            London                          Manchester                          Bradford                      Lloyds of London                                   Brussels

   A list o f the names o f the partners and their professional qualifications is open to inspection at our offices. The partners are either solicitors or registered foreign lawyers. This
   firm is regulated by the Law Society in the conduct o f investment business.
                       CROWN PROSECUTION SERVICE

                                  Casework Directorate
                                     United House
                                       Piccadilly
                                         York
                                       YOl 9PQ

                                 Facsimile__________
                                   DX: 65204 York 6


Attention of       Ann Adlington
Fax No             0151 236 1936
From               George R Croston
Tel                |
Date & Time        25/06/99 16:33
No. of Pages       16 inc this one


MESSAGE

Documents as agreed. Hard copy is in the post.

George




  This fax must not be read, copied, disclosed or used by any person other than the addressee
                              Unauthorised use may be unlawful
Ms Ann Adlington
Hillsborough Family Support                                                 j
Group
1st Floor Central Buildings                                                 |
41 North John Street
Liverpool                                                                   YBF/GC/3341/89
L2 6RR


                                                                            25 June 1999


Dear Ms Adlington

RE: ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

Thank you for your faxed letter of 24 June 1999.

I can confirm that I have received a letter from Dr Popper, the Coroner for the
Hillsborough Disaster Inquest, following your approach to him. I have
acknowledged his letter and fully considered the points that he drew to my attention.
I telephoned him on the afternoon of 24 June and he gave me some further
information based on the correspondence between us in 1997.

That discussion, and my later telephone conversation with you, has persuaded me that
there is further voluntary disclosure that I should give both to you and to the other
parties to the private prosecution. I have obtained the consent of Dr Popper to
disclose our correspondence to you, and you have agreed that your letters may also
be disclosed to the other parties. I consider that it is in the interests of justice and also
of fairness to all parties that my relevant correspondence with the police is disclosed.
I have spoken to Mr Peter Metcalfe of Hammond Suddards and he has no objection as
long as it is emphasised that PII attaches to CPS/police correspondence as a class of
documents and that a precedent is not being set in this case for the disclosure of any
other documents in the class.

The chronology of this matter is that Dr Popper wrote to Mr Pearson, the then Branch
Crown Prosecutor at this office, on 16 April 1997. Based on his recollections he
expressed some concern about the differences between the evidence of Inspector
Harry White and that of Superintendent Murray as to when the latter became aware
that the gates to the tunnel had been closed in 1988. A copy of that letter is attached
together with my reply of 18 April 1997.

In order to conduct a review of this new information, I sent a fax on 18 April 1997 to
the South Yorkshire Police with a copy of Dr Popper's letter attached and asked for a
response and all copies of any relevant statements. They replied by fax that day and
formally by letter on 21 April and 23 May. Copies of these three documents are
attached. The enclosures that were sent to me on 21 April were Inspector White's
statement of 10 June 1989 (number S2223) and Superintendent Murray's undated
statement (number S207). The enclosures sent on 23 April 1997 included an undated
manuscript statement of Inspector White which I was told had been made at the time
of the inquest hearing for the Coroner's viewing. A copy of that statement is also
attached. No other statements were provided to me by the police. I was informed that
no further statements of the Inspector had been found on the database.

My personal file note of 2 June 1997 was made after I had reviewed the new material.
I noted that Inspector White had not given evidence at the inquest and that his
statement(s) were not read out. Superintendent Murray's evidence throughout had
been that he did not know of the 1988 closure of the central tunnel to regulate the
flow of fans into the pens until after the 1989 disaster. The June 1989 statement of
Inspector White did not mention the tunnel. In his later undated statement he says that
during the briefing for the match no mention was made about the tunnel gates being
used to control ingress of the crowd. He goes on to discuss his knowledge of the gates
being used in the past. He gives no indication of the purported knowledge of
Superintendent Murray re the closing of the tunnel in 1988. I made a comment in my
file note that unless there was a statement of Inspector White that is not on the
database but was considered by Dr Popper, then I must presume that the Coroner's
recollection is wrong. I also noted that the police were doing final checks on the
number of statements made by Inspector White and that in the end no more were
found.

I considered the above matters during my 1997 review of the allegations made by
yourself and Mr T Hicks.

On 3 June 1999 you wrote to me and made a number of requests for disclosure. I
replied to you on 15 June 1999. However you copied your letter to Dr Popper and
asked him to consider the papers and then write to me. You sent me a faxed letter on
24 June requesting the disclosure to you of Dr Popper's letter sent in response to your
request to him. His letter to me of 21 June is attached. You will see that he refers to
the 1997 correspondence with myself and Mr Pearson. He also mentions a file note of
which I was not previously aware.

On 24 June I rang Dr Popper at his home and he told me that his file note of 5 March
1991 states that he saw Inspector White's statement, which was said to be dated 25
February 1991, where the officer says that he had discussed the previous closure of
the central tunnel gates with Superintendent Murray before the 1989 match was
played. I understand that there is no detail of the exact time of that discussion. Dr
Popper informed me that he had not told me of the date of Inspector White's statement
because at the time of our correspondence in 1997 his file note was in papers stored
elsewhere and he was working from a recollection only. He only obtained a copy of
the file note in August 1997. On now looking at the chronology of the events, he
considers that he may have made a mistake in his file note in that the date of Inspector
White's statement could be in 1990 and not 1991.
Dr Popper also says that he discussed this statement of Inspector White with Mr
Manning who was representing Superintendent Murray. Relevant parts of the
statement were shown to Mr Manning on or about 5 March 1991.

Dr Popper tells me that he does not wish to disclose his file note nor does he wish to
make a statement or appear as a witness re these matters.

I have copied this letter to Walker Morris, Winckworth Sherwood, Hammond
Suddards and Dr Popper together with enclosures. I have also advised the Chief
Constable through the solicitors acting for the South Yorkshire Police that every effort
should be made to confirm of otherwise the existence of any other statements made by
Inspector Harry White concerning the Hillsborough Disaster.

Please let me know if I can be of any further assistance.

Yours sincerely




George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
Walker Morris
Solicitors                                                               YBF/GC/3341/89
DX: 12051 Leeds 24
                                                                         RBM/BQW/MURRAY

                                                                         25 June 1999


Dear Sirs

RE: ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

On 24 June 19991 became aware of certain new information concerning statements
made by Inspector Harry White after the Hillsborough Disaster. Although the CPS is
not a party to the private prosecution taken out against your client, I consider that we
have a continuing duty of disclosure under the common law in this case.

For that reason I enclose a copy of my letter of today to Ms Ann Adlington of the
HFSG, together with copies of relevant correspondence and other documents. These
are self-explanatory as to the disclosure I am providing.

You will note that the new information is of the possible existence of a witness
statement made by Inspector White and having a date of either 25 February 1990 or
1991. I have not seen such a statement and the South Yorkshire Police did not bring it
to my attention in 1997. I understand from the Coroner that you were made aware of
it in March 1991.

If the Coroner's recollections are correct then the evidence in that statement may be
material to the present proceedings. I am writing to the Chief Constable of South
Yorkshire Police to advise him that the Hillsborough archive and database should be
examined again for this document.

Please let me know if I can be of any further assistance.

Yours faithfully



George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
Winckworth Sherwood
Solicitors
Westminster
London                                                                   YBF/GC/3341/89
DX: 2312 Victoria
                                                                         24332/1/SBE/jet

                                                                         25 June 1999


Dear Sirs

RE: ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

On 24 June 19991 became aware of certain new information concerning statements
made by Inspector Harry White after the Hillsborough Disaster. Although the CPS is
not a party to the private prosecution taken out against your client, I consider that we
have a continuing duty of disclosure under the common law in this case.

For that reason I enclose a copy of my letter of today to Ms Ann Adlington of the
HFSG, together with copies of relevant correspondence and other documents. These
are self-explanatory as to the disclosure I am providing.

You will note that the new information is of the possible existence of a witness
statement made by Inspector White and having a date of either 25 February 1990 or
1991. I have not seen such a statement and the South Yorkshire Police did not bring it
to my attention in 1997.

If the Coroner's recollections are correct then the evidence in that statement may be
material to the present proceedings. I am writing to the Chief Constable of South
Yorkshire Police to advise him that the Hillsborough archive and database should be
examined again for this document.

Please let me know if I can be of any further assistance.

Yours faithfully



George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
Hammond Suddards
Solicitors                                                              j
FAO: P C Metcalf
Leeds
DX: 26441
                                                                        YBF/GC/3341/89
                                                                        PCM/CHI.57-9

                                                                        25 June 1999


Dear Mr Metcalf

RE: ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

I am writing to confirm the detail of today's telephone conversation.

On 24 June 19991 became aware of certain new information concerning statements
made by Inspector Harry White after the Hillsborough Disaster. Although the CPS is
not a party to the private prosecution, I consider that we have a continuing duty of
disclosure under the common law in this case.

For that reason I enclose a copy of my letter of today to Ms Ann Adlington of the
HFSG, together with copies of relevant correspondence and other documents. These
are self-explanatory as to the disclosure I am providing.

You will note that the new information is of the possible existence of a witness
statement made by Inspector White and having a date of either 25 February 1990 or
1991. I have not seen such a statement and the South Yorkshire Police did not bring it
to my attention in 1997.

If the Coroner's recollections are correct then the evidence in that statement may be
material to the present proceedings.

Under the provisions contained in section 3 (2) (e) of the Prosecution o f Offences Act
1985, the Director has the duty to give, to such extent as he considers appropriate,
advice to police forces on all matters relating to criminal offences. Following
consultation with the Head of Casework at York it has been decided that we should
advise the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police that the Hillsborough archive
and database should be re-examined for the existence of this particular statement and
that we should then be informed of the results of the search. I have concern that if
this statement exists in the alleged form then the CPS review may have to be
reopened.
As your firm is representing the Chief Constable in this matter I would be grateful if
you would pass this advice on to him.

Please let me know if I can be of any further assistance.

Yours faithfully



George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
vSBORo^




                    Hillsborough Family Support Group




Your Ref: YBF/GC/3341/89

24 June 1999

George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
CPS Central Casework
United House
Piccadilly
YorkYOl 1PQ


Dear Mr Croston

Adlington v Duckenfield and Murray

 I understand from Dr Popper that he has written to you regarding some of the matters raised
 in the letter and material sent to you on 3rd June. I should be grateful if you would provide
 me with a copy of his letter.


 Yours sincerely




 Ann Adlington
 Solicitor




            Phone 0151 236 1919. F ax 0151 236 1936. E M ail info@ hfsg.org
          1st Floor C entral B uildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
H F S G                                 ® +0151-236-1936               24/06 '99 14:14 0 : 0 1 / 0 2


   ,560HOfy




                     Hillsborough Family Support Group



    TO:             GtCcaAA-           C x o & Q -^ \

     FAX NO:


     FROM:             ^

     DATE:          2 \ ■ \o ■           ° \

     FAX NO:                      0151 236 1936

     TELEPHONE NO:                 0151 236 1919

     NO OF PAGES TO FOLLOW:                           \

     MESSAGE:




     The information in this fax is confidential. Its contents are not to be disclosed to anyone
     other than the addressee except with the authority of the addressee. Unauthorised
     recipients are requested to maintain this confidentiality and immediately to advise the
     sender by telephone/fax o f any error or misdirection in transmission.




                 Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151,236 1936. E Mail info@ hfsg.org
               lit Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
H F S G                                        ® +0151-236-1936         24/06 '99 14:14 0 : 0 2 / 0 2


                                                                                     ^ R 0£/




                                                                                       Si/ppC?

                       Hillsborough Family Support Group




   Your Ref; YBF/GC/3341/89

   24 June 1999

   George R Croston
   Prosecution Team Leader
   CPS Central Casework
   United House
   Piccadilly
   York YOl 1PQ


   Dear Mr Croston

   A dlingiort v D ucken field a n d M urray

   I understand from Dr Popper that he has written to you regarding some o f the matters raises
   in the letter and material sent to you on 3* June. I should be grateful if you would provide
   me with a copy o f his letter.


   Yours sincerely




    Ann Adlington
    Solicitor




              Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151 236 1936. E Mail info@ hfsg.org
            1st Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
S L Popper Esq.


                                                                         YBF/GC/3341/89



                                                                         23 June 1999


Dear Mr Popper

RE: ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

Thank you for your letter of 21 June 1999.

I appreciate your concern at becoming involved in the present private prosecution by
Ann Adlington against the above two retired police officers.

 Since my letter to you of 18 April 1997 the CPS have completed three reviews. The
first was as a result of the Granada drama-documentary aired in December 1996.
Your recollections noted in your letter of 16 April 1997 were considered by me and I
obtained copies of all the relevant police statements including the statement of
Inspector Harry White that was prepared for your hearing. My comments on this
point were incorporated in the report of my recommendations that was sent to the
Director of Public Prosecutions in early May 1997. On 30 June 1997 the Home
Secretary was able to announce to the House that the Director considered that none of
the material made available to the CPS would justify fresh criminal investigations.

Further reviews were carried out by me following the publication of the Lord Justice
Stuart- Smith's scrutiny report and the instigation of the private prosecution (when the
Director was asked to take over the case in order to discontinue it). As you know our
decision in declining to take over the case was taken to judicial review resulting in the
private prosecution still proceeding on the manslaughter and wilful misconduct
charges. I understand that the oral committal proceedings commence on 5 July at
Leeds Magistrates' Court.

Ms Adlington has not written to me concerning her requests made to you. I am
unsure as to what advice she considers you are able to give me. On the matter of the
Hillsborough 'archive' held by the South Yorkshire Police, the CPS have indicated to
her on a number of occasions that we did not consider ourselves to be in a position to
make any request for alternative safekeeping measures for the archive. In his scrutiny
report at chapter 5, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith gave his opinion of the status of that
archive in that access to the material not covered by the Coroners Rules was at the
discretion of the police. He made no adverse comment on the holding of all the
material, indeed he stated that from his own knowledge he would be surprised if
criticisms of lack of disclosure (concerning body files) by the police were true.

 I am grateful that you have asked Mr Dorries to look into the some of the points
raised by Ms Adlington and I trust that eventually her fears will be laid to rest.

Again thank you for your assistance in this matter. I feel that the CPS must ensure
that all the relevant material has been considered and your contribution has gone to
the core of the allegations before the court. All the non sensitive documents held by
me have been fully disclosed to the two defendants and the Hillsborough Family
Support Group.

Please let me know if I can be of any further help.

Yours sincerely




George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
                    CROWN PROSECUTION SERVICE

                                    Casework Directorate
                                       United House
                                         Piccadilly
                                           York
                                         YOl 9PQ

                                 Facsimile
                                   DX: 65204 York 6


Attention of
Fax No             0151 236 1936
From               George R Croston
Tel
Date & Time        21/06/99 15:27
No. of Pages       4 inc this one


MESSAGE

As requested, attached is the two page schedule for exhibit number 142 (compilation
video tape). I do not have a full copy of the schedulefbut the relevant page is also
attached.




  This fax must not be read, copied, disclosed or used by any person other than the addressee
                              Unauthorised use may be unlawful
                           ’TaR.V'Lm          S'JVb£T


 G^oOP            WyrvrrS        OtfM          o   f

 CteCoUfcKT                             \^2_       (^&K€S


 8ot     -


                   Tv^ vs         t3       (A SCH-£&J<J!-
 OV^         $-       \K$ySre}         Ce>M,vv-AT\o<^

^ W t               'Tv^         $ys>Asrt£.


  Sett        W\S        'T^€.         VjS1


b^S.         fNier?         b P /^ W -        Vq




■fv))c f\so ’ CMS\~ ' 2 3 —\°\3G
w h ile              yo u   w e re   o u t




d a te



name


of



telephone number



t e le p h o n e d                   p l e a s e call b a c k



ca ll ed to s e e you                w il l call a g ain



w a n t s to s e e you               urgent



message




t a k e n by
                                                          21st June 1999


Mr. George R Croston,
Prosecution Team Leader,
Casework Directorate,
United House,                                             CASEW ORK
Piccadilly,                                                  a ^ i i urn
York,
YOl 9PQ                                                       2 3 JUN 1989
                                                              V i -1 r s *
Dear Mr Croston,                                                YORK
                          Adlington v Duckenfield and Murray

On 19th June 1999 I received a letter from Ann Adlington via the present Coroner in
Sheffield enclosing a copy of a letter to you dated 3rd June 1999 with various annexes.
She has asked me consider these and write to you.

I am extremely reluctant to get involved in Hillsborough again particularly as I have
been retired for a considerable period and for obvious reasons the detail is not as clear
as it used to be. I also for personal reasons (including geography) have no ready
access to the vast bulk of the material in the Coronal archives.

It seems to me that the majority of the points made by Miss Adlington are matters on
which for v a rio u s reasons I cannot, need not, or should not comment. I want to
make it absolutely clear that merely because I have not commented or mentioned any
matter raised by Ms. Adlington cannot and must not be construed that I agree
with or accept ( or for that matter disagree with or reject) what is stated.

 I also want to make it clear that anything I say has to be read with the caveat that it
must be checked out as in view of the passage of time, my age and any other factor my
recall etc. may not be accurate.

Before I turn to her letter I would remind you that in 1997 when the CPS were
conducting their own review I was in touch with Mr. Pearson and you, and wrote to
Mr. Pearson on 16th April 1997. I do not know what became of your review but no
doubt you will bear in mind what I then said and act as you think fit. Perhaps oh this
point for the sake of completeness I might just add that I see from a copy file note in
my possession that in early March 1990 I drew Mr. Manning’s attention to the
relevant part of the statement but he said his client would emphatically deny this.
 That would I suppose have made it impossible to admit the statement in its entirety as
documentary evidence under Coronal rules.

Turning now to Ms Adlington letter and referring to her numbered paragraphs.

1. Paragraph 38. I have no recollection of Mr. Mervyn Jones appearing before me on
18* April 1989. He did appear before me on 18th April 1990. I wonder if there is a
dating error here.

2. Paragraph 42. I am not clear why Mr. Daines states he is holding papers “on behalf
of the Coroner”. Mr. Domes is looking into this. It may be that when West Midland
Police handed over their paper work (which was of course much more wide ranging
than the coronal enquiry) they passed over copies (and ? originals) of various
documents videos etc. which they had held but which had been specifically prepared
for the Coroner and it is these he is referring to. As far as I am aware the Coroner has
the Coronal documents used in the inquests under his care.

I hope the foregoing is of help to you.

Please acknowledge receipt of this letter.




cc. Mr. C. Domes
                     CROWN PROSECUTION SERVICE

                                     Casework Directorate
                                        United House
                                          Piccadilly
                                            York
                                          YOl 9PQ                        _     _          (« 4 -

                                  Facsimile
                                    DX: 65204 York 6


Attention of        Ms Ann Adlington
Fax No              0151 236 1936
From                George R Croston
Tel
Date & Time          15/06/99 14:38
No. of Pages        5 inc this one


MESSAGE

As per out telecon this morning attached is the CPS substantive response to your
requests for further disclosure etc.

Sorry that we can't be more helpful to you.

George




   This fax must not be read, copied, disclosed or used by any person other than the addressee
                               Unauthorised use may be unlawful
Ms Ann Adlington
Hillsborough Family Support                                               i
Group                                                                    1
1st Floor, Central Buildings                                             |
41 North John Street
Liverpool                                                                YBF/3341/89
L2 6RR


                                                                         15 June 1999


Dear Ms Adlington

RE: ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

Thank you for your latest letter of 10 June 1999. I am now able to give you a
substantive response to the four requests set out in your letter of 7 June 1999.

We have taken into consideration the points made in the above letters and the one
volume of evidential material provided. Both yourselves and the solicitors acting for
the two defendants have received schedules of all the material in our possession,
including that said to be legally privileged or subject to Public Interest Immunity. All
parties have examined the non sensitive material at this office and any requested
photocopies have been provided as part of voluntary disclosure by the CPS.

You have invited us to :

•   Provide a copy of counsels' advice from 1990
•   Provide a copy of the final West Midlands Police Report
•   Make a statement indicating the material received and considered re the closing of
    the tunnel to the centre pens
•   Give guidance to the South Yorkshire Police under section 3(2) of the Prosecution
    of Offences Act 1985 re making the whole of the Hillsborough archive available
    to the HFSG, and for the archive to be resited.

Counsels ’Advice

Mr C Enzor's letter dated 31 December 1998 and addressed to you set out the CPS
position on voluntary disclosure. Our view was that we would not voluntarily
disclose material which attracted either legal professional privilege or public interest
immunity. This would cover such documents as counsel's advice, internal
memoranda and opinions, and correspondence with the police. My letter to you dated
6 January 1999 confirmed that position.
•

    The above stance is unchanged. In coming to this decision we have considered your
    representations about the reasons why you require disclosure of counsels' advice and
    also your submission that it is highly doubtful whether our relationship with counsel
    can be described as one between lawyer and client so that privilege can be invoked.
    In particular, I find your last point to be misconceived.

    We do not agree that the disclosure of counsels' advice to either Lord Justice Stuart-
    Smith's scrutiny or to the police at the time of the Taylor Inquiry would constitute a
    waiver, whether implied or express, for the purpose of disclosure to you in your
    private prosecution. You will have noted that counsels' advice has not been placed in
    the House Library as part of the material shown to the scrutiny. My understanding is
    that it was acknowledged as being subject to legal professional privilege. While I
    accept that you are aware of the conclusions of counsel as to there being insufficient
    evidence (as this was noted in chapter 1 of the scrutiny report), the body of that advice
    is plainly hearsay opinion which I do not consider to be relevant to any of the issues
    either at an abuse of process or committal hearing..

    It has also been decided that it is not appropriate in the circumstances of this case for
    the DPP to consider the waiver of legal professional privilege.

    Final West Midlands Police Report

    Our previous correspondence with you confirmed that we would not give voluntary
    disclosure of PII material. This applies to any of the police reports to which PII still
    attaches. Evans -v- Chief Constable o f Surrey [1988] 1QB 588 is the authority for the
    proposition that a report sent by the police to the DPP seeking the latter's advice falls
    within a PII class. Kelly -v-Commissioner of Police for the Metropolis [1997] TLR 22
    August 1997 confirms that proposition. The police and CPS prosecution team must be
    able to discuss details of cases and give advice freely and frankly without fear of such
    documentation being disclosed to third parties in other proceedings.

    I have considered the cases of Goodridge and Alfred Crompton Amusement Machines
    that you mention in your letter of 3 June, but I am not persuaded that they contain
    support for your request.

    In these circumstances we are declining to give you voluntary disclosure of the
    requested report in whatever form that we have it. I note your argument that there is
    no justification for withholding the Final Report when the Interim Report is in the
    public domain. However, as all the reports were generated by the police you may
    consider that, as a Chief Constable is the only person that can waive PII (see Kelly
    above), your approach should be to the Chief Constable for the force now holding the
    Hillsborough archive, that is, the South Yorkshire Police. In the end you have
    recourse to the courts for an adjudication on disclosure.

    CPS Statement

    The statement that you request concerns the CPS review of parts of the evidence
    covering the Hillsborough disaster and the subsequent judicial hearings and
    complaints arising. You have received a detailed schedule of all the material
    considered by various CPS lawyers, including myself, between 1989 and 1998. You


                                                                                                2
•
    have also had the opportunity to view this material. I consider that your request has
    been sufficiently actioned by the provision of the relevant information as part of
    voluntary disclosure, without the need for a formal statement that we perceive would
    have no relevance to any of the issues in the case.

    Guidance to the Police

    In his scrutiny report at chapter 5, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith considered the extensive
    Hillsborough archive held by the South Yorkshire Police. He gave his opinion of the
    status of that archive in that access to the material not covered by the Coroners Rules
    was at the discretion of the police. He made no adverse comment on the holding of
    this material, indeed he stated at paragraph 32 that from his own knowledge he would
    be surprised if criticisms of lack of disclosure (concerning body files) by the police
    were true.

    I understand that Mr M G Kennedy wrote to your Mr Coombes on 25 August 1998 to
    explain that the CPS was not in the position to make any request for alternative
    measures in relation to the safekeeping of the archive material held by the South
    Yorkshire Police.

    I have spoken to the solicitors acting for the Chief Constable and they confirm that
    they have had no instructions to ask the CPS for advice under the provisions of the
    Act. The CPS position concerning voluntary disclosure was made known to the South
    Yorkshire Police in our letters of 31 December 1998 and 6 January 1999.

    That position still remains the CPS view on voluntary disclosure. The police are
    aware of it and it is a matter for the Chief Constable, who acts as a third party holding
    relevant and unused material in your private prosecution, as to how he deals with your
    requests. Ultimately it is for the court to carry out the exercise of the balance of
    conflicting interests, a process which you have already used.

    Conclusion

    I note your comments on the attitude of the DPP to disclosure. His presentations were
    of course directed to our core role of conducting criminal prosecutions where one of
    our most important objectives is to scrupulously comply with the duty of disclosure.
    We fully accept that the same principle applies where, as in this case, we are a third
    party to the proceedings. We consider that our voluntary disclosure in your
    prosecution has been in accordance with the relevant law on disclosure and is to the
    high standard that the Director has envisaged.

    I have been particularly mindful of the recent case of R -v- CPS ex parte Lee[1999]
    unreported, and the duty, among others, of a 'prosecutor' to disclose material which
    might enable a 'defendant' to make a pre-committal application to stay the
    proceedings as an abuse of process. While it may be argued that the same duty does
    not rest upon a third party, I consider that we have fully complied with it in all the
    circumstances of the case.




                                                                                              3
I regret that we cannot be of any greater assistance in response to your requests.

Yours sincerely




George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
10/06   ’ 99 1 1 : 0 4   01512361936              I FS t                                               Pg .


  . ^ s60So%




                                                                                                su
                                Hillsborough Family Support Group



                                       £,   C f& C 'fcfrx
           TO:

           FAX NO:


            FROM:

            DATE:            tO .< o.°l°l

            FAX NO:                         0151 236 1936

            TELEPHONE NO:                   0151 236 1919

            NO OF PAGES TO FOLLOW:

            MESSAGE:




             The information in this fax is confidential. Its contents are not to be disclosed to anyone
             other than the addressee except with the authority of the addressee. Unauthorised
             recipients are requested to maintain this confidentiality and immediately to advise the
             sender by tetephone/fax o f any error or misdirection in transmission.




                           * h .n . 0151236 1919. Fa* 0151I 361936.E M W o@ hfis.or|
                          1* Floor Central BoSdings 41 North John Street Lnrerpool L2 6RR
10/06   ’ 99 1 1 : 0 5   01512361936                 HF S G                                                 Pg.


        vsaohoo.


          svppo^                                                                                 5£7PPQ^
                               Hillsborough Family Support Group


          10 June 1999

          Mr G R Croston
          CPS Central Casework
          United House
          Piccadilly
          York YOl 1PQ


          Dear Mr Croston,

          A dlington v D ucken field a n d M urray

          Thank you for your letter o f 7 June 1999 acknowledging receipt o f my letter o f 3 June 1999,

          I should be grateful if you could bear in mind, in considering the question whether guidance
          should be given to the South Yorkshire Police under your statutory powers, some aspects o f
          the Stephen Lawrence case, upon which Sir William Macpherson o f Cluny reported earlier this
          year.

          Paragraph 33.7, 33.2$, and 33.46 o f the report (attached as Annex A ) records the assistance
          given to the “private” prosecution, by the police who wore involved in the second police
          investigation. Paragraphs 39.45 to 39,48 show the cop-operation given by the CPS, including,
          in the middle o f paragraph 39.47, an offer to “provide the legal team with any key unused
          material so that they could see what the problems were, namely that there was virtually no
          evidence which would sustain a prosecution.”

          Further information is contains in a book on the case by Brian Cathcart “The Case o f Stephen
          Lawrence”. Extracts are attached as A nnex B. Page 226 demonstrates the striking co­
          operation between police, CPS and the lawyers acting for the Lawrence family. It appears
          that the police discussed with the family the prospect o f approaching an accomplice o f the
          alleged killers in order to seek his assistance as a prosecution witness.

          Page 228 shows that the Metropolitan police took active steps themselves to approach
          persons who had given witness statements, and that even the arrests were co-ordinated by the
          police with the obtaining by the prosecutor o f summonses.

          Thereafter (page 231) the police were apparently willing even to hand over a surveillance
          video, provided a judge approved o f the course. Clearly the family had been told o f the
          surveiUance. At page 231, it is clear that a judge ruled in favour o f disclosure in July 1996,

                                                              1
                      Phone 015 1 2 3 6 1919. Fax 015123 6 1936. E MaH info@ hfsg.org
                    1*<Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
10/06 '99 11:05         01512361936                H F S G                                                Pff. 03

   ^   4' - *

   ^ t h e month before the committal proceedings were due to take place, and it may be infemd
         that neither the police nor CPS objected.

         These facts provide a stark contrast with the Hillsborough case.1


         3 £ f t e Z ^ S e ^ ’insisted be pbced in the              o f C o l o n s library, and the
         material which was supplied to us in the course o f the Scrutiny

          The conroarison between the conduct o f the Metropolitan Police in the second Lawrence
          investigation and the South Yorkshire police speaks for itself. It cnes ° u\ f° ^ ™ J ^ hi,

          “guidance”                                        ^ ^ t ^ i o w w h « i ^ ^ a l ^ ^ l“* ^ “ ^ ,“re
          S                « in S     n   to the brieang notes you received last week, whose existence we
          learned o f by chance.

          On 13* May 1 wrote to Mr Moorhouse, Chaimum o f the Police
          oaDers have found their way back to the South Yorkshire pohce, and asked them to authons
          release o f copies o f their material. I was told on the telephone by Mr M o o r h o u ^ y ime
          that they would take up the matter with Mr Daines and telephone me again. He has not do
          so.
           The PC A has powers under section 98 (1) (b) o f the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 198
           to disclose this material for the purposes o f a prosecution.

           You will understand the prosecution’s frustration.


           Yours sincerely




                /I-/I
            Ann Adlington
            Solicitor




                                                               2
                                                                                   Vj.     — ,
                                                                                         SyppQ^

                   Hillsborough Family Support Group


10 June 1999

Mr G R Croston
CPS Central Casework
United House
Piccadilly
York YOl 1PQ


Dear Mr Croston,

Adlington v Duckenfield and Murray

Thank you for your letter of 7 June 1999 acknowledging receipt of my letter of 3 June 1999.

I should be grateful if you could bear in mind, in considering the question whether guidance
should be given to the South Yorkshire Police under your statutory powers, some aspects of
the Stephen Lawrence case, upon which Sir William Macpherson of Cluny reported earlier this
year.

Paragraph 33.7, 33.28, and 33.46 of the report (attached as Annex A) records the assistance
given to the “private” prosecution, by the police who were involved in the second police
investigation. Paragraphs 39.45 to 39.48 show the cop-operation given by the CPS, including,
in the middle of paragraph 39.47, an offer to “provide the legal team with any key unused
material so that they could see what the problems were, namely that there was virtually no
evidence which would sustain a prosecution.”

Further information is contains in a book on the case by Brian Cathcart “The Case of Stephen
Lawrence”. Extracts are attached as Annex B. Page 226 demonstrates the striking co­
operation between police, CPS and the lawyers acting for the Lawrence family. It appears
that the police discussed with the family the prospect of approaching an accomplice of the
alleged killers in order to seek his assistance as a prosecution witness.

Page 228 shows that the Metropolitan police took active steps themselves to approach
persons who had given witness statements, and that even the arrests were co-ordinated by the
police with the obtaining by the prosecutor of summonses.

Thereafter (page 231) the police were apparently willing even to hand over a surveillance
video, provided a judge approved of the course. Clearly the family had been told of the
surveillance. At page 231, it is clear that a judge ruled in favour of disclosure in July 1996,

                                                1
        Phone 0151 236 1919. F ax 0151 236 1936. E M ail info@ hfsg.org
      1st Floor C entral B uildings 41 North John Street L iverpool L2 6RR
*




    the month before the committal proceedings were due to take place, and it may be inferred
    that neither the police nor CPS objected.

    These facts provide a stark contrast with the Hillsborough case. I appreciate that the CPS has
    voluntarily provided us with such evidence as is in its possession (though not the final police
    report or counsel’s advice), but that material has not substantially added to the documentation
    which the Home Secretary insisted be placed in the House of Commons library, and the
    material which was supplied to us in the course of the “Scrutiny”.

    The comparison between the conduct of the Metropolitan Police in the second Lawrence
    investigation and the South Yorkshire police speaks for itself. It cries out for the most robust
    “guidance” that the CPS can give. There is no basis on which we can go before a judge at this
    stage, and ask for a ruling, because we simply do not know what material the South Yorkshire
    Police may have in addition to the briefing notes you received last week, whose existence we
    learned of by chance.

    On 13* May I wrote to Mr Moorhouse, Chairman of the Police Complaints Authority, whose
    papers have found their way back to the South Yorkshire police, and asked them to authorise
    release of copies of their material. I was told on the telephone by Mr Moorhouse on 1st June
    that they would take up the matter with Mr Daines and telephone me again. He has not done
    so.

    The PCA has powers under section 98 (1) (b) of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984
    to disclose this material for the purposes of a prosecution.

    You will understand the prosecution’s frustration.


    Yours sincerely




    Ann Adlington
    Solicitor




                                                   2
THE INQUIRY INTO THE MATTERS ARISING FROM TH E DEATH
O F STEPHEN LAWRENCE

Chairman; Sir W illiam M acpherson o f Cluny
Secretary: Stephen W ells
R oom 3 n
Hsiuiibal House
Elephant & Castle
London SIU t>l I'.

Telephone No: 0171 277 4326
F uT n o      0171 708 4665                                                      1         1W


Tire Rt Hon Jack Straw MP
The Home Secretary
Home Office
50 Queen Anne's Gate
London SW1H 9AT




On 31 July 1997 you asked me to inquire into the matters arising from ttic death of
Stephen Lawrence, in order particularly to identify the lessons to bo learned for the
investigation and prosecution of racially motivated crimes,

The three people appointed to support me in my task were M rlo m C o o k , the
Rt Revd Dr John Sentamu and Dr Richard Stone. They have acted as full members of a team
in all respects. I am pleased to tell you that the Inquiry Report, which I deliver to you today,
is accepted by all three “Advisers” in its entirety, The Repoit therefore sets out our
unanimous views, based upon the evidence and material put before us during both parts of the
Inquiry.

1 take personal responsibility for all that is set out in the Report



                                                                                        lf L + * y

SIR WILLIAM MACFHERSON OF CLUNY
CHAIRMAN


MR TOM COOK


THE RT REVD DR JOHN SENTAMU                                   i-   4 © ^-^
 BISHOP FOR STEPNEY                                                fi                        J
 DR RICHARD STONE
                                                       jL ij                 -
      THE STEPHEN LAWRENCE INQUIRY




                       REPORT OF AN INQUIRY
               BV SIR WILLIAM MACPHERSON OF C U N Y



                          ADVISED BY
TOM COOK, THE RIGHT REVEREND DR JOHN SENTAMl, DR RICHARD STONE




        Presented to Parliament by the Secretary oj Sinh’jo r the Home Di'purit/teiit
                              bv Command o f Her Majesty.
                                     February 1999



<’M42b2-l                                                                               £26.00
C     h a p t e r t h i r t y -t h r e e

                                       THE SECOND INVESTIGATION

    33.1    By June i 994 the investigation of the Stephen I ,«wrenee murder was at a low ebb. The CPS
            had indicated twice that they did not believe that there was a case to take forward to the
            courts. Nothing fresh had materialised by way of evidence. Much publicity had been given
            to the ca.se.

    33.2    High level correspondence and conferences were held. The Commissioner wits personally
            involved in the sense that he wrote letters about the case to Mr Knau and to
            Mr Peter Bottom ley MP and to Mr Peter Lloyd MP. and it is plain that there was much
            interest in the case both before and after the Barker Review was completed, between
            September 1993 and the spring of 1994.

            Advertisements seeking witnesses were published in the autumn of 1993, and the
            investigation continued, to little avail To his credit Mr Weeden delayed his retirement,
            in the hope that he might further the investigation.
    Tt, 4   The d o c u m e n t s show that there had been continued activity by the MPS during the latter pan
            of 1993 and the early months of 1994. The Inquest was adjourned in December 993,
            because Mr & Mrs Lawrence’s legal team believed that further evidence might be available.

    1 $ 5 (>n 2 May 1994 Mr Johnston’s command team wa» joined by a .senior officer, who was at that
          time a Commander, named Perry Novc. Mr Novc is now Commissioner of (he City oi
          London Police Service. On 1 August 1994 the MPS was restructured and Mr Nove became
          the Deputy Head of the new South East Area which look in all ot the old 3 Area and most o!
          the old 4 Area of south London,

    33.6    Mr Johnston and Mr Nove decided that there should be virtually a fresh start with the
            investigation of Stephen Lawrence’s murder. Mr Nove in d ic a te d that it was n o t easy to
            “</<> a w a y w i t h t h e b u r e a u c r a c y a t t h e s t r o k e o j a p e n ” . But he and the Assistant
            Commissioner decided that a second investigation needed urgently to he launched, and
            decided that whatever the second investigation needed it was going to get. Primarily of
            course resources come from the Area involved. But it is apparent that during the course
            of the second investigation Mr Nove did all that he could to ensure that the
            investigation’s needs In respect of cash were satisfied. Mr Nove says that everybody
            insisted that the second investigation had to he fully resourced so far us possible.

     33.7   The man chosen to be $10 in the new regime was Detective Superintendent William Mellish.
            In 1994 lie was a most experienced detective. Immediately before taking over the
            Stephen Lawrence murder case Mr Mejlbh had been involved with a team ot officers in the
            reinvest!nation of the murder of Police Constable Bluketock which took place in Tottenham.
            That investigation hud lasted from 1992 until June 1994, During that investigation
            Mr Mellish had worked under Mr Nove, and it was at Mr Nove's behest that Mr Mellish
            became involved in the Stephen Lawrence murder inquiry. Mr Mellish continued as SIO
            until March 1995. Thereafter he continued to help Mr & Mrs Lawrence's legal team when
            they embarked upon the private prosecution Summonses in respect of that prosecution were
            issued in April 1995. Day to day climge of the matter after Mr Mcliish ceased to be SIO was
            in the hands of Detective Chief Inspector John C-iml.




                                                             234
A '. k    Nobody queried Mr Mellish's record in terms of his police expertise or suggested for a
          moment that anything that he did might be influenced by racism. Indeed all the indications
          are that Mr Mellish treated everybody firmly but well.

  33.')   The arrival on the scene of Mr Nove and Mr Mellish' did give a fresh impetus to the
          investigation which had flagged badly in the 14 months since the murder. We have already
          indicated that Mr Mellish found a dispirited team. Although lie speaks highly of some of ihe
          qualities of Mr Bullock, who continued as the DIO, he criticised the fact that Mr Bullock
          seemed to show no innovation or flair in any of the decisions or suggestions that he made in
          connection with the investigation.

  33.10 Mr Mellish was at pains to indicate that from the start he intended to look forward in
        the investigation. What he described as conventional methods of investigation had in
        his opinion been exhausted by June 1994. He understood that his role did not include
        reviewing or reinvestigating what he called the “ m i n u t i a e o f w h a t t h e e a r l i e r
        in v e s tig a tio n h o d d o n e o r n o t d o n e " . He saw the Barker Review, but laid little store by
        the contents of that document. He said that he regarded the Review as a “ t i c k i n t h e
        b o x ".    Meaning that he was prepared to accept that a line should he drawn under the
        earlier investigation, and that a fresh start should be made.

  3.U I Mr Mellish was asked by this Inquiry whai his view was about the earlier activities ol the
        team, and in particular the decision not to arrest in the early days. He said that u was
        impossible or unfair to try to make a decision about ihe previous SIO s activity unless one
        was "priv y to all the information tluu the SIO had at the time '. Understandably he was
        unwilling to perform the task which has been entrusted to this Inquiry, namely to make a
        comprehensive judgment on all that took place (rom the time of the murder on 22 April IW3.
        He did however .say that if the names of the suspects were enshrined in good inlurmittion
        within the first 48 hours then if things went well, and if the suspect* could he definitely
        placed in Iheir homes, arrests might have been made by the Tuesday or Wednesday alter the
        murder.

  .’,.<.12 Sensibly however Mr Mellish was not prepared to be drawn too much into expressing
           opinions as to the past. He was very keen to indicate that while he ordered many
           actions in respect of names of persons who had earlier been investigated the new
           investigation was to be of a different kind and character.
   VU .< Mr Mellish was briefed by Mr Wecden. and there arc note;; lo show that the etlective



          takcn away relevant statements and documents. He had also read all the police reports to the
          CPS which had been rendered to date. During hi.s phase of the investigation Mr Mellish
          himself had no contact with Mr Khan and Mr & Mrs Lawrence. Il was expressly laid down
          and agreed that Mr Nove himself or alternatively Commander William tin tilths or
          Mr Johnston would undertake all liaison with the family and their lawyers.

  3,’ 14 There was no doubt at ail In Mr Mellish mind but that this was a racist murder. His
         brief from Mr Novc was that there should he evolved a radical and innovative strategy
         in order to try to get the investigation hack on the rails and In order to obtain evidence
         to take Hie suspects to court.




                                                         235
33.15 Mr Mellish produced a diagrammatic document setting out the strategy that he proposed to
      follow, in conformity with Mr Stove's instructions and discussions between himself and
      Mr Novc. There were in effect three main lines followed by Mr Mellish, First and foremost
      U was decided that there must be sophisticated surveillance using all available techniques tu
      observe the suspects. The intention was to monitor the suspects for as long as possible in
      order to establish what they were doing, and perhaps to arrest one or more ot them for some
      other serious crime. Next it was hoped that one or more of the suspects could be “rolled
      over", meaning that they might agree to give evidence against the others. In addition
      Mr Melltsh intended to review the best witnesses. For example, Witness B was taken to
      Kings Cross Police Station where there is a modern video interview facility. The idea was
      to debrief the important witnesses and to check on the evidence available.

3.3. Hi Early on in his investigation Mr Mellish focuscd upon the position ot Clifford Norris, He
        was aware that Mr Norris was wanted for large scale drug importation and that “his jnrsenve
        at huge in South East London could h a w a .significant intimidatory e f f e c t He rialitly
        believed that both witnesses and sources of information could be inhibited by the shadow of
        Clifford Norris. Nobody knew where Clifford Norris was in 1994, although oi course u is
        evident that he had been in close contact with his son'becau.se of the history oi the ease
        brought against his .son involving the attempted murder of Stacey Henclield. Bel ore he
        became involved in this investigation Mr Mellish had nut h im self known of Oil lord Norris,
        bur he said that he was, as we accept, well known in south London. Furthermore, Mr Norn.,
        had been on the run since 1988. It is difficult to understand why he had not: been more
        energetically pursued after that date. There is no true explanation of the lack of energy in
        this direction either by Customs & Excise or by the police, Mr Norris’ brother Alexander had
        been sentenced in 1989 to a long prison .sentence tor involvement in major drug crimes.

33.17 A combination of surveillance and investigation led the team to some oa.sthou.se cottages in
      Battle, Sussex.

33. IS Mr Mellish’s account of the capture of Clifford Norris was factual but dramatic, and it was
       received hy the Inquiry audience with applause. There is no need t o go into the full details
       in this report, since they appear in the evidence on Day 42. The long and the short ot it. was
       that by 10 or 11 August 1994 it appeared obvious to Mr Mellish and his team that
       Clifford Norris was at the oasthou.se cottages, Observation was continued there, and tin the
       evening before his arrest Mr Norris and an associate went to a public house where they were
       positively identified by DS Knight. Permission to carry out an armed operation was obtained
       from the local constabulary who provided armed officers. Mr Mellish also contacted the
       local Regional Crime Squad, and a team of officers including DS Davidson was provided lo
       him. Mr Mdlish spent the night at the police station and briefed everybody at 05:00 on
        11 August. Mr Norris and his associate Mr Stainer moved in the middle of the morning and
       stopped for breakfast at a local cafe, where they were arrested. They were in possession of
       loaded handguns. An iJzi sub-machine gun and a large amount of ammunition were found
       aL the oasthnusc cottage.

33.19 With .Mr Norris .safely removed from the .scene Mr Melltsh hoped that fresh information
      would emerge, and that he might be able ro discover or develop some eye witness evidence.
      Unfortunately the fact is that no such evidence lias been obtained either by Mr Mellish or
      thereafter. The limited amount of evidence available in this case is only tot) dear tu all
      involved.
        The next step taken was intrusive video and audio surveillance ol a tint occupied by
        Gary Dobson He hud been given a flat in Footscray Road, Eltham, by ihc Socia . crvices
        Department and these p r e m is e s were found to be suitable for insertion o f a probe. An audio
        S ^ ^ i n s e . e d in the premises, ami over a considerable penod dunng
        December I‘>94 Rims and r e c o r d in g s were made which we have seen. The details ot thusc
        “         w i * « K . hut * Mr Meilish indicated
        nresent in that flat including all the suspects except Jamie Acourt. had i t p r o p t m i n f o r
        M e m * a m l th t a u r iu ir * M m   m i m m * %«rv "• The young men
        explicit racisi comments and remarks repeatedly, and large km>e.s w u e much             ^        •
        These knives were waved about and used to simulate stabbing. Ou several ocasio is knives
        were ,n«rted in the waistbands of some of the young men who were seen to leave the
                  and return, depositing the knives baek on the wtedow all. Jam.e Acmrt was ,n
        custody, having been charged with another offence involving vioteiw-c.

        We do not here examine the full nature of these terrible recording The fact js h'mever
i.Ul
        that it was apparent that the young men almost certainly suspected tlwt tht{
        b^eed Whether they appreciated that there was a video camera installed may be
        subiect to doubt. But it is evident that these men knew that they were being overheard.
        Not only are they proved by the recordings to be violent racists, but they are also defiant
        r f X         haUrdone by the police or bv authority in connection with their own
        i £ E Z J X c Z o Z J to k             transerip. of Ik. recortin** which were Wore us
        is in the Appendices to this Report.

*3.22


         ;is Mi Melltsn acceptca, me pioduct of the probe                                                      «,   .v.rivkv
         to obtain either some dime: admissions, or at least admissions o «.fher criminal                      >
         whi*! wotiUI have enabled him to arrest Hie suspeit*. Mr Melhshs own new suo^ly
         expressed. was that “«« m e i o t a o f n k l m c t c a p i ' M e o j I m i g I f « l « ‘ v I " " " '

         t h w   n u 'n   w e re th e m i w k r c n   v t S te p h e n   U tw tv n e e w is   o b ta in e /l




,i.U3
         AS a result of Hie «u lier audio surveillance a small morsel of information bad h.™ obtained
         indieatinf that perinfx Gary Dobson could not *fc«* i l w p r e m m - . ^                    “ "d
         ftoni conversation overheard when the young men were visiting Jamit Atom) at tk R *
         Centre where he was detained. He had stabbed somebody in a ,1* 1,,-dub.^ind wa he d
         custody in connection with that matter. The fact that undercover police . . H i l l i s j) tsu: i
         the club hud observed the stabbing may have been one oi t h e c^tnbutory Actors which
         alened ihe young men to the fact that they were being watched and ictoiiieu.

          It was Mr Mellish's view that their knowledge and their appreciation ol the
          surveillance came primarily from “ s c h o o l i m ” from Clifford Norris before be was anesicd.
          Mr Mellish believed that after thetr arrest in 1903 Mr Norris would have y r ^
          as he out it and instructed them to keep silent and wanted them o the risk that here mifeht
          Se tpfelka'ed lurvc.W e ot then, in the future. This is a possible Itaury. A M ”*
          thev mav have been alerted by others, in addition the yourtg men were aware imm the very
          L ils the nxotdings show, that the landlord of the flat with somehody else had been ta ut
          by <i^ 7 IJobs,,,, am! the direet statcWW is made m the very tlrs, tteonhng. md.eatmp IM
          some interference had taken place.
 33.25 It may not matter in the end how they were aware of the surveillance. The fact is that they
       probably were aware of it and therefore may have avoided making arty incriminating
       remarks. Their whole attitude and their denials may have been spec ideally intended to put
       the police off the scent.

 *3,26 When Gary Dobson was seen by DS Knight, who approached him i>u the softly, softly basis
       he made no admissions in a long conversation and produced no useful indication that he
       would be able to give evidence! against the others. Later when he was arrested Mr Mellish
       interviewed him, and again Mr Dobson made no admissions and was not prepared to assist.
       Incidentally there was very little evidence ever available against Gary Dobson. He was not
       identified at any parade, and the only material available to the prosecution in the end was the
       weak or very weak evidence concerning the suggested transference of fibres to
       Stephen Lawrence’s hand.

33.27 By the time Mr Mellish left the team there was really little advance, in the sense that no
      satisfactory additional evidence was obtained in order to assist the prosecution. Mr Mellish
      was very doubtful about the evidence of Duwayne Brooks, principally in his case because he
      fell that everybody should “be a w a w that his defence have used a psyehintm t who says ihat
      he was suffering f n m post traumatic shock at the tiiw o f the riot. Ifthis is v/> what value can
           place on his positive ID made just after the rUrt?”

33.28 Mr Mellish did not wish to approach the case or the family or their lawyers on the negative
      basis that the case was hopeless. But it is apparent that Mr Meliish's view was that the case
      was very weak. Indeed he indicated this informally to some of those involved from time to
      time. It was not for him to make the ultimate decision as to whether the prosecution should
      go ahead. That was for the Crown prosecution team, and later for the lawyers advising
      Mr & Mrs Lawrence. The CPS had made their decisions in 1993 and April 1994, so ii was
      for Mr <& Mrs Lawrence’s leant lo make a proper and informed decision as to whether the
      prosecution should proceed. Once it has been decided that there should be no prosecution by
      the CPS it is possible for a private prosecution to start, subject to any veto which may be
      imposed by the Attorney General,

33.29 Mr Mellisb indicated that there was not the material upon which a jury might act, even if the
      Judge let in the vital evidence of Mr Brooks, Mr Mansfield believed that the surveillance
      evidence would be admitted. Mr Mellisli did not agree, This of course was never tested at
      trial, although is is right to indicate that the Magistrate at. the committal proceedings did allow
      the edited version of these terrible scenes and words to be given in court. He did not have to
      make any final ruling as to whether the recoidings could be made available at trial.

33.30 Mr Mellish was asked about the resourcing of his inquiries. He gave evidence which reflects
      the position, namely that resources are always and were always tight, but that those above
      him were undoubtedly helpful in obtaining money for the initiatives which he wished to take
      forward. Mr Mellish did not complain that he was short of officers or short of funds in the
      result in connection with the initiatives and investigation which he had proposed.

33.31 As to Mr Brooks Mr Mellish noted that Mr Brooks had been acquitted in connection with the
      Welling disturbance on the basis of traumatic stress, Ami his logic was that Mr Brooks must
      hiivc made his identifications when he was under the same traumatic stress and “a half
      reasonable defence barrister would make inincetneui o f him ".
   P Mr Brooks had never formally I                h   T    w    a     s         a v i S ^ i ^ fte £ i


           him thereafter as a witness must huve been apprehenMve A                } .        sense
           h, Mias iane »           »                                       - b t « difficulty fa
           connection wilhMr Brooks and the giving of his evidence stie would have been tit tin.1 so
           to indicate.

           „ was though, wise however that there ^ ^ J S y ^ S &                                  . ’E S
           during uiul around the days ot the trial, and that he *huuld t^ac.u>mp n
           the night with officers nearby. Throoshout the
           26 April IW6 there were pjlict-otticerescortspr.rndui M               ^            a ,||ected by
              Snow Hill Police Station, near the                                   A i ^ f e d survey has
                      jfo f”       y“ a t «? the                     » perform this guard duty.

           In his statement to the Inquiry Mr Brooks does g                 o           w             “ ' uo




            general expectation must have been that his evident, would not be put b tlo u tht ju,y.
                                ■i      on i«  ^ d Sto  Ann!
                                                           n l . He
                                                                 Ht then
                                                                    r e went m w uv tor the weekend   to thi.
3.3.35
   ... .
            Mr Brooks g a v e evidence     18 .,*,,1  ^ Ap                               Wlthil, a trial” on
            West Midlands.
            West Midlands.     He  continued  and    brushed his  ^vtUuiu m  uie
            Monday, 12 April I W .

V'.jfi      O   of
                n e      ..Ulcers all.)ca>ed to guard him on Ha‘ "«“ * ^ ^ epls nPhtly that if Ok-
                      th e

            has been .uade. Anybody who ,» asked about tti.s a ^amju « - I* . J ^ ^ ^ ^
            alkx-.iti.i8 officers had known nboul DS X A » ^ *               J [|f^ !ISSM.mlio„



            :2r2"s rrJt*&js■*«*—-—- 1*
             the MPS.

 '.'3-37 That is a separafe matter in » * , Se. since rhe M
                hut on appeal thut decision was upset <md he was a llo w s in rtmu»
                Area, as a Detective Constable.
                                              concerned while it is obviously undesirable that
 3 .UK So far as the guarding of Mr Bruok*             .      .      evidence whatsoever that
      OS XX should have been                                  ^       « rtu n r t. .tat if there
      anything went wrong as a result - f DS XX s        " ^ a ,          Mf Br0()ts, (vMence
      had been any > « r i W * t o l *                     rer convlnOTl that there to no basis
      in any way it would at onto have been Wist                       hearing on the evidence
      for anv suttaestioii that the presence of DS XX had in fact any n u n v
      given by Mr Brooks or indeed upon the course of the trial.




                                                           239
 33.39 When the Irial was. over Mr Mellish himself wrote to Mr Pcnstonc of the Greenwich Borough
       Council, on y July 1996, seeking a Community Care Grant for Mr Brooks. Mr Mellish
       confirmed that Mr Brooks had been under his care during the currency of the dial and he
       pointed out that Mr Brooks had undergone rigorous cross-examination and had been the
       focus of enormous media attention. He indicated quite rightly that these experiences had hail
       a most traumatic effect on this young man, and he hoped very much that Mr Penstone and
       indeed the police could help Mr Brooks to readjust to his new lift.*. He rightly pointed out
       that Mr Brooks had been under exceptional pressures and would need every support to cope
       with his new situation.

33.40 It is a pleasure to record that at the outset of Mr Mansfield’s cross-examination he thanked
      Mr Mellish and expressed the appreciation of Mr & Mrs Lawrencc fur the way in which he
      had conducted the second investigation, Mr Mansficid then prepared the ground for the
      showing of the video of the Mr Dobson’s Hat. The Inquiry then saw the video highlights, as
      did the public and the press. Mr Mansfield rightly told the Inquiry ihat consideration h;id
      been given to the question of prosecution for possible offences arising from the video itself.
      Since the activities of these young men took place in a private flat there was in fuel no
      appropriate crime with which they could be charged.

33.41 As to Clifiord Norris Mr Mansfield pointed out that Mr Mellish had been able to obtain from
      intelligence dockets and other documents his information about Clifford Norris without
      difficulty. Mr Mellish had never associated DS XX with Clifford Norris, but aL the rele'-an!
      time he was aware that DS XX had "mt't it criminal in bud c in ,tin>sUotct'\ unci iru.v
      disciplined”. Plainly the tactic of arresting. Clifford Norris could have been followed earlier
      by the Weeden team. It is surprising that particularly after the Benefield case no positive
      .steps seem to have been taken to take Mr Norris out of circulation. He must always have
      been regarded as an evil influence hovering'over tht; case and potentially over witnesses and
      those who might give information, most of whom had been known to one or other members
      of the gang.

33.42 As to James Grant Mi Mellish indicated that the name Gran? was of eoune on the system
      when he took over, IK* also said that James Grant was, so far as he knew, an informant
      judging by the text of the message or the action which had identified him to Mr Mellish in
      the first place. He said that his officers tried to find the paperwork relating to James Grant
      locally and at AMIP Headquarters but that they could find no documentation whatsoever. He
      raised an action to try to trace James Grant, and he told the Inquiry that he knew that one of
      hi.s officers had approached somebody who appeared to have been involved as a handle- of
      James Grant who told him that there was an informant, but that he had forgotten his name
      except thai. it. was "something like tin ojfticenrc Mr Mellish sardonically indicated that the
      name of James Grant was, the nearest that one could get to an off licence connection.

33.43 The action to trace James Grant remained open until the new year of 1995. James Grant was
      never (raced formally as a result of that action, but it i.s interesting, and somewhat surprising,
      to discover ihat two ol Mr Meflish's officers in fact by coincidence when visiting somebody
      else came info contact with James Grant, and also Witness K. Theic was some confusion in
      the evidence about this aspect of the matter, but a pocket book entry by ihe two officers
      shows quite plainly that James Grant was seen on 7 and 1 F'ebmary                by them and that
      James Grant made a limited vedia! statement io the officers.

13.44 Mr Mellish believed James Grant to be a registered informant and he says that that interview
      would not have resulted in any formal record of what had taken place. As Mr Mellish points
      out James Grant himself never gave any indication that he was a witness, and the true value




                                                 240
                        i i     i'     .1 • „ io<K u j - M i n L'ount'Ction with whai witnesses such as K
     of his information both earlier and m l          .»        _               suitcimrnt to DS Davidson
     and B might have been able to say.                                                  at about 23:30 on
     on 17 May 1993. He had said that he had v .s e d                                    ^             ^
     the night of the murder and that he                  *a f ^            Witwss K, had his T-shirt off.
      that one of them had said ft «wi«" i u-' .                      ' J       ourse a nnnrnv and that he
      Thereafter Mr Mellish told the                                                  h    * * '« « l«K» «
      M l hi» • * « « «*"* " < » -» # ''< «                           S w K ^ ta v c L -t.a b to to s ty .



      o fn MhiU'WUniss K 1d i w p p e ^ so *at the only witness statement that ever existed was
       that tjik.cn in 1993.
VV45 As to the registration of James ^m nt Mr‘ hellish ^ i r m e c U t u t th e ^ ^ bJ n f0I-mally
     anywhere, although ol course there should ha           ^ '     , k ■ conneetitw with the
     registered and if the relevant and proper steps had twui Uk,n
     documentation.

1U(> As to [he private prosecution Mr MelLish ^                                       formal meetings that he
‘'   negative and he would have "lemioned , ^                                               job toother with
                                              wSther they «          p *             «> ,« ft* a r —             .
        Mr Mellish regarded his own opinion us* in a sen.se irrelevant.

_i:U7 Mr MtHMt was                                     ^     ^ ^ . . 1 ’■!*“ .S " '* whleh h f o p e ^ ' w m
       agreed with Miss Woodley that the                                                              |« .1 . Simply for
       different from and tetter » » " * * ^ “ ^ “ “ h S n . UHI Police Station in IW4.
       example there was a dedicated HOI-                          *             ^ bw;n ^ p lic a te d or triplicated
       and indeed dedicated staff filled v»ri‘>u^ 0^                     J e d jmlicated. that M r Mellish whs
       in 1993. Furtherm ore it is evident to we I^h ® . ^ / decisi(jn bad been made in Un­
       provided with money from central funds, b                           .          ^ ^        sup|H>rtod fn m l s of
       higher echelons that the second inves g-                          .           . •nifwrs overseeing the first
       S i r c e s . It must be «M that It * » ^                                                   »„d ^ L v e U « id e d
        investigation to have treated that "Pe“ "“                         h ^ met vtrv simi|ar difficulties to
        additional fuadlns ami staff, lie also'“k ^ *f                          .,.,.>1,111 with.' for example, elieitina
        those e,.countered b, the first                                                                  "“•> * « » * 1,“ "
        information from witness** sudl “s [""^.niK. , „ i ti, Emma trick Mr Melllsh laid
        reluctant lo co-operate with the police.                                            » “ hero near her by her
        that police officers were simply prevented                              l. encounter with that particular
         mother. There h' therefore an echo of DS Da» .t e n £ e * £ m                                          was ^    „
         K«r«. ^           r              e          s       u        l          t          s        .           This cross-
         » representative of Mr Khan s oil ice, wu                           ..                     unable to advance the
         examination did indicate that the second »"^dga                                      connection with the video
         case or to obtain satisfactory evidence, otherwise man
         recordings.
                                                  11                                      k>h..ir of Mr Brooks Mr Mellish reiterated thtU whi
  33,48 In answer to Mr Macdonald, on tahall ot                             ybouMho ease which was going on at the
          "guaniiitn" officers would have known some                    ^ '                               Clifford Noins had
          ( emral Criminal Court, they wou d not have                                                     Criminal Court. *o
          been .nested, and David Moms hmwclt was not on ru a me. Li
          that the “ N o r r i s f a c t o r s " in the case were in any evrnt dummsht .
.49 In answer to Mr Brian Barker QC, bn behalf of the CPS, Mr Mellish confirmed that
    Mr Youngerwood was anxious to see the investigation going forward as far as humanly,
    possible. Furthermore he indicated that he was prepared to give Mr Mellish every support
    that he could from his professional position and that he would of course support a further step
    in connection with the prosecution if any hard useful evidence could be produced.

.50 Mr Mellish confirmed that he had not met Mr & Mrs Lawrence during the
    investigation. The connection with them hod been firmiy taken into the hands of
    Commander Nove. Mr Mellish had been told that there had been a lack of
    communication with the family and that Mr Khan had played an important part in
    that, and he added that Mr Bollock told him that the solicitor had effectively “hijacked
    ihe fa m ily ’'. In Mr Wecden’s briefing note to Mr Mellish Mr Khan was described as
    '*closely linked to AHA , Within hours o f (he murder he interposed him self between the
    Lawrence fam ily and the Police, Has turned the erne into a political bandwagon     This
    is another example of Mr Weeden passing on deprecatory views which did not help the
    situation.

.52 Mr Mellli.sh did all that he could during his time as SIO.      He retired from the MPS in
    February 1998, after 33 years service.
 CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE
                               CROWN PROSECUTION SERVICE

 39.1    For a time we wondered whether a Police Act Inquiry into policing should encompass
         evidence abour the decisions in connection with the prosecution ot the .suspects. On
         reflection it was plain that the Inquiry would be woefully incomplete if the prosecution
         process was not examined. Furthermore the inter-relation between the police mid ihe Crown
         Prosecution Service, as highlighted in This ease, could lead to recommendations in
         connection with the future prosecution of eases of this kind. With these considerations in
         mind evidence was called on Days 51 and 52 dealing with the CPS' pail in this case. In
         addition we have seen all the background papers relevant to die prosecution, including IS
         successive reports prepared by the investigation team fur the CPS, commonly called
         Investigating Officer's Reports.

>•>•2   Some of the evidence given by the witnesses in statement form was read to the Inquiry, and
        two witnesses were called to give live evidence, The first of tlie.se witnesses was
        Mr Philip Medwynter. He gave short evidence in the witness box, and his lull statement was
        read out by Mr Brian Barker, on behalf of (he CPS, as the record shows. Mr Medwynter is
        a Bachelor of Law and a Barrister. He had experience as a Court Clerk in the Magistrates'
        Court and in 1987 he joined the CPS, He is arid was in 1993 a principal Crown Prosecutor,
        He was the principal .Cfown Prosecutor for the Camberwell Greenwich Youth Team
        managing three other lawyers when the team acquired the Stephen I awtence case. He
        allocated the cose to hinvselI' because he realised its seriousness.

3().3   Initially Mr Medwynter believed, after reviewing the available early evidence, that Ihere was
        a ease lor Neil Aeourt to meet, because he had been unequivocally identified by
        Dtiwayne Brooks, As the ease developed Mr Medwynter discussed it with his line manager
        Graham Grant-Whyte, who was an Assistant Crown Prosecutor. Mr Grant-Whyte rightly
        proposed that there should be a ease conference with the police in order to discuss the
        available evidence, outstanding evidence, other suspects and the nature of police
        investigation and inquiries. The role allocated to Mr Medwynier was that of collating the
        evidence submitted by the police, assessing if and briefing Mr Grant-Whyte as to the nature
        and quality of the admissible evidence.         There were frequent discussions between
        Mr Medwynier and Mr Gram-Whyte about the case, and a constant review of the evidence
        and developments w;is made by Mr Medwynter on liehal f ol his superiors

39.4    It is significant to note that Mr Medwynter and the other prosecutors weie fully conscious
        that this was purely a crime motivated by racism.

39.5    Mr Medwynter appreciated early on that it was not his responsibility to make the ultimate
        decision whether or nor to prosecute in the Stephen Lawrence case, because of the gravity
        and aggravating features of the case, and because the case had attracted national media
        attention.

39.6    Once the identification of Luke Knight by Mr Brooks had taken plate on 3 June 1993 and
        the evidence of DS Crowley came before the CPS there wus further detailed consideration
        given to rhe ease. Mr Medwynter told us of the written minute Uuted 1.5 June 1993 prepared
        by Mr Grant-Whyte tor Mr Huward Youngerwood, the Branch Crown Prosecutor, seeking
        Mr Youngerwood's decision as to whether the ease against Mr Acourt and Mr Knight for the
        murder of Stephen Lawrence should continue.
17       A case conference in fact took place on 9 July 1993, and Mr Yoiu^erwood tald those
         present bis view of the evident* as it stood at that elate. We all know that the ultimate
         decision made bv Mr Youngerwood was that the evidence against Neil Acourt and
         indeed against Luke Knight was in itself weak, and that the evidence of Mr Brooks was
         further undermined by the evidence of DS Crowley. The decision to discontinue the
         prosecution was taken on 28 July by Mr Youngerwood himself, and the decision was
         communicated to Mr Weeden and Mr Bullock by Mr Grant-Whyte at a further case
         conference. Mr Youngerwood attended the closing stages of that conlercnce and
         explained to the police that if further admissihle reliable evidence came to light the
         prosecution could be resurrected.

V),X     The records show that there were further case confcrcna?s on 27 October uih.I I I November
         1993. The evidence was reviewed therefore after the initial discontinuance, but the advice
         given by the CPS was still that the totality of the available evidence could not justify ic
         charging any ol the suspects, and in particular those identified by Mr Brooks.

39.9     U should lie noted that there was never any question in 1993 94 of the other
         being charged, since in truth there was no evidence against any of them to justify
         prosecution. None of them had been identified at any parade, and there was no other
         evidence to establish their involvement in this terrihle crime.

V). 10   Mr Grant-Whyte’s statement was also rend on Day 51 He has retired lYom employment with
         the CPS. He was a graduate of the University of' Natal, and he studied law at ( anibndjic ami
         was called to the Bar in 1963. In 1966 he joined the legal stall of the Department oi Hie
         Director of Public Prosecutions, and in 198A he was an Assistant Branch ( rown Proseaitoi.
         Mi Grant-Whyle became ill in December 1993, and he handed over his pan in t.ie
         Stephen Lawrence prosecution to Vivienne Pert.

V)ll     Mr G ran t-Whvie told the Inquiry in his statement that he worked closely with
         Mi Medwynter who he regarded as a most competent and eflicieni lawyer. Mr Medwynwr
         was the primarv reviewing lawyer having ihe day lo day conduct i»l the ca.'.e, but r irant
         Whyte read all "the papers and had frequent discussions with Mr Medwynk-r and nuked with
         Mr Yuutigerwood who wa.s his superior.

19 1 ’ Mr Grant-Whyte referred to the Code for Crown Prosecutors issued under Section 10
       of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985, He usefully set out the two criteria which have
       to be considered In every ease which is reviewed and conducted by the Cl -

                 " F ir s t th e s u ffic ie n c y             c rite r ia   , nam      e ly    *■<t h e   e v id e n c e s u c h      as     w o u ld

                 e n s u re     a    r e a lis t ic p r o s p e c t o f c o n v ic tio n ? .            T h a t is , w o u l d a j u r y         o r a

                 b e n c h    o f M a g is tr a te s p r o p e r ly d ir e c te d in                  a c c o r d a n c e w ith     th e la w       be

                 m o re      lik e ly th a n          n o t to    c o n v ic t th e d e fe n d a n t o f th e a lle g e d c h a r g e



                 S e c o n d ly      ,   i f   th e    a n s w e r     is    in   th e       a ffirm a tiv e        th e   p u b lic        in te re s t

                 c r ite r ia       fa lls     to     b e   c o n s id e re d ,   th a t       is   a lth o u g h    th e re   is    s u ffic ie n t

                 e v id e n c e d o e s t h e p u b lic              in te re s t r e q u ir e       « p r o s e c u tio n ?

                 E a c h      c a s e h a s to b e lo o k e d a t o n                 its o w n f a c t s a n d c ir c u m s t a n c e s .            I f

                 b o th       c rite r ia       a re        s a tis fie d    th e n      a     p r o s e c u tio n     s h o u ld      n o r m a lly

                 fo llo w s




                                                                                   269
V), 13 Mr Grant-Whyte himself considered that the evidence in the ease of the murder of
       Stephen Lawrence appeared from the start ‘Vo he exceedingly weak". Mr Grant-Whyie on
        15 June 1993 submitted a long memorandum to Mr Youngerwood indicating that in his
       opinion the evidence of Mr Brooks was in itself weak, and that it was further weakened by
       the evidence of DS Crowley. Rightly both he and Mr Youngerwood applied the te.st set out
       in R v Turnbull 1977 QB p 224 in connection witli the basic identification by Mr Brooks of
       Neil Acourt and Luke Knight. This ami subsequent cases spell out with emphasis the dangers
       of misidentification. Experience shows that where there has been a "fleeting glimpse" of a
       person, or a longer observation in difficult circumstances, the Court must (if the case goes to
       the jury) give recognised and careful warnings pf the special need for caution, How long w h s
       the observation? In what light? What wore the circumstances?

39.14 An apparently clear identification can be mistaken. When the quality of the identifying
      evidence is poor and unsupported the trial Judge .should withdraw the case from the
      jury, since experience has shown that misidentifieation upon poor evidence is a source
      of injustice. This case, and subsequent firm endorsement of its principles, must he
      particularly noted in the context of this ease. Once the Judge decides that the
      identification evidence is poor and unsupported he has a duty to withdraw the case,
      The law is clear, and the Judge rightly enforced it.

39.15 Mr Granl-Whyte confirms that Mr Youngerwood?s advice was that there was no
      realistic prospect of conviction based upon Mr Brooks' evidence, and that the case
      should be discontinued subject of course to the discovery of other credible evidence to
      support Mr Brooks.

39.16 On 12 July 1993 Mr Andrew Mitchell, an experienced Junior Counsel, had been hooked to
      conduct the committal at the Magistrates’ Court On 14 July information was received from
      the police that the last outstanding scientific evidence would not be available for some
      months. Further identification grades involving Luke Knight had been mooted, but his
      .solicitor had indicated that Mr Knight was not prepared to consent 10 a further identification
      patade unless he wits advised to attend one by Counsel,

39.17 On 27 July 1993 Mr Mitchell telephoned Mr Medwynter and informed him that having
      read the committal papers there was not, in his own words, “a cat in h ell’s chance o f a
       conviction

-'9.18 On 28 July 1993 Mr Crunt-Whyte in fact signed the notices of discontinuance, after
       Mr Youngcrwood had advised that this should be done. 1’hose notices were posted on
       that day, and copies to the solicitors for the accused were faxed on the morning of
       29 Julv- The proceedings were formally discontinued at Camberwell Youth Court on
       29 July 1993.

39. IM Thereafter on I September 1993, at Hie request of Mr Gordon Btherington, the Chief Crown
       Prosecutor for London, a detailed report was prepared by Mr Grant Whyte in conjunction
       with Mr Medwynter.

39. ?() It must he stressed that discontinuance did not mean a final and irrevocable end to the
        case. Everybody knows that the police remained active during the later months of 1993
        and in the early months of 1994. Their activity produced no fresh evidence, and there
        were meetings and conferences held by the CPS during the latter months of 1993, and




                                                270
      advice was given to Mr Weeden that on the available evidence the CPS still believed that
      there was insufficient evidence to justify charging any ot the suspects with murder.

19 21 The CPS witnesses dealt also with the ease of Stacey Benefield. M r (irunt-Whyte burned
      the view that the Stacey Benefield case had to be treated as a separate matiei from u
      Stephen Lawrence case. It .should be said that w,- agree, rhm in legal terms that
      was correct. There would not have been any prospect of-the prosecution being nliowul to
      join the Stacey Benefield ease with the Stephen Lawrence murder.

W ”   Incidentally it should be noted that the CPS were asked to reinstate proceedingsagainst
      £ & Auiuit uml David Norris in « M « c l i o n with «he smbbinj ol a vcmng man c,dlcd
      Darren Withum in Chislehurat in 1992. David Norris M been picked out by the victim ol
      that stabbing at an identification parade, The matter had been discontinued on hebasisol
      insufficient evidence. In spite of the police wish that the matter .should bo lunsUlcd w.is
      the view of the CHS that .such reinstatement was inappropriate.

W     This was also the CPS view of the case concerning a young man called Lee                 N,>
      realistic prospect of a conviction in that case was present, bearing in mind that Mi Pcuison
      could not say who had stabbed him and also bearing in mind that he was reluctant to gue
       evidence.

W">4 It should be observed that Mr B ullock and Detective Constable Freeman composed a
                               which was submitted to the CPS inviting the                    *»
     reconsider the case in relation to the Witham brothers und seeking .t.s reinslate.ne.it. As
     has been pointed out this action by Mr Bullock b inconstetent with
     he was          s o ft" on David Norris, It should be added that we ourselves have some
     concern about the CPS decision not to revive the Witham case. I here was evidrtji- that
     David Norris and Jamie Acourt had been involved In violence, and a kmk and
     truncheon had been used. It does appear to us that there was the ma enal avoiloWe tor
     a successful prosecution. We appreciate that the weight and quality
     first to be assessed by the CPS, and that the judgement of the relevant CPS ^ itu * *
     involved. Hut it must certainly be in the public interest to
     follow where there has been violence and dangerous weapons have been used, provided
     that the evidential test is met,

 W     When Mr Medwyntcr came into the witness box after ihe statements ot hintself cin<l
       M r Gram-Whyte had been read, it was apparent that it was his personal view [hat the
       prosecution of Mr Acourt and M r Norris could have been pursued. O n the other hand he
       accepted that the decision was nor. his to make. He believed that DS Crowley might h* t.
       misunderstood what M r Brooks was saying, und he would have liked the prosecution lo g.n
       forward notwithstanding the evidence qf D S Crowley. However M r Medwynter quite ighUy
       accepted that even when there were differing views amongst the ranks of the pmsecuMiN th
       ultimate decision was for the senior prosecutor to make. Mr Medwyuter agietd that by
       July 1993 the evidence of Mr Brooks was “severely undermined by D S < n.wlcy * ^vidu**.
       and he realised that tactically it would have been better not lo pursue the maner at oro.e. bu
       to wait to see whether further admissible and reliable evidence emerged, in answet to
       M r Brian Barker he accepted ultimately that discontinuance was appropriate, although it is
       apparent that he was more keen than others that the matter should be act.vcly pursued.

 .W.?6 Th* crucial evidence on behalf of the CPS was in fact given by Mr Y o » n ^ ^ « i i e e
       he was the man who had tn make the relevant decisions. He had maii ^ r , "
       experience as a solicitor both with the MPS, with whom he worked for 16 years, and in
         the CPS in its various existences. When he gave evidence he was retired* but he hud
         been involved throughout with the Stephen Lawrence murder investigation. He was an
         impressive witness, and it was plain to the inquiry that be hud been worried and
         anxious about the case and the decisions which he had fett bound to make. By the end
         of June 1993 he was aware that Mr Grant-Whyte and Mr Mcdwynter were both acutely
         concerned about the state of evidence in the Stephen Lawrence case. He had been in
         touch with them as the matter developed, but it was in June that he became closely
         involved in the decision making. He asked for the committal file, and he saw the key
         unused material.

„W,27 Mr Youngerwood U>Id us that, it did not take him long, on reading the full papers which wore
      put before him, to realise that the situation was depressing. He realised and accepted fully
      that tins was a wicked racist murder. But it was his duty, as he told us, first to consider the
      nature of the evidence which was available. Plainly there was evktence that five or six white
      youths had killed Stephen Lawrence, in a joint enterprise, so that (here were no problems in
      that regard. There was however, as M r Youngerwood told us in vivid terms, a very
      considerable problem as to the quality of the identification evidence of Mr Brooks.

.W.2S    IVIr Brook* had, as his statements show, concentrated his attention on the person
         referred to as ‘'the slabber” who appeared to he staring at him. At the identification
        parades he had indicated that the persons identified were simply part of the group and
        not the person upon whom his attention had been concentrated. Mr Youngerwood over
        and over again in his evidence indicated that he looked at the matter in two ways. Firs!
        he looked .simply at the quality of the Identification; he did not believe that any criminal
        lawyer of competence could in all conscience have said that the identification in the
        circumstances described could possibly he considered to have been safe. And in
        addition there was the evidence of DS Crawley. The bash of the discontinuance notice,
        said Mr Youngerwood, was tithr$e cumulative factors”. His decision was based on the
        initial unsatisfactory quality of the identification of suspects in the group. Plus, as he
        said, '‘the even worsening assessment of what the Ittwexi effect of Crowley ’v evidence might
        be’\

39.2S) The long and the short of it is thar Mr Youngcrwnod throughout his evidence indicated that
       he could not conceive that there would be a conviction upon the evidence of Mr Brooks. It
       was therefore his duty to make his own assessment of the situation and reach a decision as
       to whether the prosecution should go ahead. He chose to discontinue at the end of July 19'>3
       and not !o adjourn the case tit the hearing M o r e the Magistrate.',. Mr Mansfield cross-
       examined M r Youngcrwood at some length as to this decision, suggesting that the most that
       should have been done was lo ask the court to adjourn. The suggestion being pur to
       Mr Youngerwood was that it would be difficult to resurrect the case on.ee there had been a
       discontinuance. M r Youngerwood believed that it would be wrong simply to seek an
       adjournment, and rhat the only fair course to take was to indicate that in the state of the
       evidence as it was the case could not and should not go abend.

.VJ.3U We ftilly understand Mr Youngerwood’s reasoning und his decision, and we believe that
       his conclusion was correct. If further evidence came tu light, either scientific evidence
       or further evidence which might have emerged as a result of the repeated picas to the
       public for their assistance, then the matter could have been revived. But if the situation
       remained as it was there would be no prospect of the case being pursued satisfactorily-

.WJI    M r Youngerwood in his evidence was more than once asked why ii was not reasonable to
        allow a jury to decide whether they believed M r Brooks or DS Crowley. He accepted that
        this was an attitude which was understandable, but. rightly in our view, he said that ihis was
        i) "califmm the h e a r t" which he had to resist. His first duty was to look at die case and reach
          his own conclusions, bearing in mind the Crown Prosecutors’ Code, as to whether thcic was
          the basic material to allow the case to go to court. He bclieved thai Lhcre could only be a
          negative answer lo the question “Hto there safe identification evidence to allow tins case to
          proceed?

   p      Mi* Youngerwood was criticised by Mr Mansfield oil the basis that he was tiiking over
          the role of the Judge or the jury, and that he ought to have allowed the ease to proceed.
          We do not agree with this criticism. Mr Youngerwood was a highly experienced and
          responsible solicitor, and it was his duty to reach a decision hearing in mind all relevant
          matters. He was not allowed in accordance with the Code or in accordance with the law
          to float the case simply because of its Importance and because of the racist nature of the
          attack, or for any other reason. He had to make an assessment of what probative
          evidence was available at the time that he considered the case, and he had to act
          properly and in accordance with his conscience after such consideration.

39.33 l£ was further suggested to Mr Youngerwood that he ought to have gone to Treasury Counsel
      in order to obtain a further view of the strength of die case before reaching (he, conclusion as
      to discontinuance. In fact Mr Youngerwood had the oral and uncompromising view ol
      experienced criminal Junior Counsel, namely Mr Mitchell It is true that there was no wiitten
      opinion '.liven or written advice obtained, and no further reference: 10 more Senior Counsel
      was contemplated. As mutters stood in 1993 it seems to us plain that Mr Youngerwood was
      not only entitled to reach the decision that he did. but that he reached the con cut decision.
      There was in July 1993 no prospect ol a successful prosecution being pursued on the basis
      of the evidence which was then available.

          U is right, to say that there was no qualification in the actual identification of the two suspects
          by Mr Brooks. Mr Mansfield described the identification of Neil Acouri as "a classic
          identification, subject obviously to the usual warnings that any jury and tiny Magistrates
          Conn would have to have in mind". Mr Youngcrwood agreed that the identification was
          unequivocal, but pointed out. rightly in our view, that people are often convinced that they
          are right and make what can be termed a classic identification although tin: ciiLiiinsiain.cs
          make it plain that such confidence is misplaced,

3 9. 35   That is the reason, said Mr Youngerwood, why so much caution has to be ewrciscd and
          why injustice has sometimes tjccurrecl over the years. A clear identification may well be
          mistaken, and the circumstances mast !>« looked at with great care before an
          unqualified identification is taken as gospel.

>),36 Mr Youngerwood’s view was that the identification by Mr Brooks of two people who were
      not '‘the ■s tahher " was patently unsafe' in the circumstances. There was no identification
      made by any of the other three witnesses who were present at or near the bus-slop at ihe time
      of the murder.

 <9.37 There is justifiable criticism of the police for then failure to act quickly, and thus to be abk*
       tt> organise identification parades at which Mr Westbrook und the others might have been
       able to identify the culprits. Wc will never know whether that might have occiurcd. It seems
       doubtful, because none of those witnesses was able to give satisfactory descriptions of any
       of those involved, and all of them agreed that the whole incident was over m a matter of a
       few seconds

39.38 The fact is however that dieie was no satisfactory cvidcncc to corroborate the doubtful
      evidence of Mr Hmoks, and even without the matter being tested in court the statement ol
      DS Crowley was a severe stumbling block
 39.39 In the round Mr Youngerwood asserted and re-asserted that it was his duty to look at
       the case, as he did with his colleagues, In order tu make a decision logical]} and
       objectively in relation to the prosecution code tests, the first of which was the evidential
       test. If the view of the CPS after careful consideration was that the evidence of
       identification was very weak or woefully inadequate, bearing in mind the guidelines set
       out in R v Turnbull then the CPS had no alternative but to exercise their judgment and
       make a decision about the continuance of the prosecution.

39.40 Discontinuance may seem to imply a permanent block upon the prosecution. This is not
      so, since if further evidence arose the whole situation would he changed. No argument
      that there was an abuse of process could in our opinion possibly have been mounted if,
      for example, other witnesses bad subsequently identified Neil Acourt and Mr Knight as
      being present and involved in the murder.

39.41 The simple truth is that virtually no further viable evidence was ever discovered. Ail
      indication was given at the first hearing of the Inquest that there might be some new
      “dramatic" evidence. But nothing more was heard of that evidence. Witness B's
      evidence was available ill 1995 at the Magistrates’ Court. But Witness It was effectively
      destroyed as a credible witness, because of bis failure to identify David Norris and
      because of his confusion over the presence of one or other of the Aeourls when he said
      that he had seen them from the top of the bus> No other ‘dramatic* evidence ever
      materialised.

39.42 There was in 1995 available also the surveillance evidence of the suspects. Taking all that
       into account (and thai was fresh material}, the Magistrate decided during committal
       proceeding* that there was a case for two uf tin? suspects to answer. Gary Dobson was also
       separately committed tor trial. The fact that the Magistrate decided to commit Neil Acourt
       and Luke Knight for trial dues not mean that the earlier CPS decision to discontinue was
       Hawed. Different considerations governed the two decisions, anti rlu-re wun material
      .available to the Magistrate which did not exist in 1993/1994. furthermore the iihim;n,> result
       at trial shows that the CPS decisions were correct. Wc do not hluntc Ihe Magistiute for
       allowing the case to go ahead Ugainsf those two suspects, hut in the end the Judge wits eorreei
       to stop the prosecution in its tracks once he had heard the evidence of Mr Biuuks, closely
       tested and indeed destroyed as it was by Leading Counsel for the accused.

H>,43 We have looked again and again at the evidence of the CHS witnesses. We are unable
      to crlticisc the decisions made by Mr Youngerwood. It seems to us that he reached
      careful and reasoned conclusions, and he defended his decisions roundly and
      satisfactorily and conclusively in the witness box at the Inquiry.

.19.44 Mr Mansfield suggested to Mr Youngerwood thal if might perhaps be right that a case of this
       kind should go to a Special Case Unit for review, or alternatively that there should be some
       guidance as to ihe check (up, of <m opinion made m circumstances such as those in which
       Mr Youngcrwuud made his decisions. There are however no laid down guidelines or rules
       designed to impose upon senior CHS officers an obligation to take a formal second opinion.
       Mr Youngerwood was a senior lawyer, and he acted within .t team of lawyers.
       Mr F.rherington. his own superior, agreed with what he hud done, and so did Counsel.

39.45 Private prosecutions are nor automatically "vetted’' hy any agency. But they can, it the need
      arises, be stopped by the Attorney General who has the power to make a formal order to
      cheek unwarranted prosecutions.
V).4(> Mr Y o u n g e r w o o d was asked questions abom die/private prosecution. Jso ,a rj**
       Mi Youngcrwood was concerned the decision to go ahead in 1995-96 was a disaster. We
       believe that Mr Youngei’wood did telephone Mr Khan. probably on more than one occasion,
       in order to indicate his disapproval of what was happening. Mr Youngerwood told the
       Inquiry that when he heard thut (he private prosecution was being mooted he at once
       contacted Mr Khan, because he was very worried since It was his view ihat the prosecution
       was bound lo lail, unless there was further evidence in the possession of Mr Khan.
       Mr Youngerwood told Mr Khun that it was hopeless to bring a prosecution, because ot the
       R v Turnbull guideline* ms to identification evidence and because of the insuperable
       difficulties in connection with Mr Brooks’ evidence

39.47 Mr Khan was apparently very polite, but he said little or nothing about ihe intentions ol the
      legal leiun advising Mr & Mi's Lawrence. W hen'll was finally announced that the
      prosecution was to go ahead in 1995-% Mr Younger wood was ill at home. He telephoned
      Mr Khun again and offered to speak to Mr Mansfield and said that he would provide the legal
      team with any key unused material so that they could see what the problems were, name y
      that there was virtually no ovidcncc which would sustain a pruKtfcution. When he finally
      heard lhat Mr & Mrs Lawrence and their lawyers had launched their prosecution
      Mr Youtigerwood was dismayed.

39.48 Mr Khan never indicated to Mr Youngerwood any substantial measure *»t disagreement or
      dissent as to Mr Younge w ood's opinion. He was always polite on the telephone and m his
      correspondence, and made no comment about Mr Younger wood's views. Wc have no doubt
      that those views were transmitted 10 Mr Khan by Mr Youngerwood It was for Mr Khan and
      Counsel and Mr & Mrs Lawrence to make their own final decision, The truth is that viable
      evidence was in the end not available at the trial and the final outcome was that those
      prosecuted obtained, as a result of their acquittal, immunity from any future prosecution.

.19.49 Another aspect of the ease which concerned the CPS was the prosecution of Mr Brook*
       in connection with the damage done by him during the May demonstration in which he
       was involved following the murder of Stephen Lawrence. Mr Brooks’ part in the
       incident was not brought home to the police until September 1993. when a police officer
       who had seen the incident was able to identify Mr Brooks as the perpetrator of damage
       to a motor car during that disturbance. In October 1993 Mr Brooks was charged with,
       an offence, and thereafter he was prosecuted, eventually appearing before Ins Honour
       Judge Tilling in the Croydon Crown Court.

.'>9.50 There was disagreement bet wee a the senior police officers, Including Mr Johnston, and the
        CPS as to whether Mr Brooks ought ever to have heen'taken to court. By the time that this
        pioseeution was launched Mr Brooks was being advised by Miss Jane Deighton ol Deighton
        Gucdulln. He had been diagnosed un being traumatised and much ntteeied mentally by the
        experience which lie had gone through at the time of Stephen Lawrence's rnuixiei,

 '•9,:>1 We are not surprised that Mr Brooks was traumatized, andwhen the prosecution was mooted
         he was seen by doctoi-s. who assessed his mental condition and who wished to be able to
         identify what thut condition had b een on 8 May I99.V 1 ;i*er u appcuis that the suggestion
         was made at a preliminary hearing at Croydon that his lawyers might raise the defence ol
         automatism, quite apart from reliance upon medical evidence in connection with Mr Brooks
         disturbed menial state, 'the Judge took the view apparently that material should be collected
         ill Older to assist him and/or the jurv in their decision in connection w ith Mr Brooks.
 39.52 Mr Youngerwood says that the Judge indicated that ali the statements that the police had
        should be looked at and a summary should he drawn up lo see if there was material available
        to assist in connection with Mr Brooks’ mental state. Mr Youngerwood was told by Counsel
       thut the Judge wished to see and to collect together any evidence or information which
       showed “untoward" or "abnorm al ” behaviour by Mr Brooks bccause of the defence which
       was being pursued. Mr Youngerwood passed on this requiremeni to the police who
       suggested that the best way of acquiring the information would he by questionnaires to all
       the officers who had contact with Mr Brooks. Mr Youngerwood agreed, ami the MPS created
       and circulated the questionnaires. This exercise was much criticised by those advising
       Mr Brooks, who suggested that it gave the opportunity for racist .stereotyping, since police
       officers were being positively asked whether they had noticed anything abnormal or out of
       the ordinary in Mr Brooks' behaviour, which might prompt unfortunate and ill-founded
       comments from olficers who were not well disposed towards Mr Brooks.

 39.53 Mr Youngerwood says that all that was done was done in order to assist the defence and
       effectively because of the request made by the Judge, He accepted that he had asked the
       police to send out questionnaires to all police witnesses who hat! any dealings, however brief,
       with Mr Brooks asking whether any abnormal behaviour had been noticed by them. At the
       time no protest was made by Mr Brooks or those acting on his behalf. Indeed on 20 May
       1994 Miss Deighton wrote lo Mr Youngerwood indicating that she would be grateful if the
       completed questionnaires could be forwarded to her office “at M r
       eonvemwHv". The purpose of seeking the information was. she said, to assist the expert,
       namely the doctor, instructed on Mr Brooks’ behalf.

39,51 It i« a feature of the ca.se Unit some of the officers saw fit to make strong critical
      comments about Mr Brooks. However, we do not believe thul the existence of these
      questionnaires or their content can lead to criticism of the CPS, since they emerged as
      a result of the defence which was being raised by Mr Brooks, ami as it result of the
      Judge's wish to obtain any information which might be useful to the defence.

39.55 it is perterriy true that Judge Tilling thought liulc of the uise which was levelled against
      Mr Brooks. He indicated early on that even if there were si conviction it would be likely that
      Mr Brooks would be discharged. But the CPS had reached their own decision, namely thut
      the case should be put before the court. As we have already indicated many police officers
      and others believed that the prosecution ought to have been stopped. Mr Brooks was the only
      witness who could give direct evidence in the Stephen Lawrence murder.

39.5ft There is perhaps some irony in the fact that the CPS deemed it right to proceed against
       Mr Brooks but not to proceed against the suspects. When the matter is examined however
       the logic of the two decisions can be seen. The view of the CPS. and in particular of those
       who had to make the relevant decision, was that if the prosecution was dropped the defence
       would have considerable ammunition to aim at Mr Brooks, upon the basis that he had been
       favoured by the CPS in return for his continued willingness to co-operate and to give
       evidence in the Stephen Lawrence case. To add to the frustrations of Mr <& Mrs Lawrence
       not only did these two decisions of the CPS run eountcr to their hopes, but so did the decision
       over the Saiiushury’s car park matter, which is referred to in Chapter 38.

39.57 In the result the Judge thought the same as the police officers about the case against
      Mr Brooks. The ease against Mr Brooks was dismissed upon the defence submission that
      there was an abuse of process, primarily because of delay in bringing the proceedings.
      Mr Brooks' medical condition was also before the Judge. We do understand the CPS'
       argument in the end we feel that it would have been better it' the prosecution of Mr Brooks
       had been abandoned early on. But a decision of this kind is n<« an easv one to maku

?y.58 The way in which the d i s c o n t i n u a n c e p n w « u t l o n had beet)




       (he matter had even i.empon>rily been halted m its tracks.

w jg Most cartful liming and most cartful               “'* * °f0<
                                                                 the a'asi'iiuetwi-rof a
     family are vital. Scrupulousc.ns.deratkH, m »J b . # « n u rtte »




        time to cm mui.ia.te satisfactorily with the ram.l? beiore the matter w * rcsoivta.

 « *    m b in our opinion no t m ™ , sin « then,
        order t o ensure that the family were found and toW «tat tt*            w,™              ^ ^
        and was imminently to be Implemented. Mr &: Mrs U                        through diplomatic
        time. But ever, effort should have been made Ihnm ^
        channels tu ensure that they       L,* ? p lh„ p3ffp,,A f *i,e decision IJse <>t‘the procedure

        S=S2 ^                     ' f “ '’^                  ^         s r           ,^ E S =
        a decision of this kind to the family in circum stance such as this in the




                                                    277
Ms Ann Adlington
Hillsborough Family Support
Group
1st Floor, Central Buildings
41 North John Street
Liverpool                                                             YBF/3341/89
L2 6RR


                                                                      7 June 1999


Dear Ms Adlington

RE: ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

Thank you for your letter of 3 June 1999. Your four requests set out on page 1 are
being considered and I will provide a substantive response as soon as possible.

Further to our telephone conversation today I enclose the following copy documents
as part of the formal agreed disclosure process:

•   Stuart Thorpe's statement of 30.4.89
•   The 1976 Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds (Football)
•   The 1986 Guide to Safety at Sports Grounds

I have obtained copies of the authorities that you mentioned ( Goodridge and Lee).

Yours sincerely




George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
' suppo^                                                                               sa^
                        Hillsborough Family Support Group

                                                                     CASEW ORK
George R Croston
                                                                           4 JUn 1939
Prosecution Team Leader
Casework Directorate                                                       r m
United House
PicadiUy
                                                                           YORK
York
YOl 9PQ


                                                                                    3rd June 1999


Dear Mr Croston,

Adlington v Duckenfield and Murray

1     Thank you for your letter of 27th May 1999. I appreciate your offer of assistance.
      There are indeed a number of requests that the prosecution wishes to make of the
      Crown Prosecution Service as we approach the two weeks of committal and abuse of
      process hearings starting on 5th July.

2     The prosecution invites the CPS:

                (i)      to provide us with a copy of the advice given by leading counsel in
                         1990 on which the Director of Public Prosecutions acted in deciding
                         not to institute criminal proceedings;
                (ii)     to provide us with a copy of the final West Midlands Police Report;
                (iii)    to make a statement setting out what material it had received and
                         considered relating to the practice of closing the tunnel under the West
                         Stand at the Hillsborough stadium, leading to the Leppings Lane
                         terraces;
                (iv)     to give guidance under section 3 (2) of the Prosecution of Offences Act
                         1985 to the Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire police force, that
                         he should make the whole of the Hillsborough archive available to the
                         prosecution.




                                                 1


            Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151 236 1936. E Mail info@hfsg.org
           1st Floor
                  Centra] Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
’   •
        Fresh evidence

        3      The first three of these requests are directly relevant to the issue of abuse of process
               which the defence will raise before the magistrate. The fourth is primarily relevant to
               the presentation of the case generally. I raise these issues in the light of the enclosed
               material that the Assistant Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire produced to the
               Leeds District Magistrates Court on 24th May. There are three sets of typed notes,
               dated 16th 17th and 19th April 1989, marked Annex A, B and C, respectively, recording
               the content of meetings held by the Chief Constable, Mr Peter Wright with senior
               officers of his force. These notes contain important evidence, the contents of which
               we believe were not disclosed to any of the previous inquiries.

        4      We became aware that meetings had been held on those dates from the statement of
               DS Carr of 25th April 1989, (Annex D)which was one of the South Yorkshire police
               statements placed in the House of Commons library in April 1998 at the insistence of
               the Home Secretary after the “Scrutiny” of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. At a hearing
               before Mr Cadbury at Leeds on 10thMay this year the South Yorkshire police,
               represented by counsel and solicitor, objected to the production of the notes, and
               indeed to all the material we listed in an application for a witness summons, on the
               ground that it did not fall within section 97 of the Magistrates Courts Act 1980.

        5      The magistrate disagreed. He accepted the argument of the prosecution that the
               records of these meetings were likely to be material within the requirement of section
               97, because statements in those meetings were likely to be admissible in their own
               right, as direct evidence, under section 24 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988;
               alternatively as admissions made by the defendants. As directed by the magistrate,
               these records and other material were produced at court by Mr Daines, Assistant Chief
               Constable, on 24th May.

        Foreseeability and the previous practice o f closing the tunnel

        6      The notes of the meetings demonstrate that the senior officers of the South Yorkshire
               police were well aware of the practice of closing the tunnel when pens 3 and 4 were
               full. See the remarks of the Chief Constable at page 3 of Annex B:

                       “ CC Go back to the control inside the tunnel. Whose responsibility it is there
                       to divert people - anybody?

                       Duckenfield - Inspector White with serials 14 and 15. Specific instructions on
                       the Order at page 2.”




                                                       2
7    See also Nesbitt, page 3 of Annex B.

             “Top of the tunnel solid with horses - procedure that happened last year.”,

     To which the Chief Constable responded;

             “The fact that encourages me is that we have a team of officers who have seen
             and done it all before.”

8    Murray was present at this meeting. For example, at page 6, Chief Superintendent
     Mole said, about 1989;

             “What did we do about the tunnel and people seeing it and going for it?

            Murray - “Total lack of information apart from Marshall’s information.”



9    Mr Duckenfield then suggested that the tunnel was shut off as a matter of practice
     when the tunnel becomes full:

             “The Order has officers listed, and once that central tunnel becomes full the
             officers control that and it is shut off and people directed to the wings.”

     The Chief Constable observed;

             “Whilst the north stand problem was recognised, the problem associated with
             gate C and the opening of gate C and the control of movement of people once
             they were going through gate C, there was no action taken on that. You were
             well aware that there were contingencies to deal with the filled stand, ie the
             shutting of the tunnel.”

10   On 19th April, page 1, it is noted that there was nothing in the operational order or
     briefings about closing the tunnel but:

             “Officers remembered (particularly Chief Inspector Creaser) that in previous
             years the above has been done by the use of horses and static police lines
             (referred to as Supt Freeman’s policy).”

     No-one present at these meetings expressed any ignorance of this policy and practice.




                                             3
The Taylor Inquiry’s approach to the 1988 issue

11     At Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, a different account was presented by the South Yorkshire
       police. For example, Superintendent Marshall, who is shown as present at the 16th and
       17* April briefings in annexes A and B, was asked about the matter by Mr Woodward
       QC, representing the South Yorkshire police, on 31st May 1989, transcript pages 45F-
       46E. Mr Marshall had of course been inside the ground as a Superintendent in 1988.

              “There has been some suggestion that there was at a period during the 1988
              event a blocking off of the tunnel to go to the terrace. Do you follow? A. Yes

              Do you know anything about that having been done? A N o            I was not
              aware that it was done.

              Q If it was done? A. I was not even aware of the necessity for it to be done.

              Q If there had been a situation that had given rise to someone deciding to block
              off the tunnel involving the use of Police manpower whilst you were there,
              would you have expected to have heard about it? A. Yes.

              Q. Was there a chain of communication that would have enabled you ultimately
              to have been told about it after the game? A. Yes”

12     Paragraph 171 of the Taylor Interim Report records evidence that at league games a
       policy was followed of filling pens one by one, but:

              “At cup semi-finals, a different approach was adopted. All the pens were
              opened from the start and the policy was “to let the fans find their own level”.
              This phrase was repeated over and over again by police officers at the Inquiry.”

13    Paragraph 181 records that when the central pens became full in 1988, entry to the
      tunnel was blocked off by police shortly before kick-off. However, paragraphs 230-
      231, contain Lord Taylor’s central findings:

              “230. Since pens 3 and 4 were full by 2.50 pm, the tunnel should have been
              closed off whether gate C was to be opened or not. The exercise was a simple
              one and had been carried out in 1988. All that was necessary was for a few
              officers to act as a cordon at the entrance to the tunnel and divert fans
              elsewhere. Unfortunately, the 1988 closure seems to have been unknown to
              the senior officers on duty at the time. It did not figure on the debriefing notes.
              Therefore, it had no influence on the planning for 1989.

              231. Planning apart, however, it should have been clear in the control room
              where there was a view of the pens and of the crowd at the turnstiles that the
              tunnel had to be closed. If orders had been given to that effect when gate C
              was opened, the fans could have been directed to the empty areas of the wings
              and this disaster could still have been avoided. Failure to give that order was a
              blunder of the first magnitude.”

                                               4
14     Lord Taylor’s findings accurately record the evidence. The policy to block off the
       tunnel, spoken about by Supt Nesbitt, Supt Duckenfield, the Chief Constable, and
       known as “Supt Freeman policy”, is fundamentally different to a policy of “find their
       own level.” That phrase does not appear in the briefing notes of 16th, 17th and 19*
       April.

15     However, the question whether senior officers knew that the central pens had been
       closed off by police officers in 1988 was not, apparently, a major concern at the
       Taylor Inquiry, for the reason given in paragraph 231. The Taylor Inquiry continued,
       at paragraph 232, to describe the failure to close off the tunnel (whatever the officers’
       knowledge of 1988) as “a blunder of the first magnitude”.

The Interim Report o f the West Midlands Police and the 1988 issue

16     This question did, however, become important later. As you know, we found a copy
       of the Interim Report of the West Midlands Police in the Public Record Office last
       October. Section 17, part (v), deals with the 1988 issue. It says;

              “Firstly a number of supporters who attended the same game in 1988 stated the
              tunnel access was at one point subject of a blockade by police Officers. If this
              happened it is not documented and was not a decision made by the Senior
              Officers present at the 1988 game. Enquiries have found just one retired
              officer who recalls this happening. He, it must be said, is vague in his
              recollection but the probability is that some officers acting on their own
              initiative turning [sic] supporters away having recognised that part of the
              terrace was full        Without doubt the fact that access to the tunnel was not
              controlled aggravated the overcrowding in pens 3 and 4 and is a significant
              factor in the deaths of the 95 people.”

The 1990 accounts o f Murray and Marshall as to the 1988 issue

17     The interview with Murray of 25* June 1990, conducted by the West Midlands Police,
       a copy of which has been supplied by you to us, demonstrates the increased
       importance of this issue in the minds of those conducting the investigation. At page
       22, Murray answers a question about the closure of the tunnel in 1988 (“by one form
       or another”) by saying he had no knowledge:

              “I’ve never know [s/c] the tunnel be closed under any circumstances it’s
              never come to my attention, the, that the tunnel’s been closed, at any of the
              matches I went to, particularly the 1988 (000088) semi-final.”

18     Similar questions, with similar answers, were put to Superintendent Marshall. (Neither
       Duckenfield nor Greenwood answered questions, but Greenwood put in his own
       statement, which did not deal with this issue.)




                                               5
19     The answers given by Murray and Marshall are, of course, quite inconsistent with the
       accounts given in the briefing notes of 16*, 17th and 19* April 1989.

The CPS and the 1988 issue

20     In his interview with Lord Justice Stuart-Smith of 2nd December 1997, Detective
        Superintendent Fosterof the West Midlands Police indicated that the questions put in
       June 1990 to Murray, Marshall etc were put after a consultation with leading counsel.
       (Mr Foster referred to “Mr Williams”, now Lord Williams of Mostyn QC). It is
       therefore reasonably clear that leading counsel must have advised that the 1988 issue
       was important, perhaps critical, to his advice. Furthermore, a formal witness statement
       (Annex E) dated 30* June 1990 was taken from PC Lang about the closing of the
       gates in 1988, presumably by the West Midland Police, which would also have resulted
       from a query by counsel or the CPS.

The South Yorkshire police presentation o f the 1988 issue

21     The South Yorkshire police had themselves drawn a similar favourable conclusion as
       they prepared for civil proceedings, and had no doubt communicated it to the West
       Midlands police. I enclose as Annex F a statement by Chief Inspector Bettison (then of
       the South Yorkshire police, now Chief Constable of the Merseyside police), dated 12*
       July 1990, in which he too remarks;

              “The fullest information on the closure of the central tunnel at the 1988 semi­
              final was obtained and forwarded. It was an informal initiative at junior level
              not reported to command level. It was performed exclusively by police.”

22    Mr Bettison has admitted in public since his appointment at Liverpool last October that
      he was part of a small group of South Yorkshire officers who were investigating the
      disaster in the Spring of 1989. You will note from the attached statements Annex G
      that Mr Bettison has initialled the statement of an officer who gave a short statement at
      the end of April 1989 contradicting the assertion that horses had been used to shut off
      the tunnel, and attached his own written comments. No evidence is available that
      contradicted the other assertions made in the briefing notes. The conflicting evidence
      about control by horses was not brought to the attention of the CPS, nor, we believe,
      any of the other inquiries. Mr Bettison’s conclusion of July 1990 cannot be reconciled
      with the briefing notes of April 1989.

23    It may be assumed that the South Yorkshire Police drew this matter to the attention of
       West Midlands Police, who shared the same Holmes computer system on which
       Bettison’s statement of July 1990 was stored. The West Midlands Interim report
       indicated that, unusually, South Yorkshire police collected and supplied evidence to
       the West Midlands on some aspects of the criminal enquiry to influence the
       investigating force’s recommendations. (See last paragraph of the Interim Report,
       page 20.)




                                              6
24    Mr Metcalf of Hammond Suddards, solicitors to the South Yorkshire police, told Lord
      Justice Stuart-Smith on 11* November 1997 (Annex H) that;

              “The only record of the request [asking for officers’ impressions and
              comments] will be in Chief Inspector Bettison’s notes of the meeting of 17*
              April which I have not seen.”

25    Counsel appearing for the Chief Constable at recent hearings in Leeds in relation to
      witnesses summonses offered the magistrate the explanation that Mr Metcalf was
      wrong in saying that Bettison attended the 17* April meeting. However, he was
       evidently involved in 1989 and the summer of 1990 and came up with an explanation in
      July 1990, identical to that offered to the CPS by West Midlands police in the Interim
      Report, which cannot sit with the material in the fresh evidence.

26    It is, I believe, obvious that the final report of the West Midlands police will have
       emphasised and strengthened the comment in the Interim Report of October 1989,
       cited above, in the light of the evidence of Murray and Marshall, and the statement of
       Bettison, and will have presented to leading counsel a fairly clear evidential conclusion
       that senior officers like Murray were not aware of the closing of the tunnel at the 1988
       final, or any other big game.

The Coroner and the 1988 issue

27    The Coroner’s Inquest also attached significance to the 1988 issue. The Coroner had
      the final West Midlands police report. He informed Lord Justice Stuart-Smith that
      when selecting potential witnesses, he used the DPP index as his screen. The Coroner
      directed the jury at Day 75 that the senior Commanders had not been aware of
      diversions from the tunnel by police officers in 1988. (Divider H of the documents
      accompanying the HFSG submission to the CPS of 24* September 1998 sets this out.)

28    Mr Murray’s answers to the Coroner’s questions demonstrate the evidential
      significance of the briefing notes. He said he knew nothing of the closing off of the
      tunnel in 1988 until after the disaster;

              “It came to my attention someone said the tunnel was closed in 1988. I
              disputed that but if people say it was closed, it was closed.”

29    Mr King, for some of the Liverpool families, asked, on the basis of evidence from
      supporters;

              “Were you not aware of the system operated by the Police in the past, that is,
              before 1989, if they so chose, of diverting fans from, shall we say, the centre
              pens to the side pens on the terrace.

              A. What system was that, sir?”




                                               7
30     Mr Murray repeated this answer twice. (Day 67, p 55F-G ) No-one outside the South
       Yorkshire police knew that a system had been described in front of Mr Murray on 17*
       April, that he did not dispute it, and that not one officer of the large number present
       had disputed the description of a system.


The significance o f the briefings notes in relation to the edited statements

31    Our formal Representations of 24th August and 24th September 1998 described at
      length the process adopted by the South Yorkshire police in the early weeks after the
      disaster of excising factual material from statements of junior officers. In particular,
      references to the 1988 closure of the tunnel and the practice by which the Control
      Room monitored the terraces and the closure of the tunnel was dealt with in one or
      more of the early statements of Inspector White, PC Woodcock, PC Lang, and PS
      Crawford. All of the references to 1988 were then expunged.

32    Furthermore, none of the statements of the senior officers, dated for the most part in
      early May 1989 (copies of which were placed at the insistence of the Home Secretary
       in the House of Commons library in April 1998) dealt with the subject of 1988 at all.

33    We know that only the edited versions of statements were sent to the DPP and the
      Coroner. This much is clear from the Master Witness List of April 1990, and has been
      in any event admitted by Detective Superintendent Foster in a letter to the Home
      Office in the course of the “Scrutiny”, that the edited, not the unedited, statements
      were to be used as the basis for submission to the DPP and Coroner.

34    The comments in the briefing notes about 1988 and the established practice
      demonstrate that the most senior officers of the South Yorkshire police realised the
      relevance of those matters to the inquiry. They make it impossible to argue that the
      deletions of assertions about 1988 and the closing of the tunnel were matters which
       could be deleted from statements as being comment, opinion, or repetition.

The wider significance o f the fresh evidence

35     These notes disclose that the senior officers of the South Yorkshire police were
       meeting to formulate an agreed approach as to the facts of the disaster, before any of
       them made a witness statement, and, it appears, before they made detailed notes.
       Annex A shows that various matters were “Agreed”. For example, there were short
       very short contributions from three officers, one of whom, Superintendent Marshall
       (who had, it appears, contrary to the general practice, made some kind of note),
       imputed “drinking outside off-licences” to the Liverpool fans.

36      The Chief Constable then put the following proposition to the 28 persons present,
       including 24 officers of the rank of Inspector or senior.

                “So there is no evidence whatsoever of the delay in transit of the fans. Then
               fans arrived at the ground vicinity early enough to go in the ground but instead
               went drinking. THIS WAS AGREED. ”

                                                8
•
    37    Various other propositions were agreed, no questions critical of police were posed,
          and the meeting concluded with a speech by the Chief Constable in which the tactical
          presentation of the facts was considered.

    38    The second and third meetings took place after the announcement of the institution of
          Lord Taylor’s inquiry, after the West Midlands police had been appointed by the Chief
           Constable to conduct an independent inquiry, and to investigate for Lord Taylor. The
          third took place the day after the inquest had been opened on 18* April, at which Mr
           Mervyn Jones of the West Midlands police had appeared as Coroner’s officer. Annexes
          B and C show some discussion about safety, but principally a similar tactical approach
           to the investigation of the disaster as had characterised the first meeting.

    39    The basic and obvious approach to any police investigation is to obtain statements or
           notes from witnesses as soon as possible, so as to ensure that a witness puts down his
          own honest account while it is fresh in his mind, and so that no-one can suggest that
           his account has been influenced by the opinions, recollections and observations of
          others. A normal, proper and honest investigation would have involved the writing of
          formal witness statements within a day of the disaster. Critical questions should have
          been posed and answered in writing as to why, for example, Duckenfield had falsely
          told so many people, including Assistant Chief Constable Jackson, that the fans had
          broken down the gates.

    40    The briefing notes show that the South Yorkshire police did not do any of this. They
           show that the most important aim in the minds of those responsible for policing the
          event was to achieve a consensus on critical issues, with which later statements and
          evidence would be consistent. The prosecution are in no doubt that the CPS was not
           shown these briefing notes, nor any pocket book notes. They disclose a disgraceful
          approach to the investigation of a disaster which was without precedent in British
           sport, and which demanded honesty, integrity and utter candour.

    The relevance o f the advice andpolice report

    41    The contents of the police report and counsel’s opinions are obviously relevant to
          issues before the magistrates’ court, namely, whether it is an abuse of process to
          prosecute when (a) the CPS decided not to prosecute in 1990, (b) the Coroner’s
          verdicts (founded on evidence referred to in the report) were accidental death, and (c)
          Lord Justice Stuart-Smith ruled that no fresh investigation was warranted. We have
          material already which implies that those inquiries were misled. No-one has
           contradicted the inferences which we argued in September 1998 ought to be drawn
          from the material available. We have presented the material to the South Yorkshire
           police themselves in connection with the issue of funding the defence, and have
          received no denials or contradictions of those facts and assertions.




                                                    9
A
    42   Nor have we been supplied with any explanation why South Yorkshire police should
         have the police report and advice of counsel. Assistant Chief Constable Daines made a
         “witness statement” on 19th May 1999 (Annex I) . The second paragraph of the first
         page shows that the papers were “generated” by West Midlands, who prepared papers
         for Lord Taylor, and for the CPS. Mr Daines is holding papers “on behalf of the
         Coroner”. The Coroner has indicated that apart from the limited category of
         documents he is obliged to disclose under the Coroners’ Rules, he considers that the
         law prohibits him from disclosing documents to the prosecution. Why then do the
         police hold them?

    43   Mr Daines contends at page 2 that “The archive is a historical record of the
         tragedy     I would ask that these documents are returned to me at the conclusion of
         these proceedings so that I can preserve the integrity of the archive.”

    44   We know of no possible legal basis for the “archive” to be held by South Yorkshire
         police, but this is the first time we have been told that this is a “historical record”. The
         phrase suggests that the archive is to be made available to writers in the future, but
         presumably, only after an undetermined number of years. It is not reasonable for a
         decision as to the release of such information to be left in the hands of the police force
         which has admitted negligence, which has argued that the defendants costs should be
         paid in full out of its police fund, and which has argued that the documents sought by
         the prosecution ought not to be produced to the court.

    45   It is absurd to argue that a historian should be able to see the material in the future, but
          that the prosecution cannot have access to it now.

    46   Mr Daines has argued that the facts of the case justify the funding of the defence by his
         Police Authority. That authority has agreed to fund it, on the basis that it accepts Mr
         Daines’ verdict that the officers acted “in good faith”. The prosecution itself involves
         allegations of negligence against the South Yorkshire force. In these circumstances it is
         offensive and unjust that the South Yorkshire police should hold the papers which
         were prepared by others who reported to Lord Taylor, the CPS, the Police Complaints
         Authority, and the Coroner. The material in their possession that has been disclosed in
         the last year has come to our attention only through the intervention of the Home
         Secretary, allowing us to see the edited statements of the officers, and to discover the
         existence of the meetings of SYP which took place in the days following the disaster.

    47   Most offensively of all, the solicitor to the South Yorkshire police, Peter Metcalf of
         Hammond Suddards, who was directly involved in the editing process in 1990, has
         demanded that before any “voluntary disclosure” is made by way of the supply of copy
         documents, we identify to him the suggested relevance of each document, and that we
         agree to pay the extortionate figure of £30 per hour for the work of an officer (a) to
         locate the documents, (b) to copy and provide them to prosecution, and (c) to copy
         and provide them to both solicitors for the defence, each of whom is funded in any
         event by the South Yorkshire Police Authority. This extraordinary condition amounts
         to a requirement that we subsidise the costs incurred by the South Yorkshire Police
         Authority in paying for the defence.



                                                   10
Legalprofessional privilege

48     There is no legal impediment to your disclosing the report and the advice of counsel.
       The police can claim no privilege in the advice, because the CPS asked for it. It is
       highly doubtful whether your relationship with the counsel can be described as one
       between lawyer and client, so that privilege can be invoked..

49     If, alternatively, privilege does exist, it was surely waived when the advice was
       disclosed successively to the West Midlands and South Yorkshire forces and to Lord
       Justice Stuart-Smith. The report of the “Scrutiny”refers to some limited parts of the
       advice but not others. The limited part of the report quoted by Lord Justice Stuart-
       Smith will be used against us. We, and the court, will need to see the rest of it.

50      If it is contended that privilege has not been waived by these previous disclosures, the
       CPS can waive it now. In the circumstances, the CPS has a most powerful duty to
       ensure that the court hearing the abuse of process application is not misled by general
       assertions about the thoroughness of the West Midlands investigation, the experience
       of two leading counsel, the suggestion that the CPS saw all the evidence, and other
       assertions of the kind advanced by the defence hitherto to you or the South Yorkshire
       Police Authority.

51     If there are any parts of the report or advice which contain confidential comments
       upon persons who are not concerned in this prosecution, or other unusually sensitive
       material, it would of course be open to you to redact or obscure such material in the
       familiar modem way.

Confidentiality

52    It cannot possibly be argued that considerations of confidentiality justify withholding
      the final police report, when the Interim Report has been lodged in the Public Record
       Office. If you disagree, we invite you to explain what interests require to be protected
       by continued secrecy, and why irrelevant sensitive material, if any such appears, cannot
       be redacted. These documents are not privileged.

53    We invite your attention to the following cases, which demonstrate the limits of the
      doctrine of privilege, and the restrictions upon the effectiveness of claims of
      confidentiality in relation to reports of police investigators;

       Goodridge v. Chief Constable o f Hampshire Constabulary [1999] 1 All E.R. 896
       Crompton Amusement Machines v Customs and Excise [1973] 2 All E.R. 1169

The attitude o f the Director o f Public Prosecutions to Disclosure

54    The Director has publicly affirmed twice in recent weeks the great importance to the
      administration of justice of proper disclosure of all relevant material to the defence. It
      cannot be right, or consistent with this policy of openness, that disclosure of matters
      relevant to important issues of abuse of process, which fall to be decided by the
      magistrate, can be withheld from the prosecution.


                                               11
Timetable

55     We invite you to disclose the police report and advice to us well in advance of the
       committal, and I respectfully suggest by 25* June so that we can deal with its
       significance by advance written submissions to the court and defence. We also invite
       you to provide us with a statement by the same date setting out what the CPS knew
       about the practice of closing the tunnel and confirming that in 1990, the DPP and
       Counsel were provided with the edited versions of police officers’ statements.

56     In view of the importance of these matters, we shall send a copy of this letter and its
       enclosures to Mr Metcalf, the Police Complaints Authority and the former Coroner,
        and ask them to make comments to you, and to draw any facts they consider relevant
       to your attention. If matters within their own knowledge show that we are wrong in
        any of the inferences we have made from the facts as known to us, they can tell you.
       We shall also draw the attention of this letter and your reply to the attention of the
       magistrate, Mr Cadbury, when we contend that the prosecution should proceed.

Guidance to the police

57    Section 3 (2) (c) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 imposes the duty on the
       Director “to give, to such extent as he considers appropriate, advice to police forces
       on all matters relating to criminal offences”. This duty does not arise only when a
       force requests advice. Mr Justice Moore-Bick said so specifically in the Goodridge
       case at pages 902h-903a, citing reg 4 of the Prosecution of Offences Regulations 1978
       as well as section 3 (2) of the 1985 Act.

58    In the light of the history of the case, our previous representations, and the new
       material, we contend that it is overwhelmingly in the interests of justice that the
       Director advises the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police that the archive as a
       whole should be handed over to the CPS, or to some other party nominated by you
       after consultation with us. If you advised merely that the papers should be retained by
       the police, but that we should have access to them, past experience shows that endless
       petty obstructions would be placed resentfully in our way when we planned to travel to
       Sheffield to inspect and take copies.

59    We will complete our preparation of the committal papers this week, and are anxious
      to continue our investigations of the evidence as soon as possible thereafter. We may
      be placed under time pressure by the Crown Court if the matter is committed, and we
      shall of course have obligations of disclosure to the defendants. Accordingly, it is
      important that we gain access as soon as possible to the archive. I look forward your
      reply.


Yours sincerely,



Ann Adlington
Solicitor

                                              12
HFSG                            +0151 236 1936               0 3 /0 6 199 17:55 NO.815       01



           0%
                                                                                     *     » .*




       sup?®*'
                         Hillsborough Family Support Group




                               e.     Ctostsn
   TO:                § ^ 3

       FAX NO:

       FROM:                        Ann Adlington

       DATE:                 3- ( s . W .


       FAX NO:                      0151 236 1936

       TELEPHONE NO:                0151 236 1919

       NO OF PAGES TO FOLLOW:                         Is -

                                                                                p c js i
       MESSAGE:




       The information in this fax is confidential. Its contents are not to be disclosed to anyone
       other than the addressee except with the authority of the addressee. Unauthorised
       recipients are requested to maintain this confidentiality and immediately to advise the
       sender by telephone/fax of any error or misdirection in transmission.




                  Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151 236 1936 , E Mail info@hfsg.org
                 bt Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
HFSG                                +0151 236 1936                  0 4 /0 6 '9 9 12:42 NO.821   01


                                                                                                 ROfy

       •. •

 \
       SUppO^
                           Hillsborough Family Support Group




      TO:

       FAX NO:

       FROM:                             Ann Adlington

       DATE:                    M-.le        ■ C ^P \



      FAX NO:                            0151 236 1936

      TELEPHONE NO:                      0151 236 1919

      NO OF PAGES TO FOLLOW:                                  <^_


      MESSAGE:
                                                        U L
     Cer^uj           C / e - W d X j ' ^ G ’'




     The information in this fax is confidential. Its contents are not to be disclosed to anyone
     other than the addressee except with the authority o f the addressee. Unauthorised
     recipients are requested to maintain this confidentiality and immediately to advise the
     sender by telephone/fax o f any error or misdirection in transmission.




                  Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151 236 1936. E Mail lnfo@hfsg.org
                l»t Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
HFSG                              +0151 236 1936                 0 4 /0 6 '9 9 12:43 NO.821         02



  ;$BOROff




  st/ppo**                                                                                        SU P7&
                        Hillsborough Family Support Group

       Ian Daines BA (Hons) Dip Ed
       Assistant Chief Constable
       South Yorkshire police
       Snig Hill
       Sheffield
       S3 8LY

                                                                                              4 June 1999

       Dear Sir

                                    Adlinaton v Duckenfield and Murray

   As you are the custodian of all original statements relating to the Hillsborough Disaster, it has
   not been possible for me to ascertain which statements comply with the requirements of
   section 102 Magistrates’ Court Act 1980. Copy statements in my possession are, in the main,
   computer generated. You have previously refused witnesses access to their original
   statements quoting CPS guidance. It is understood that these will be produced to the coui t if
   ordered, and if available.

   At this stage it is imperative that I at least have copies of the original signed statements so that
   I can fulfil my duty to the court and the defence. In the circumstances I should be grateful if
   you would provide me with copy signed statements of those persons listed in the attached
   schedule.


   Yours faithfully




   Ann Adiington
   Solicitor


   cc:       George Croston, CPS




             Phone 0 1 51 2 3 6 1919. F a x 0151 2 3 6 1936. E M a il iufo<gihfsg.org
           l*t F loor C e n tr a l B u ild in g s 41 N orth John S treet L iverp o ol L 2 6 R R
HFSG                          +0151 236 1936      0 4 /0 6 '9 9 12:43 NO.821   03




^                                      SCHEDULE

    1.    Roger Houldsworth

    2.    Stephen Williams

    3.    Brian Anderson

    4.    Norman Langley

    5.    Colin Flenley

    6.                    ~

    7.    Maurice Kay

    8.    Karl Mullee

    9.

    10.                   ~


    n.    1               ~

    12.   Colin Moneypcnny

    13.   GlcnKirton

    14.   Adrian Brazener

    15.   Nicholas lload

    16.   Anthony Gordon Lang

    17.   William Crawford

    18    Robert Wallace Creaser

    19.   Peter Carr

    20.   Trevor I liggins

    21.   Harry White

    22.   Harold Guest (deceased)

    23    David Godfrey Duckenfield

    24.   Bernard Dean Murray
Ms Ann Adlmgton
Hillsborough Family Support
Group
1st Floor, Central Buildings
41 North John Street
Liverpool                                                             YBF/3341/89
L2 6RR


                                                                      2 f May 1999


Dear Ms Adlington

RE: ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

Further to our telephone conversations of last week concerning documentary material
in the possession of the CPS, I enclose a copy of the video taped interview of Peter
Edward Smith.

It comprises two videos marked as Exhibit Numbers MJF/V1/1 and 2.

Please let me know if there is anything else I can do to assist.

Yours sincerely




George R Croston
Prosecution Tearn Leader
                             SUNDAY BUSINESS
                                      2 3 /0 5 /9 9

                           HHIstoroiujlifury i o
                           FAMILIESof the Hillsborough
                           Stadium disaster victims are
                           furious that police will fund the
                           legal defence of twoformer
                           officers accused of manslaughter.
                              South Yorkshire police authority
                           will pay for the defence in the
                           private prosecutions of former
                           superintendent Bernard Murray
                           and ex-chief superintendent David
                           Duckenfield, who also face
                           accusation of wilful neglect. The
                           cases are being brought by
                           families of the 96 people who died.




                                            14

ttVSO   208 *ON ZZ'.Ol 66, SO/ K
                                           FILENOTE

                                     HILLSBOROUGH

             10 May 1999

            1.     T/C from Ann Adlington re the case. Monday 24/5 is the return date for the
            witness summons against ACC Daines at Leeds MC, for him to explain why original
            statements from the main inquiry are now missing and to question police disclosure.

            2.     As she has got some problems with the police disclosure she asks me to check
            and see if the CPS have the following docs:-

     (.     •  Re Marshall's i/v and where PCs Smith and Illingworth state that the tunnel was
               closed off in past
     ^       —Re i/v of P-G-Smith'.jobtain copy -                  o r
              —Rei/v of PC Illingworth: obtain copy
            •         Re statements of PS Higgins: statement num ber^6is available but not those
     y         marked as 516A and 516B; obtain copies




lb        Sr ?             3         o           ^          3. /                               £ - V


                           \


                                                      £




         "TTCcRT (ijJ U A                  f -i •      H 24r 4 - 0 .              \ U ib   .
                                FILENOTE

                          HILLSBOROUGH

10 May 1999

1.     T/C from Ann Adlington re the case. Monday 24/5 is the return date for the
witness summons against ACC Daines at Leeds MC, for him to explain why original
statements from the main inquiry are now missing and to question police disclosure.

2.     As she has got some problems with the police disclosure she asks me to check
and see if the CPS have the following docs:-

•   Re Marshall's i/v and where PCs Smith and Illingworth state that the tunnel was
    closed off in past
•   Re i/v of PC Smith: obtain copy
•   Re i/v of PC Illingworth: obtain copy
•   Re statements of PS Higgins: statement number 516is available but not those
    marked as 516A and 516B; obtain copies
From:              George Croston
To:                BrophyL
Date:              28/04/99 (W ed) 3:46pm
Subject:           Hillsborough -Reply

Hi Leanne

I've just had the latest blurb from the HFSG re new dates.

Monday 26 April: Adjourned to Monday 10 May at Leeds MC for argument on the granting of a witness summons
against an Asssitant Chief Constable in the SYP.

A full committal hearing starts on 5 July at Leeds MC for at least 1 week. The previous committal was for 3
weeks but it now appears that a number of witnesses can be read out.

george
              Kings Court, 12 King Street, Leeds, LSI 2HL. Telephone 0113 2832500,
            Facsimile 0113 2459412. D o cum en t Exchange 12051 Leeds 24. Email info@walkermorris.co.uk
                                  - _.,Web: http://www.walkerm orris.co.uk



Crown Prosecution Service                                       Our ref       RBM/BQW/MURRAY
Headquarters
DX 300850                                                       Your ref YBF/3341/89
LUDGATE EC4
                                                                15 April                       ,
                                        -rs
                                                                      f j U * *        f

                                                            /fr ?
                'U
Dear Sirs

ADLINGTON -V- DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

We acknowledge receipt o f the copy letter to Winckworth Sherwood with the notice
o f discontinuance in relation to their Client, David Duckenfield, in relation to the
charge o f attempting to pervert the course of justice.                               j                           j

Yours faithfully


                                                                                      ,v

R B Manning
                                                                                           1 S APR 133®
PARTNER




                                                                                              CASEWORK

                                                                                                   I I APR 1939
C W P Newell
                                                                                                           m
)irector, Casework.
                                                      ■■I" ; ■ 7 '
                                                                                                          CPS
                                                                                                          Headquarters
                                                                                                          50 Ludgate HiU
                                                                                                          London EC4M 7EX
                                                  V 'a 'I        5 I


r                                            m lr                                          Direct Line:   0171-273 1226
                                              >1B O M 3 S V O                              Switchboard:
                                                                                             Facsimile:
                                                                                                          0171-273 8000
                                                                                                          0171-329 8366
                                                                                               d x No:    300850 Ludgate EC4
       The Clerk to the Justices
       PO Box No. 97
       Westgate
       LEEDS                                                                                  Ref: YBF/GC/3341/89
       LSI 3JP
L                                                       J


                                                                                               12 April 1999




       Dear Sir

       RE:       ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD and MURRAY
                 LEEDS MAGISTRATES’ COURT: Adjourned Hearing

       On 18 December, 1998, you were informed of the Crown Prosecution Service’s
       decision in this case, that we would not intervene to take over any of the charges
       before the court.

       On 31 March, 1999, the Divisional Court handed down judgment on an application by
       Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray for judicial review of the CPS’ decision not to take
       over the private prosecution in order to discontinue, as was requested by the two
       defendants. Whilst the Director's policy and his decision not to take over and
       discontinue the charges of manslaughter and wilful neglect to perform a public duty
       were found to be lawful, the Court quashed the decision not to intervene insofar as it
       related to the charge of attempting to pervert the course of justice laid against Mr
       Duckenfield, on the basis of a breach of legitimate expectation.

       I have, therefore, reconsidered my decision in relation to that charge in the light of the
       judgment of the Divisional Court and I have decided, on behalf of the Director of
       Public Prosecutions, to exercise the power under section 6(2) of the Prosecution of
       Offences Act, 1985, to take over the private prosecution by Ann Adlington, of the
       charge against Mr Duckenfield of attempting to pervert the course of justice on 15
       April 1989. The prosecution of the remaining charges against both Mr Duckenfield
       and Mr Murray is not affected by this decision.

       I have reviewed this charge of attempting to pervert the course of justice and have
       applied the tests set out in the Code for Crown Prosecutors. I have decided that the
       charge should be discontinued under section 23(3) of the Prosecution of Offences Act
       1985.




                         Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests of justice
A formal letter of discontinuance is enclosed.

Yours faithfully




C W P NEWELL
    C W P Newell
^ ^ M re c to r, Casework.                                                                                        CPS
                                                                                                                  Headquarters
                                                                                                                  50 Ludgate Hid
                                                                                                                  London EC4M TEX



     r                                                        1
                                                                                                   Direct Line:
                                                                                                   Switchboard:
                                                                                                                   0171-273 1226
                                                                                                                   0171-273 8000
         The Clerk to the Justices                                                                   Facsimile:    0171-329 8366
                                                                                                        d x No:   300850 Ludgate EC4
         PO Box No. 97
         Westgate
         LEEDS
         LSI 3JP
                                                                                 Our Ref: YBF/GC/3341/89
     L                                                        J
                                                                                 12 April 1999




                                         NOTICE OF DISCONTINUANCE

         Dear Sir

         RE:      DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELD
                  LEEDS MAGISTRATES COURT - ADJOURNED HEARING

         I am writing to give you notice under Section 23(3) of the Prosecution of Offences Act, 1985,
         that I do not want proceedings against the above named to be continued on the following
         charge, namely that:

               David Godfrey Duckenfield, on the 15th day of April 1989 at Hillsborough Football
               Stadium, Sheffield, with intent to pervert the course of justice, did an act which had a
               tendency to pervert the course of justice in that he lied about the circumstances in
               which gate C at the Football Stadium became open; contrary to Common Law.

         The reason for my decision is that there is insufficient evidence to provide a realistic prospect of
         conviction.

         I have notified the accused of this decision and of his right to have the proceedings revived.

         Yours faithfully




         C W P NEWELL




                                Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests o f justice
C W P Newell
Birector, Casework.                                                                                        CPS
                                                                                                           Headquarters
                                                                                                           50 Ludgate HiU
                                                                                                           London EC4M 7EX



 r                                                      1
                                                                                            Direct Line:
                                                                                            Switchboard:
                                                                                                           0171-273 1226
                                                                                                           0171-273 8000
                                                                                              Facsimile:   0171-329 8366
                                                                                                d x No:    300850 Ludgate EC4



        Messrs Winckworth Sherwood
        Solicitors                                                                             YBF/3341/89
        DX 2312 Victoria
 L                                                      J                                      24332/1/SBE/jet

                                                                                                12 April 1999




        Dear Sirs

        RE:      ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY
                 LEEDS MAGISTRATES’ COURT: Adjourned hearing

        On 31 March, 1999, the Divisional Court handed down judgement in the case of R v
        DPP ex parte Duckenfield and Murray. The court ruled that, whilst the overall Crown
        Prosecution Service policy on private prosecutions and the Director’s decision not to
        take over and discontinue the charges of manslaughter and wilful neglect to perform a
        public duty were lawful, that policy was only partly followed in the consideration of
        the allegation against your client concerning an attempt to pervert the course of
        justice. Accordingly, the Divisional Court quashed the decision insofar as it related to
        that charge.

        I have, therefore, reconsidered my decision in relation to that charge in the light of the
        judgment and I have decided that the CPS should take over that single charge in order
        to discontinue it under section 23(3) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985. The
        reason is that there is clearly no case to answer on that charge.

        Accordingly, on behalf of the Director of Public Prosecutions, I am exercising the
        power under section 6(2) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 to take over the
        private prosecution by Ann Adlington, of the charge against Mr Duckenfield of
        attempting to pervert the course of justice on 15 April, 1989. The prosecution of the
        remaining charges against both Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray is not affected by this
        decision.

        A formal letter of discontinuance is enclosed.




                          Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests of justice
I have informed Leeds Magistrates' Court and Ann Adlington of this decision.

Yours faithfully




                           \J < k s ^ rC i




C W P NEWELL
C W P Newell
Director, Casework.                                                                          V -i

                                                                                                           Headquarters
                                                                                                           50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                           London EC4M 7EX


r                                                                                           Direct Line:   0171-273 1226
                                                                                            Switchboard:   0171-273 8000
                                                                                              Facsimile:   0171-329 8366
                                                                                                d x No:    300850 Ludgate EC4
     Messrs Winckworth Sherwood
     Solicitors
     Dx: 2312 Victoria

                                                                                  Our Ref: YBF/3341/89
L                                                       J
                                                                                  Your Ref: 24332/1/SBE/jet


                                                                                             12 April 1999


                                   NOTICE OF DISCONTINUANCE

    Dear Sirs

    RE:     DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELD
            LEEDS MAGISTRATES COURT - ADJOURNED HEARING

    I have today written to the Clerk to the Justices at Leeds Magistrates’ Court, informing him,
    first, that I have taken over and secondly, that I am discontinuing under Section 23 of the
    Prosecution of Offences Act, 1985, the following charge against your client: that on the 15th
    day of April, 1989, at Hillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield, with intent to pervert the
    course of justice, he did an act which had a tendency to pervert the course of justice in that he
    lied about the circumstances in which gate C at the Football Stadium became open; contrary to
    Common Law.

    The effect of this notice is that your client no longer needs to attend court in respect of this
    charge and any bail conditions imposed in relation to it cease to apply.

    The decision to discontinue this charge has been taken because there is not enough evidence to
    provide a realistic prospect of conviction.

    This notice does not apply to any other charges against you client. Your client must still attend
    court in respect of these charges and any bail conditions imposed in relation to them continue to
    apply.

  Your client has the right to require the discontinued proceedings to be revived. If you wish to
  exercise this right, you must give written notice to the Clerk to the Justices at the above
  magistrates' court as soon as possible (and in any event within 35 days).

  Should your client wish to apply for any costs incurred in respect of our taking over of this



                         Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests o f justice
charge, you may make a written request to the Clerk to the Justices. It is not necessary to apply
for the proceedings to be continued in order to apply for your costs.

CAUTION: this notice only applies to the charge specified in it, and does not have any effect in
relation to any others that may be pending, or other proceedings against your client.

Yours faithfully




C WPNEWELL
    C W P Newell
     'irector, Casework.                                                                                        CPS
0
                                                                                                                Headquarters
                                                                                                                50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                                London EC4M 7EX


                                                                                                                0171-273 1226
     r                                                                                           Direct Line:
                                                                                                 Switchboard:   0171-273 8000
            Ms Ann Adlington                                                                       Facsimile:   0171-329 8366
            c/o Hillsborough Family                                                                   DX No:    300850 Ludgate EC4
            Support Group
            1st Floor, Central Buildings
            41 North John Street
            LIVERPOOL                                                                                Ref: YBF/GC/3341/89
            L2 6RR
     L                                                     J

                                                                                                     12 April 1999




            Dear Madam

            RE:       ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD and MURRAY
                      LEEDS MAGISTRATES’ COURT: Adjourned Hearing

            On 18 December, 1998, you were informed of the Crown Prosecutions Service’s
            decision in this case, that we would not intervene to take over any of the charges
            before the court.

            On 31 March, 1999, the Divisional Court handed down judgment on an application by
            Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray for judicial review of the CPS’ decision not to take
            over the private prosecution in order to discontinue, as was requested by the two
            defendants. Whilst the Director's policy and his decision not to take over and
            discontinue the charges of manslaughter and wilful neglect to perform a public duty
            were found to be lawful, the Court quashed the decision not to intervene insofar as it
            related to the charge of attempting to pervert the course of justice laid against Mr
            Duckenfield, on the basis of a breach of legitimate expectation.

            I have, therefore, reconsidered my decision in relation to that charge in the light of the
            judgment of the Divisional Court and I have decided, on behalf of the Director of
            Public Prosecutions, to exercise the power under section 6(2) of the Prosecution of
            Offences Act, 1985, to take over the private prosecution by yourself, of the charge
            against Mr Duckenfield of attempting to pervert the course of justice on 15 April
             1989. The prosecution of the remaining charges against both Mr Duckenfield and Mr
            Murray is not affected by this decision.

             I have reviewed this charge of attempting to pervert the course of justice and have
             applied the tests set out in the Code for Crown Prosecutors. I have decided that the
             charge should be discontinued under section 23(3) of the Prosecution of Offences Act
             1985.




                              Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests o f justice
I enclose a copy of the formal letter of discontinuance that has been sent to Messrs
Winckworth Sherwood.

Yours faithfully




C W P NEWELL
            l e e c t s

                              i+ ~ i o Q
           Oi ) Z 3 ^


7   "ti   G i/   S    U   S
Dear Sirs

DISCLOSURE OF PROSECUTION MATERIAL UND
PROCEDURE AND INVESTIGATIONS ACT 1996

Rv

URN:                                 ]
