                         THE
                   HILLSBOROUGH
                       REPORT

                                 1998




Prepared at CPS Central Casework, York
                        HILLSBOROUGH REPORT

LIST OF CONTENTS                                                      Page


Chapter 1     The Background                                           2-3

Chapter 2     The Private Prosecution                             .    4-5

Chapter 3     Charges                                                  6-7

Chapter 4     The Law                                                 8-10

Chapter 5     CPS Policy                                          11-13

Chapter 6     The Taylor Inquiry & initial police investigation   14-24

Chapter 7     The Criminal Investigation                          25-27

Chapter 8     CPS Review of 1990                                  28-31

Chapter 9     The Inquests                                        32-35

Chapter 10    The Attorney General & Judicial Review                   36

Chapter 11    The New Evidence                                         37

Chapter 12    CPS Review of 1997                                       38

Chapter 13    The Scrutiny                                        39-42

Chapter 14    The HFSG Representations                            43-47

Chapter 15    The Defence Representations                         48-49

Chapter 16    Key Considerations for the CPS Review               50-57

Chapter 17    Recommendations                                          58

Chapter 18    Conclusions                                              59



Appendix 1    1990 Briefing Note for the Attorney General

Appendix 2    Schedule of material considered in 1998 Review



                                                                         1
1.    THE BACKGROUND

1.1   While the main facts of the Hillsborough Disaster in 1989 may be familiar to the
      reader, the more detailed background note which was prepared for the Attorney
      General in 1990 is attached at Appendix 1.

1.2   The relevant history of the various judicial inquiries and hearings will be dealt with
      comprehensively in later chapters. However in brief, following the Taylor Inquiry
      the South Yorkshire Police accepted that they (with others) had civil liability for the
      negligence of some of their police officers involved in the events of 15 April 1989.
      The Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police had assisted the Taylor Inquiry
      in the initial enquiries and in the taking of statements from the many witnesses.

1.3   The then Director of Public Prosecutions considered the recommendations contained
      within Lord Justice Taylor’s Interim Report and asked the South Yorkshire Police
      to conduct a full criminal enquiry. As the West Midlands Police had been appointed
      to conduct the initial investigation, the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
      requested that they also conduct the criminal investigation as being an independent
      investigating force. This was agreed and in 1990 a report was supplied by the West
      Midlands Police to the Director who then asked two leading counsel for a joint
      advice as to the merits of a criminal prosecution against any organisations or
      individuals. Counsels’ view was that there was no sufficient evidence to support
      criminal proceedings of any kind against either the police or civilians whether as
      individuals or as an organisation. The Director was in agreement with this advice
      and a Press Release released on his behalf stated that there was "insufficient
      evidence to justify the institution of proceedings against any officer in the South
      Yorkshire Police Force or any other person for any offence".

1.4   The Coroner’s Inquests, which had been adjourned pending the CPS decision, were
      resumed. In early 1991 verdicts of accidental death were returned. In 1992 an
      application for judicial review of the Inquests was refused and the Divisional Court
      held that the inquisition was correctly completed and that the Coroner’s direction to
      the jury was "impeccable".

1.5   There the matter rested until in December 1996 when a drama documentary of the
      disaster was shown on national television. It specifically mentioned allegations of
      a cover-up by the police re their knowledge of crowd density in the two central
      Leppings Lane terrace pens where 96 people died. The Home Secretary became
      involved by way of an Adjournment Debate in the House and requested the
      assistance of the South Yorkshire Police in answering ten questions concerning the
      disaster. In January 1997 the CPS asked for a preliminary briefing from the police
      on the impact of any new material facts.

1.6   In March 1997 the Hillsborough Family Support Group (HFSG) sent to the Director
      a large volume of papers concerning what was said to be fresh evidence. In their
      supporting letter the HFSG said that the pre-production research for the television
      programme and its subsequent airing had brought to light this fresh evidence and/or
      new witnesses proving that suppression of evidence, perjury and conspiracy to

                                                                                            2
       pervert the course of justice featured in the legal process that followed the disaster.
       A number of letters had also been received from families of some of the deceased
       requesting a re-examination of the circumstances of the tragic events.

1.7    Following consultation between the CPS, the LSLO and the Home Office it was
       decided that while each of the various Government Departments should form their
       own judgement in relation to the discharge of their own duties, there would be a
       co-ordinated response to the HFSG representations.

1.8    The report of the CPS Review was submitted to the Director via the Chief Crown
       Prosecutor for Central Casework in early May 1997. It concluded that there was no
       sufficient evidence on allegations of suppression of either video or medical evidence.
       Accordingly there were no grounds for the CPS to recommend to the Home Office
       that there should be further investigation of criminal allegations against the police
       or other persons. In June 1997, in a statement to the House, the Home Secretary
       said that his department, the Attorney General and the CPS had carefully considered
       the evidence recently put forward and had been unable to find anything which would
       have materially affected the outcome of any of the investigations into the disaster.

1.9    He then appointed Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to conduct a scrutiny into whether there
       was any fresh evidence which might have a bearing on the various legal procedures
       and decisions that had been taken. The resulting scrutiny report is a very detailed
       review of both old and new evidence and concludes that nothing the judge was
       asked to consider added anything significant to the evidence available to Lord
       Taylor’s Inquiry or to the Inquests. In particular there was no material which should
       be put before the Director which might cause her to reconsider the decision already
       taken.

1.10   Previously there had been an intimation that if the HFSG did not receive the
       ‘justice’ to which they felt they were entitled, then they would be taking out a
       private prosecution. The next chapter describes how this occurred.




                                                                                             3
2.    THE PRIVATE PROSECUTION

2.1   On 26 June 1998 Ann Adlington, a solicitoracting on behalf of the HFSG, laid
      informations before South Sefton Magistrates’ Court on Merseyside. They alleged
      that ex Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, who had been in overall control of the
      policing at the football match had:

              1.    Unlawfully killed John Alfred Anderson
              2.    Unlawfully killed James Gary Aspinall
              3.    Wilfully neglected to perform a public duty
              4.    Perverted the course of justice by lying about the circumstances in
                    which Gate C at the Football Stadium became open.

2.2   It was also alleged that ex Superintendent Murray, who was the senior officer in
      charge of the policing of the ground itself, had committed the first three offences
      above. The HFSG have not been specific in their correspondence to date as to the
      evidence upon which they rely for the first three allegations, except to say that the
      third matter (Misconduct in a Public Office) is based on the same circumstances as
      the two manslaughter charges. However they have confirmed the foundation of their
      charges during a telephone conversation.

2.3   The HFSG then requested disclosure of all the material in CPS possession including
      police reports and counsels’ advices. Solicitors for the two defendants were prompt
      in asking us to take over the prosecution in order to discontinue it. I was appointed
      to review the evidence in order to make appropriate recommendations to the Chief
      Crown Prosecutor of Central Casework and to the Director as to what action, if any,
      should be taken by the CPS.

2.4   There was then animated and at times heated discussions between the legal
      representatives for the prosecutor and the two defendants as to the legality of laying
       informations in a commission area that was not where either the offences allegedly
       took place or the defendants resided. Subsequently the informations were laid at
       Leeds Magistrates’ Court (within which commission area Mr Murray now resides)
       and were returnable to 20 August 1998.

2.5   During July the CPS policy on voluntary disclosure and review of private
      prosecutions where we have been asked to take over in order to discontinue, was
      promulgated to all the parties. They were informed that the issue of voluntary
       disclosure would not be considered by the CPS until the review decision had been
      made. The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police requested advice on
       disclosure under the provisions of section 3(2) of the Prosecution of Offences Act
       1985. He was concerned about the vast amount of potential disclosure. He was
       advised of our present policy and it was suggested that he might wish to follow that.
       He considered that he should do so.

2.6   Leeds Magistrates’ Court were informed of the CPS review and that the defendants’
      solicitors would likely require an adjournment of the case so that this review could
      be completed and either the case be discontinued or for voluntary disclosure to be

                                                                                          4
      given to all parties. On 20 August the case was adjourned to 30 October with a
      provisional date for an old style committal set for 7 to 17 December 1998.

2.7   The HFSG are saying that the new information now available to them undermines
       the inquest verdicts of accidental death, and calls into question the validity of all the
       previous investigations. In particular they point out that:

       •     The alleged independence of the West Midlands Police was a sham;

       •     thesignificance of the statements disclosed in the course of the scrutiny
              discloses manipulation of the evidence to the past benefit of the defendants
              and the South Yorkshire Police in general;

      •      the DPP was not given full and proper disclosure for the purposes of the
              CPS review in 1990;

      •      the scrutiny report has conclusions that are seriously wrong about the edited
              statements and therefore caution should be employed in accepting facts set
              out in that report.

2.8   The submissions made in this latest opinion from the HFSG counsel are far more
      wide reaching than the charges before the Magistrates’ Court and indeed go to the
       very heart of the validity of all previous judicial and criminal investigations.




                                                                                               5
3.     CHARGES

3.1    In his opinion of 24 September 1998, Alun Jones QC, who acts for the HFSG, has
       said that "...the Taylor findings in themselves amount almost to a prima facie case
       of manslaughter by gross negligence and of misfeasance. The decision to open the
       gates without taking steps to divert the oncoming spectators was a ‘blunder of the
       first magnitude’ and was an immediate (and therefore substantial) cause of death.
       The decision was taken by Duckenfield with the agreement or acquiescence of
       Murray." He also says that the basis of the charges of misfeasance and attempting
       to pervert the course of justice (PCOJ) is clear from the Taylor Interim Report and
       the information and submissions made at Leeds. The PCOJ allegation is based on
       the argument that the "disgraceful lie" was an obvious attempt to impede inquiries
       and to suppress the truth.

3.2.   The charges of manslaughter and misconduct are not specific as to the circumstances
       giving rise to these allegations. I have now been informed by Ann Adlington, a
       solicitor acting for the HFSG that the basis for them is contained within their
       counsel’s opinion of 24.9.98. In which case the gross negligence alleged must be
       the failure to divert the fans after the opening of gate C. What the Taylor Report
       described as a "blunder of the first magnitude". The CPS review should therefore
       be based on this specific ground rather than the other innumerable allegations of
       negligence, many of which can be laid at the foot of the other parties criticised in
       the Taylor Report and were subject to successful civil claims for damages. In a
       recent telephone conversation, Ms Adlington has confirmed that the relevant
       circumstances concern the failure by the defendants to close off the access tunnel
       to the central pens once gate C was opened by the police.

3.3    However, the HFSG in their letter of 13 August enclose what is a provisional
       committal bundle containing the submissions made by Alim Jones QC in the laying
       of the informations at Leeds Magistrates’ Court. Here it is said that the facts set out
       in chapters 1 to 5, 9 to 11, and 16 of the Taylor Report form the basis of the
       allegations. Chapter 9 covers the lack of effective monitoring on the terraces,
       chapter 10 is about the build up at the turnstiles, chapter 11 is on the "blunder on
       opening the gates" and chapter 16 gives a brief summary of the causes. The causes
       of the gross overcrowding and hence the disaster were said to be fourfold.

       •     The immediate cause was the failure to cut off the access to the already
              overfull centre pens when gate C was opened.

       •     The pens were overfull because, as regards the police, no attempt was made
             to control the entry of fans into the individual pens numerically and there
             was no effective visual monitoring of crowd density.

       •     It was not the police responsibility that no safe maximum capacities had been
              laid down for the pens. Neither was it their responsibility that the layout of
              the barriers within the pens afforded less protection than it should or that the
              eventual rescue efforts were retarded by the type of exit gates leading from
              the pens onto the pitch. However there was a lack of leadership involved in

                                                                                             6
             the early stages of the rescue effort.

      •      The need to open gate C was due to the dangerous congestion at the
             turnstiles. This was the fault of both the Club and the police in not
             foreseeing, as they should have done, that large numbers of fans might arrive
             at once. Both the police Operational Order and their tactics failed to provide
             for this.

3.4   Notwithstanding the HFSG letter noted in the above paragraph this review will
      therefore consider the level of negligence to be attributed to the police based on the
      latest information from the HFSG.




                                                                                           7
4.    THE LAW

      Involuntary Manslaughter by Gross Negligence

4.1   Before 1982 the ‘Bateman Test’1 was used to define the degree of negligence
      required to be a sufficient basis of liability for manslaughter:

             "... the facts must be such that, in the opinion of the jury, the negligence of
             the accused went beyond a mere matter of compensation between subjects
             and showed such disregard for the life and safety of others as to amount to
             a crime against the State and conduct deserving punishment."

      In 1937 an element of ‘recklessness’ was imported into the test2 when it was said
      that in order to summarise the very high degree of negligence required, the word
      ‘reckless’ most nearly covered the case. Two authoritative House of Lords decisions
      in 1982 on the meaning of recklessness3 appeared to confirm that the test was of
      recklessness rather than gross negligence. However in 1989 there was still some
      uncertainty as to whether or not gross negligence continued to exist as a head of
      liability.

4.2   The decision in R. v. Adomako [1995] 1 AC 171 has clarified the law considerably.
      The House of Lords held that the Bateman/Andrews test was of general application
      and there was therefore an immediate reversion from Lawrence recklessness to gross
      negligence. Lord Mackay LC set out the essentials of gross negligence:

      •     A duty of care towards a victim based on theordinaryprinciples       of thelaw
            of negligence; and

      •     a breach of that duty;

      •     which caused the death of the victim; and

      •     if so should the act be characterised as grossnegligence       andtherefore      a
             crime4.




             Laid down by Lord Hewart CJ in Bateman [1925] 19 Cr App R at p. 11-12.

             Judgement of Lord Atkin in Andrews v DPP [1937] AC 576 at p. 583.

             MPC v Caldwell [1982] AC 341 and Lawrence [1982] AC 510

             At page 187 Lord Mackay says "...the jury must go on to consider whether
             that breach of duty should be characterised as gross negligence and therefore
             as a crime. This will depend on the seriousness of the breach of duty
             committed by the defendant in all the circumstances in which the defendant
             was placed when it occurred."

                                                                                             8
      He said th a t"... essence of the matter which is supremely a jury question is whether,
      having regard to the risk of death involved, the conduct of the defendant was so bad
      in all the circumstances as to amount in their judgement to a criminal act or
      omission." The Court of Appeal in R v Khan and another [1998]5 confirmed that
      the appropriate course would be to leave to the jury the four questions posed based
      on the above principles where the allegation is of manslaughter by omission.

      Misconduct in a Public Office

4.3   This previously little used common law offence is now being prosecuted more often.
      Until the case of R v Dytham [1979]6 it was considered that the offence required
      either malfeasance or misfeasance and was restricted to corruption or dishonesty.
      That case, which concerned a police officer, established that there was an offence
      of a public officer wilfully neglecting to perform a duty that he was bound to
      perform by common law or statute. The neglect had to be wilful and not merely
      inadvertent and had to be culpable in the sense of being without reasonable excuse
      or justification. The element of culpability had to be of such a degree that the
      misconduct impugned was calculated to injure the public interest so as to call for
      condemnation and punishment and it was for the jury to decide whether the evidence
      revealed the necessary culpability.

      Perverting the Course of Public Justice

4.4   This common law offence is committed when a person or persons acts or embarks
      upon a course of conduct, which has a tendency to, and is intended to pervert the
      course of public justice7. A positive act is required. Inaction is insufficient to
      constitute the offence8. Archbold gives a number of examples of that conduct
      which is capable of amounting to the offence and in particular where a person
      conceals the commission of an offence, even though no proceedings in respect of
      it are pending or have commenced.

4.5   To establish a tendency or a possibility to pervert the prosecution does not have to
      prove that the tendency or possibility in fact materialised; there must be a possibility
      that what the accused has done, without more, might lead to injustice. Proof of the
      accused’ intent is also required.




             R v Khan and another [1998] Independent Law Report, 25 March 1998

             R v Dytham [1979] 69 Cr App R 387, the judgement of the Courtof Appeal
             being given by Lord Widgery CJ.

             R v Vreones [1891] 1 QB 360.

             R v Headley [1995] Crim L R 757 CA.

                                                                                             9
4.6        The Court of Appeal has held9 that in order to lay the charge a course of justice
           must have been embarked upon in the sense that proceedings of some kind are in
           being or imminent, or investigations which could or might bring proceedings about
           are in progress. In particular the Court of Appeal had well in mind that:

                  "... conduct which relates to judicial proceedings, civil or criminal, whether
                  or not they have yet been instituted but which are within the contemplation
                  of the wrong-doer whose conduct was designed to affect the outcome of
                  them. That conduct includes giving false information to the police with the
                  object of among other things putting the police on a false trail..."

4.7        In R v Rafique [1993]10 the Court of Appeal said that if an intention to pervert the
           course of justice in relation to the matter was proved, the conduct had the same
           quality whether performed before the matter was investigated, or even discovered,
           as it would have had at a later stage. In the particular case they said that it had been
           open to the jury to conclude that the possibility of judicial proceedings must have
           been within the contemplation of the appellants; an act had occurred which was
           likely to lead to a charge in judicial proceedings and at the very least there was
           bound to be a an inquest.




      9
                   R v Selvage and Morgan [1982] 73 Cr App R 333.
      10
                   R v Rafique [1993] 97 Cr App R 395.

                                                                                                10
5.    CPS POLICY

      Gross Negligence Manslaughter

5.1   The CPS Prosecution Manual Volume 3 at para 2.23 and 2A.9 contains guidance on
       charging practice which accepts the law as noted above.

      Misconduct in a Public Office

5.2   There is no guidance available in the Prosecution Manual or Central Casework
      Manual. However as the culpability required for this offence must be such as to call
      for condemnation and punishment, it involves misconduct that goes beyond that of
      pure civil liability or mere negligence. It is submitted that as the misconduct
      impugned is said to be so serious as to merit a criminal prosecution then a similar
      test to that used in manslaughter by gross negligence should be used. There is no
      intermediate grade of culpability between that required for civil liability and that of
      the manslaughter charge. In the instant case the ‘actus reus’ of the two offences is
      said to be the same. While the elements of culpability and ‘mens rea’ may be
      described in different terms I see little point in attempting to differentiate between
      them for the purposes of a prosecution. Both offences, as here, may involve
      omissions to act in circumstances where necessary action is called for. They stand
      or fall on the same evidence and should stand or fall together.

      Perverting the Course of Justice

5.3   The Manual in chapter 20 of Volume 3 states that the offence should be reserved
       for a serious case of interference with the course of justice (which must be shown
       to have commenced). In the particular circumstances of this case which we are
       asked to take over, I shall not consider possible alternative charges. The general
       public interest considerations concern the nature of the proceedings to be interfered
       with and the consequences/likely consequences of that interference. It is said that
       a prosecution might not be in the public interest if the principal proceedings are at
       an early stage and the action taken by the defendant had only a minor impact on
       those proceedings.

      Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 Section 6(2)

5.4   The 1990 CPS review supported by the joint opinion of two eminent leading counsel
      decided that the evidential sufficiency test from the Code for Crown Prosecutors was
      not satisfied in that there was not a realistic prospect of conviction on any of the
      charges considered11. During the CPS review of 1997 we came to the conclusion
      that, following the consideration of the ‘new’ evidence provided by the HFSG,
      there was no new material that might have affected the previous decision. There
      were no grounds for the CPS to recommend to the Home Office that there should
      be a further investigation of criminal allegations against the police or other persons.


              See chapter 8 for a more detailed discussion of this issue.

                                                                                          11
      The scrutiny that followed confirmed that there was no material to put before the
      Director which might cause her to reconsider decisions already taken. The HFSG
      have now put more ‘new’ material before the CPS which is claimed calls into
      question the validity of all previous investigations. For reasons which will be
      explained in chapter 16 I do not accept this claim and this review will therefore
      proceed on its original basis which is that of considering the joint defendants’
      request to take over the private prosecution in order to discontinue it.

5.5   Our policy is found in the Prosecution Manual Volume 1 at chapter 7. This policy
      builds on the criteria for prosecution contained within the Code for Crown
      Prosecutors. As the right to bring a private prosecution is preserved by section 6(1)
      of the Act, subject to the power under section 6(2), the CPS will only exercise that
      power to take over the private prosecution where there is a particular need for it to
      do so on behalf of the public. If there is no need for the CPS to be involved then
      the private prosecutor should be allowed to carry on with the case. Paras 7.13 and
      7.10 apply in this case, and the circumstances in which the power to take over (and
      then discontinue) the prosecution are:

      •     There is clearly no case to answer12. A prosecution commenced in these
            circumstances would be unfounded, and would therefore be a an abuse of the
            right to bring a prosecution.

      •     The public interest factors tending against prosecution clearly outweigh
            those factors tending in favour. A relevant factor might be that of a
            prosecution that can be seen as malicious or vexatious. The other suggested
            examples are not likely to apply, neither should delay be a factor in the
            present case where there has been a history of active judicial hearings.

      •     The prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests of justice. For
            example, the disclosure of sensitive material.

      Disclosure of Material

5.6   In order for all relevant material to be considered in the course of this CPS review,
      the private prosecutor and both defendants were asked to voluntarily provide the
      CPS with firstly schedules of such papers in their possession, and then copies of
      fresh evidence not previously seen by the CPS. The HFSG have now provided both
      the CPS and defence solicitors with detailed bundles of evidence and
      representations. The defendants have done the same. These papers as well as a


             However see R v Bow Street Stipendiary Magistrate and another, ex parte
             South Coast Shipping Company Ltd and others [1993] 96 Cr App R 405
             where it was said, per curiam, that "The Director may take over proceedings
             instituted by a private prosecutor which he might otherwise institute himself
             and if he does so, he may then discontinue them under section 23 of the
             1985 Act if the evidence is insufficient..."


                                                                                        12
      provisional committal bundle have been taken into consideration during the review.

5.7   All the parties to the private prosecution have requested the CPS to provide
      voluntary disclosure of material in our possession. Chapter 7 of Volume 1 of the
      Manual gives guidance on disclosure to a third party. Any disclosure by us prior
      to a successful committal is on a voluntary basis. After committal the Crown Court
      may grant witness orders for the production of relevant material from third parties.
      The general rule is that we should give disclosure whenever it is in the interests of
      justice to do so, and that it should be even-handed as between the parties.
      Following discussion within Central Casework it was agreed that the decision to
      give voluntary disclosure would be deferred until after the section 6(2) decision was
      made. If the decision was to exercise the power in order to discontinue then
      disclosure was no longer an issue. This was advised to the parties and has
      grudgingly been accepted. The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police requested
      legal advice from the CPS on the point of their voluntary disclosure to the HFSG
      (he is in control of an extremely large archive of material generated during the
      various investigations), and was advised that he might wish to consider exercising
      his discretion in a manner similar to ours. While his decision to do so generated
      lengthy argument from the HFSG, that is still the present position.




                                                                                        13
6.    THE TAYLOR INQUIRY & INITIAL POLICE INVESTIGATION

6.1   Two days after the disaster the then Lord Justice Taylor was appointed to carry out
      a Public Inquiry with the West Midlands Police assisting in the gathering of
      evidence both for the Inquiry and the Coroner. This consisted of almost 5000 CJA
      and non CJA statements, approximately 8000 completed questionnaires, 1740
      documents and 71 hours of film. The hearing lasted 31 days. There was no power
      to administer the oath to witnesses but Lord Justice Taylor was satisfied that there
      was no instance of witnesses giving evidence that would have otherwise been
      different. While he accepted that the witnesses called were only a small fraction of
      those available, he was satisfied that they were sufficient in number and reliability
      to enable him to reach the necessary conclusions. Also he took into account many
      written statements in addition to the oral testimony13. Submissions had been made
      to him that it would be unsafe for findings of fact to be made while evidence was
      still being gathered, but he was assured by the police that it was most unlikely that
      significant further evidence would later emerge. He paid tribute to the West
      Midlands Police for their speed and dedication in the gathering of evidence, as did
      the Secretary of the Football Supporters Association who said that their initial
      anxiety that the investigation would not be fair and objective was wholly dispelled
      when the evidence that they had obtained privately entirely accorded with that of the
      police.

6.2   I have read all the transcripts of the Inquiry that were sent to York. They are not
       complete however they do cover the evidence of the two defendants as well as many
       of the other senior officers who were present on the day. I find, not surprisingly,
       that this evidence accords with the views expressed in the Interim Report. I
       therefore propose to adopt what Lord Justice Taylor has said in his conclusions
       contained within that report.

6.3   In his sermon at the Hillsborough Memorial Service the Archbishop of York said
       that "...Disasters happen because a whole series of mistakes, misjudgments and
       mischances happen to come together in a deadly combination." This was the finding
       of Taylor LJ14.

6.4   The overcrowding up until 1452 hours was due to:

      •      The layout of the Leppings Lane end;

      •      Lack of fixed capacities for the pens;

      •      Lack of effective monitoring of the terraces.

      The crushing and fatalities after 1452 were due to:


              Interim Report at para 14.

              Interim Report at paras 116 & 117.

                                                                                         14
      •       The build-up at the turnstiles;

      •       The blunder on opening the gates;

      •       The barriers in pen 3;

      •       The crushing not recognised;

      •       The response of the police;

      •      The perimeter gates were too small.

      The factors emphasised above are those that may be attributed either wholly or part
      to the police and are the only ones I shall consider.

      Monitoring of the Terraces

6.5   In 1985 there was considerable controversy in the course of a public inquiry held
      by Mr Justice Popplewell as to the respective responsibilities of the club and the
      police in controlling crowd behaviour. He said in his Final Report that "It cannot
      be too strongly emphasised that it is upon the club, or the occupier of the ground
      who is putting on the function, that the primary and continuing obligation rests".
      However what Lord Justice Taylor found was that de facto the police at
      Hillsborough had accepted responsibility for the control of the pens at the Leppings
      Lane end. At League matches their practice where only modest crowds were
      anticipated was to sequentially fill the pens as required. It was impractical and
      unsafe for police officers and stewards to go into the terraces with away supporters.
      This meant that the monitoring of the numbers of fans in any pen had to be done
      from vantage points outside it. There was said to be a good view from the control
      box and on the television screens there. Police in the West Stand, just above the
      terraces, and on the perimeter track were able to provide a good appreciation of the
      state of the terraces. Action to cut off access to the pens could be taken when
      necessary.

6.6   At Cup semi-finals a different approach was adopted. All the pens were opened and
      the police practice was "to let the fans find their own level". No specific direction
      was given to fans entering through the turnstiles. If they became uncomfortable or
      wished to move for any reason then they could theoretically move elsewhere. They
      would level themselves out and distribution would be achieved without police
      intervention. Lord Justice Taylor found this argument to be wrong in both theory
      and practice. The effect of the policy was that at semi-finals where overcrowding
      was more likely the police would only intervene when there was some overt sign
      that an area was "full". The Green Guide (Guide on Safety at Sports Grounds)
      sought to improve safety and comfort by laying down criteria for maximum
      capacity, ie defining what is "full". The figures considered appropriate in the centre
      pens at Hillsborough were too high. An experiment was conducted at the ground
      and in a Health and Safety Executive laboratory where it was found that the
      maximum density set out in the Green Guide left considerably more room than

                                                                                         15
       monitoring the terraces would have left before declaring an area "full".

6.7    There had been occasions at the ground when packing on the terraces had caused
       discomfort and sometimes fear to the fans. At a 1981 semi-final at the ground
       crushing occurred on the Leppings Lane terraces that necessitated the opening of the
       perimeter gates. 38 persons were treated for injuries including broken limbs. The
       capacity figure for the terraces had been exceeded. As a result of this the terrace
       was divided into three pens. At the 1987 Cup semi-final there was evidence that the
       central pens were uncomfortably overcrowded. This occurred again at the 1988 Cup
       semi-final although here the entry to the tunnel into pens 3 and 4 was blocked off
       by the police shortly before kick-off because the pens were deemed to be "full".

6.8    The conclusion was that by 1452 when gate C was opened, pens 3 and 4 were over­
       full even by the test of leaving the fans to "find their own level". Many of the fans
       there were uncomfortable. To allow any more into those pens was likely to cause
       injuries, to allow in a large stream was courting disaster15.

       The Build-up at the Turnstiles

6.9    The decision to open gate C, and subsequently gates A and B too, was forced on the
       police by the crowd conditions which developed outside the turnstiles. The crush
       was so severe that injuries were being suffered and deaths were feared unless the
       pressure could be swiftly relieved. There were a number of causes why the crowd
       pressure had built to such an intensity16:

              The layout of the turnstiles and the number of fans they were required to
              serve left no margin of safety against an uneven flow of fans.

       •      Police strategy did not cater for the arrival of a large number of
              supporters between 1430 and 1440 that created an unmanageable crush
              of over 5,000 fans.

              The presence of a substantial minority of fans who had drunk too much
              aggravated that problem.

6.10   The police Operational Order for the day closely followed that laid down for 1988.
       In the light of known previous experience it was not thought necessary to change
       it for the 1989 game.

6.11   Lord Justice Taylor found that having lost control outside the Leppings Lane
       turnstiles and having rejected the option of postponing the kick-off, the police were
       left with no alternative but to open the gates. Superintendent Marshall, who was in
       control outside the ground was right to ask for it and Mr Duckenfield was right to


              Interim Report at para 184.

              Interim Report at para 228.

                                                                                          16
       agree. But the possible effects of so dramatic a step required other action.

       The Blunder on Opening the Gates

6.12   As this issue would appear to be the most crucial part of the HFSG allegation I have
       reproduced in full the findings of Lord Justice Taylor:

       "229. The decision to order the opening of the gates was not accompanied or
       followed by any other order to deal with the consequences. When gate C was
       opened, a steady stream of about 2,000 fans poured through it over some five
       minutes. Clearly they were going into the ground somewhere and unless they were
       diverted their likeliest route was through the tunnel for the reasons given. No
       warning was issued from the control room that the gate was to be opened. Serials
       on the concourse were not alerted. Neither the Club control room nor the Chief
       Steward at the Leppings Lane end was warned. Not even Mr Greenwood, the
       Ground Commander, was informed. From 2.47 pm when Mr Marshall made his
       first request until 2.52 pm when Mr Duckenfield acceded to it , there were five
       minutes in which orders could have been given as to how the influx was to be
       absorbed. It was not done. In evidence, Mr Duckenfield began by saying that no
       officer made any wrong decision but he later conceded he had erred in this regard.
       He said he did not consider where the people would go when the gate was opened.
       Even after it opened, when he could see the influx on the television screens, no
       order was given to steer the fans to the wing pens. Mr Duckenfield said it did not
       cross his mind to detail officers on the concourse to shut off the tunnel. Those
       officers could not have known from their position how full pens 3 and 4 were. That
       was a matter for the control room to monitor from its own observations and using
       intelligence from around the ground.

         230. Since pens 3 and 4 were full by 2.50 pm the tunnel should have been closed
       off whether gate C was to be opened or not. The exercise was a simple one and had
       been carried out in 1988. All that was necessary was for a few officers to act as a
       cordon at the entrance to the tunnel and divert fans elsewhere. Unfortunately, the
       1988 closure seems to have been unknown to the senior officers on duty at the time.
       It did not figure in the debriefing notes. It therefore had no influence on the
       planning for 1989.

         231. P lanning apart, however, it should have been clear in the control room where
       there was a view of the pens and of the crowd at the turnstiles that the tunnel had
       to be closed. If orders had been given to that effect when gate C was opened, the
       fans could have been directed to empty areas of the wings and this disaster could
       still have been avoided. Failure to give the order was a blunder of the first
       magnitude.

         232. Significantly, when permission was given to open gate A, Mr Duckenfield
       did order serials to go to that part of the concourse to monitor the influx towards the
       north stand. He did this because he feared that if fans went to the north stand
       without tickets, they would not get seats and, there being no perimeter fences at the
       north side they might invade the pitch. This illustrates again the preoccupation with

                                                                                           17
       avoiding pitch invasion as against safety and the risks of overcrowding. Because
       those entering through gate C could not get onto the pitch, it was not thought
       necessary to alert officers to monitor them. The possibility of overcrowding simply
       was not considered."

       The Crushing not Recognised

6.13   The Report considers that as the stream from gate C flowed through the tunnel, the
       officers in the control room could be expected to keep a close watch on pens 3 and
       4. They had a direct view of them from an elevated position and by using the zoom
       facility on the TV camera. Attempts could have been made using the now
       functioning radio to alert officers on the perimeter track to watch for overcrowding
       and to report their observations. As the pens became more and more crowded, fans
       were showing and signalling their distress. None of this was seen or recognised in
       the control room. The written instructions to the perimeter track officers made no
       reference to the avoidance or detection of overcrowding. The 1988 Operational
       Order instructed officers to forbid fans access to the pitch without a senior officer’s
       consent. This prohibition was further emphasised in the 1989 Order. The
       combination of no instructions as to overcrowding and the strong prohibition on
       opening the perimeter gates was likely to make police recognition of crushing slow
       and their response reluctant. Even after the recognition of a problem it still required
       consent to open the gates. However, action was taken to alleviate the situation once
       officers recognised the distress, although there was a period during which the failure
       to recognise the problem and the inhibition against tackling it caused vital time to
       be lost.

       The Response of the Police

6.14   Even when the realisation of the problem came to the officers on the track, it was
       some minutes before it reached the control room where the immediate assumption
       was that there was a pitch invasion. John Motson, the BBC commentator,
       considered that the trouble appeared to be overcrowding and not misbehaviour17.
       Until Mr Murray rang for ambulances at about 1506 the assumption in the control
       room persisted. Only then was the Major Disaster Plan started. Initially there was
       no effective leadership either from control or on the pitch to harness and organise
       rescue efforts. Despite this many officers did all they humanly could to rescue and
       revive the victims.




              Although in his statement of 4 May 1989 he says that at about 1445 hours
              "...I suddenly spotted that two end sections of the Leppings Lane terrace
              were only just over half full....I must also stress that the two central sections
              were fully occupied and gave the usual impression of a solid heaving mass
              of fans who were chanting, singing and clapping." He was not aware of
              anything untoward, of any panic or if anyone was experiencing discomfort.

                                                                                            18
            The Evidence of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield

6.15        The relevant points from his statement made on 5.5.89 were :

            •     At 1430 there was space at the front and sides of the Leppings Lane terraces.

            •     At that time he was told by Superintendent Murray that all the fans would
                  be in by kick-off. He then took the view that there was no reason to delay
                  the match.

            •     At 1440 he was aware from the CCTV of the increasing crowd situation at
                  the Leppings Lane end.

            •     Shortly after 1445, being aware of the increasing pressure on the turnstiles,
                  he looked at the Leppings Lane terraces and saw there was room for
                  supporters. He then considered delaying the kick-off but as one of the teams
                  ran out onto the pitch (which actually occurred at 1454 hours) he discarded
                  that option.

            •     On receiving the demand from Superintendent Marshall to open the gates
                  before someone was killed, thoughts about monitoring and control of
                  supporters entering the ground crossed his mind but there was still space on
                  the terrace and the concourse to ease the situation.

            •     If the gates were opened there might be crushing and injury on the inside as
                  compared to the serious situation outside the gates where people could be
                  seriously injured or killed.

            •     On being asked by Superintendent Murray if he was going to open the gates
                  he said "If there’s likely to be serious injury or death I’ve no option but to
                  open the gates - open the gates."

            •     He watched the Leppings Lane terraces for any development as a result of
                  the gate opening. He noted that the centre pens were almost full but that
                  there was room in the two side pens.

            •     He saw officers opening perimeter gates to let fans onto the pitch but was
                  unable to assess the situation and the need to open these gates. He then saw
                  an increasing number of people spilling onto the perimeter track by way of
                  the gates or over the fence. He was still unaware of what the exact problem
                  was.

6.16        The relevant points from his evidence given to the Inquiry18 are:

            •     While he had walked around looking at the ground, he had not appreciated


       18
                   Inquiry transcript of 24 to 26 May 1989.

                                                                                              19
that the lack of signs at the Leppings Lane turnstiles would cause problems.

His understanding was that the filling and monitoring of the pens was a Club
responsibility. He was aware of the importance of ensuring there was no
overcrowding in the pens.

If at 1430 Superintendent Murray had said there was a problem in getting the
fans into the ground in time, he would have seriously considered delaying the
kick-off.

At 1440 while he considered that he could still get 5 to 6,000 people through
the turnstiles by kick-off he was concerned, but this was overtaken by events
(disruption by loss of radio communications).

At 1445 he considered that there was still plenty of room in the centre pens,
but it was becoming clear that not all the fans would be in by 1500 with the
situation outside the turnstiles. He did not make a decision to delay the kick-
off because his mind was taken up with these difficulties.

At 1447 when the first request was made for gate C to be opened, he was
reluctant to agree. On receiving Superintendent Marshall’s demand at 1448
that the gates be opened he accepted that he took until 1452 to make a
decision.

He appreciated that if people came through gate C they would have to go
somewhere though not necessarily through the tunnel. He had no option but
to order the gates to be opened because of the risk of serious injury or death
outside. His thoughts at this time were concentrated on the gate and not on
the tunnel. It did not cross his mind to issue an instruction for officers to
direct the flow of fans.

He was concerned about the effects of opening the gates and allowing people
to enter the ground, He anticipated that there would be pushing. He watched
the Leppings Lane terraces intently for developments. He did not see
anything untoward on the terraces until the perimeter gates there were
opened.

He considered that it was the responsibility of the Club stewards to be
present at the tunnel entrance in order to prevent overcrowding in the pens.

While he made a mistake in not following up the consequences of opening
gate C, he would have hoped that officers in the area should have remedied
the mistake by using their initiative.

He considered that it was a matter for the fans to level themselves out on the
terraces.

At about 1515 he saw Mr Kelly, the Chairman of the FA, and others in the

                                                                             20
              police control room. On being asked by them what had happened he accepted
              that he had told them a lie about a gate being forced by fans when in fact it
              was opened on his instruction. He was not being deceitful, he believed he
              may have referred to the first time the gate was opened (at 1447 when some
              fans pushed through after one was ejected). He was in a state of shock, and
              wanted to collect his thoughts and assess the situation. At that stage he did
              not want to communicate fully the situation until he had seen a senior
              officer.

       •      He was concerned about the crowd situation and did not want the public to
              become aware of what had happened as he feared there would be massive
              disorder. He agreed that there was nothing to stop him telling his Assistant
              Chief Constable the truth or the full picture when he saw him, but he did not
              do so.

       •      When asked why he told a lie about the supporters he apologised and said
              that "In the crisis of the moment, sir, with all those pressures that are so
              evident, I can’t give an honest answer other than the stress of the situation."

       The Evidence of Superintendent Murray

6.17   The relevant points from his statement made on 2.5.89 are:

       •     As the previous year’s fixture had passed without serious incident it was
             decided by Chief Superintendent Mole, himself and others to base the 1989
             operational order on that of 1988. There was concern in preventing a pitch
             invasion. The order and planning was discussed with Chief Superintendent
             Duckenfield in the two weeks before the match.

       •     At 1430 on the day the centre pen was filling but there were large clear
             sections still.

       •     At 1445 there was a compacting crowd outside the turnstiles and then a
             message was received from Superintendent Marshall requesting that gate C
             be opened. He was asked to standby. That officer then asked for the
             Leppings Lane gates to be opened or people would be crushed. At this stage
             he was attempting to contact the Club Security Officer on the radio to inform
             him of the problems at the turnstiles, but was unable to do so (due to poor
             communications).

       •     The officer is somewhat confused as to the exact timing of the various calls
             made about the gates between 1445 and 1452 hours. He does state that there
             were calls to open gates otherwise people would be killed and that gate C
             was opened as a result.

       •     At 1452 he was aware that the centre two pens were almost full.

       •     At 1458 he saw fans from the centre pens going onto the track but was

                                                                                          21
              unaware of the real problem until about 1506 hours.

6.18   The relevant points from his evidence given to the Inquiry19 are:

       •     His role on the day was to be in overall control of the control room and as
             adviser to Mr Duckenfield20.

       •     It was the duty of police to monitor the filling of the pens at league matches.
              At the game on the day of the disaster the fans were given the whole terrace
              to go where they wanted to. No officer was given the specific duty to
              monitor the filling of the centre pens. It was not considered to be a problem.

       •     When the centre pens were filling up he never considered that there might
             come a time there would be a need to divert people from them.

       •     At 1445 he was concerned about the crowd at the turnstiles and tried to
             contact the Club Security Officer on the radio but could not raise him. He
             was then overtaken by the serious events that followed. No attempt was then
             made to instruct the stewards to close off the tunnel.

       •     After gate C was opened he didn’t consider where the fans would go, he
             thought that they would disperse throughout the ground. He did not realise
             that people going through gate C would necessarily go towards the tunnel.
             He had not envisaged that gate as an entry point. However it was obvious
             after the event.

              When people were let out of the centre pens onto the perimeter track he did
              not see anything untoward about them or that there was any overcrowding.
              It was only when he went down onto the field at Mr Duckenfield’s request
              that he saw the distress there.

       •     He understood that it was the responsibility of both the police and the
              stewards to monitor and report any concern about the numbers on the
              terraces.

       •     When the last request to open the gates was made, he did not think that Mr
             Duckenfield was dithering in coming to a decision but was weighing the
             considerations.




              Inquiry transcript of 31 May and 1 June 1989.

              The operational order for 1989 has Mr Duckenfield in overall command of
              the event, three superintendents being responsible for their own sectors (the
              inside of the football stadium, and outside the ground designated to either the
              home or away fans, and Mr Murray was noted as being in the control room
              in overall control of overseeing the entire operation.

                                                                                          22
       •      It was only in hindsight that it was obvious that the number of fans still
              trying to get into the ground at 1447 would cause a problem of overcrowding
              unless checked. He had not foreseen problems with the centre pens.

       The Evidence of Mr Kelly

6.19 He was the Chief Executive of the Football Association. When he went tg the
     police control box at 1520 to find out what was happening he spoke to Mr
     Duckenfield who told him that the gates had been forced and there had been an in­
     rush of Liverpool Supporters. At that time ACC Jackson was also present

       Inquiry Conclusions re Police and Others

6.20 The performance by the City Council of its duties in regard to the Safety certificate
     was inefficient and dilatory. Their failure to revise the certificate over the previous
     three years was a serious breach of duty. As a result there were no fixed capacities
     for the pens. Breaches of the Green Guide standards were permitted.

6.21   The Club had in general adopted a responsible and conscientious approach to its
       responsibilities. However it was aware of the problems involving the shortage of
       turnstiles and the number of fans expected to turn up at the Leppings Lane end.
       Although the police had assumed responsibility for the monitoring of the pens, the
       Club’s officials ought to have alerted the police to the grossly uneven distribution
       of fans on the terraces. The onus here was on the Club as well as on the police.
       The poor signposting outside the turnstiles and on the concourse before the tunnel
       tended to produce under-filling of the wing pens and over-filling of pens 3 and 4.

6.22   There can be no valid criticism of the emergency services (by which he meant the
       various ambulance services or the fire brigade).

6.23   The 1989 Operational Order left much unsaid. There was no provision for the late
       or congested arrivals, nor for the avoidance of overcrowding on the terraces.
       Satisfaction with the 1988 event led to complacency. That some thought the pens
       to be overfull in 1988 and that the tunnel was closed off on that occasion did not
       figure in or influence the plan for 1989. While it was understandable that the newly
       promoted Mr Duckenfield should have been expected to take command of events
       in his Division from the date of that promotion, in view of the lack of his experience
       at the ground it was imperative that he be fully briefed. It might have been wiser
       to have left Mr Mole, who had been in command both in 1987 and 1988, in charge
       of the operation.

6.24   The policing on 15 April 1989 broke down in the ways already described, and
       although there were other causes, the main reason for the disaster was the failure of
       police control. Some senior officers in command were defensive and evasive
       witnesses to the Inquiry, neither their handling of problems on the day nor the
       account of it in evidence showed the qualities of leadership to be expected of their
       rank. Mr Duckenfield leant heavily on Mr Murray’s experience. Between them
       they misjudged the build-up at the turnstiles and did little about it until they received

                                                                                             23
            Mr Marshall’s request to open the gate21. At this stage Mr Duckenfield’s capacity
            to take decisions and to give orders seemed to collapse. Having sanctioned, at last,
            the opening of the gates, he failed to give necessary consequential orders or to exert
            any control when the disaster occurred. He misinterpreted the emergence of fans
            from pens 3 and 4. When he was unsure of the problem, he sent others down to
            assess the situation rather than descend to see for himself. He gave no information
            to the crowd22.

6.25        Lord Justice Taylor said that it was most surprising that Mr Duckenfield gave the
            Chairman of the FA, his Assistant Chief Constable and others to think that there had
            been an inrush due to Liverpool fans forcing the gate. This was not only untruthful,
            it set off a widely reported allegation against the supporters which caused grave
            offence and distress. He could only assume that Mr Duckenfield’s lack of candour
            on this occasion had been out of character. The reason given for not telling the
            truth was that if the crowd had been aware of the real situation there might have
            been a very hostile reaction that might impede rescue work. However the reluctance
            to tell the truth did not require that a falsehood be told.

                   "284. The likeliest explanation of the officer’s conduct was that he simply
                   could not face the enormity of the decision to open the gates and all that
                   flowed therefrom. That would explain what he said to (the FA Chairman),
                   what he did not say to (the Assistant Chief Constable), his aversion to
                   addressing the crowd and his failure to take effective control of the disaster
                   situation. He froze."




       21
                   Interim Report at Para 281.
       22
                   Interim Report at para 282.

                                                                                               24
7.         THE CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION

           Interim Report II

7.1        Following the publication of the Interim Report the Chief Constable of West
           Midlands Police immediately referred it to the DPP asking for a decision on the
           question of criminal liability of any member of South Yorkshire Police. On 15
           August 1989 the Director advised that the matter should be the subject of a full
           criminal investigation. As the West Midlands Police had done considerable work
           in gathering evidence for the Taylor Inquiry it seemed sensible that they should be
           invited to continue. In October 1989 Assistant Chief Constable Mervyn-Jones, who
           was in charge of the Hillsborough Inquiry Team of the West Midlands Police, sent
           to the Head of the CPS Police Complaints Division a revised copy of the report
           prepared for the Taylor Inquiry (known as Interim Report II). Though it was up to
           date there were still some other statements being taken. The findings worthy of note
           some of which have been covered previously are as follows:

           •     The barrier breaking in pen 3 must be a primary factor for the high
                 proportion of deaths in pen 3 as compared to pen 4;

           •     The 1988 blockade of the tunnel by police officers was not documented, and
                 was not a decision made by the senior officers present at the 1988 game.
                 One retired officer recalled what had happened and his recollection is
                 vague23. The probability is that some officers acting on their own initiative
                 turned supporters away having recognised that part of the terrace was full;

           •     The fact that access to the tunnel was not controlled was a significant factor
                  in the deaths;

           •     The visual evidence available shows supporters at the rear of pens 3 and 4
                  to be totally oblivious to the unfolding events as their fellow supporters died.

           The Report

7.2        This was produced by the Chief Constable of West Midlands Police, Geoffrey Dear,
           on 30 March 1990 following the formal commencement of the criminal and
           disciplinary investigation on 27 September 1989. The Police Complaints Authority
           were supervising the conduct of the investigation. The Chief Constable had major
           concerns about the admissibility of much of the evidence adduced before the Inquiry
           and on which his report was based24. A number of his findings are reproduced
           below:

           •     Following the media attention and what was seen as the adverse effects of


      23
                  Statement number R516 of PS Trevor HIGGINS dated 2.6.89.
      24
                  THE REPORT, Part VII at p 181-5.

                                                                                               25
             a public inquiry it was seriously questionable whether Mr Duckenfield would
             receive a fair trial if a prosecution for manslaughter was pursued against him.

      •      At 1451 hours on the day the video evidence shows that the fans in pens 3
             and 4 were enjoying the event, singing, raising arms and acting seemingly
             quite normally.

      •      Criminal interviews should be conducted of those police officers subject to
             formal complaint as well as members of other organisations.

      •      Whatever the understanding between the Club and the police re the
             monitoring of the terraces, in the event neither police nor Club employee
             recognised the fact that pens 3 and 4 were overcrowding. Nor did any other
             observer recognise that fact including professionals who regularly attend
             matches. A photograph taken at 1454, two minutes after gate C was opened
             still suggests that there was no real crush at the time.

      •      Mr Murray was part of the decision making team at the match. His post in
             the control box placed him in a position of overall responsibility with Mr
             Duckenfield.

7.3   Subject to the analysis of interviews under caution the interim recommendation was
      there was insufficient evidence for a prosecution for Corporate Manslaughter in
      respect of any of the identified organisations. Criminal responsibility of individuals
      could only be assessed following interviews.

      Interview of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield on 3.7.90

7.4   The officer declined to answer any questions.

      Interview of Superintendent Murray on 25.6.90

7.5   Relevant points from the transcript of interview are:

             He had no knowledge of any problems of overcrowding in either 1981 or
             1987.

      •      Although he was in the control room in 1988 at the semi-final match it had
             not been brought to his attention that fans had been injured because of
             overcrowding, or that the centre tunnel to pens 3 and 4 had been closed off.

      •      His responsibility on the day was to have overall command of the control
             room.     That would involve overseeing the event, arranging the
             communications and acting on information received. Mr Duckenfield’s role
             was to be in overall command of the event, which he conducted from the
             control room.



                                                                                         26
      •     He considered that any question of opening gates was for Mr Duckenfield
            and not for him to make. If his senior officer had not been in the control
            room at the time he would have had to contact him for a decision to be
            made.

      •     At about 1430 he did consider that all the fans would be in by 1500.

      •     As the requests to open the gate were coming in he was trying to contact the
            Club Security Officer for him to take action on the problem at the turnstiles.
            He had no discussion with Mr Duckenfield about the decision to be made
            except to ask his superior if we were going to open the gates.

      •     Prior to the decision to open the gates he saw nothing on the terraces to give
            him cause for concern.

      •     At about 1508 when the Assistant Chief Constable, Mr Jackson, asked Mr
            Duckenfield what had happened, he was not told that the gate had been
            opened at police request. At that stage Mr Murray did not associate the
            deaths with the opening of the gate.

      Interview of ACC Jackson on 28 June 1990

7.6   He believes that it was Mr Duckenfield who told him that the gates had been
      stormed. It was about 1615 when he first learnt the true situation.

      Police Complaints Authority

7.7   On 11 July 1990 the PCA directed that disciplinary charges of neglect of duty be
      preferred against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray. In
      November 1990 Mr Duckenfield retired on grounds of ill health and subsequently
      the PCA announced that they would not pursue the charge against Mr Murray on
      the ground that it would be unfair to pursue what was in essence a joint charge
      against one officer only.




                                                                                        27
8.         CPS REVIEW OF 1990

8.1        The Director sought the advice of two very experienced Queen’s Counsel, Gareth
           Williams QC and Peter Birts QC. They produced a joint opinion on 6 August 1990.
           They considered the police report and documentation produced for the Taylor
           Inquiry as well as the Police Interim Report II. The terms of their brief was to
           advise whether there existed sufficient evidence to justify bringing criminal
           proceedings against any of the organisations or individuals concerned.

           Joint Opinion

8.2        Counsel commented that a notable feature of the disaster was the absence of conflict
           of fact as to what had happened, and that the criminal investigation, for all its
           thoroughness, had not significantly added to or contradicted the Inquiry findings.
           The layout of the ground was the responsibility of four organisations, the Club, the
           consultant structural engineers, the Council and the police. None of them foresaw
           that the progressive alterations made to the ground from 1977 onwards in the
           interest of safety and good order would come to constitute in effect a death trap for
           supporters entering pens 3 and 425. The circumstances of the crushing at the
           turnstiles and the opening of gate C were also not foreseen. While all four
           organisations must share some responsibility for the lack of safe maximum
           capacities, the lack of controlled entry to the pens, the absence of any proper system
           of monitoring and the inadequacy of the Safety Certificate, it is the police that had
           the main responsibility for the policy of letting the fans find their own level.

8.3        That there had been a crushing incident in 1981 where large numbers of fans were
           admitted to the West terraces via the tunnel access and were crushed against the
           perimeter fence was not such as to have alerted the police and Club to potential
           problems in 1989. That earlier problem was believed to have been properly
            addressed by the installation of radial fences. It had no direct bearing on the
            disaster and did not add to the potential criminal responsibility of the Club or the
           police.

8.4        Mr Duckenfield’s decision to open gate C was correct in the circumstances. That
           was his responsibility alone as was his serious error in failing to give any order to
           accommodate the influx. While the competence of this newly promoted Chief
           Superintendent to take charge of a match of this importance could be questioned,
           there is no evidence that those responsible for his promotion should share the
           responsibility for his errors.

8.5        That the tunnel was cordoned off in 1998 by a handful of junior officers was
            apparently on their own initiative - an action that would have almost certainly
            averted the disaster of 1989. At first sight the operational organisation of the police
            might seem responsible for failing to incorporate that tactic into the match planning.
            However that Mr Duckenfield despatched a serial to deal with the opening of gate


      25
                   Joint Opinion at page 18-19.

                                                                                                28
      A demonstrates that it was within his power to accommodate the opening of gate
      C, and the blame for his not doing so cannot in our view be laid elsewhere26.

8.6   The buildup outside the ground was again the responsibility of the four
      organisations. While the layout and slow admission rate of the turnstiles gave rise
      to policing difficulties, the loss of police control and the failure to follow the
      filtering employed in 1988 was solely a police responsibility, but it was a collective
      one that could not be attributed to any individual officer.

8.7   Counsel gave lengthy consideration to the relevant law for involuntary manslaughter
      and culpable misfeasance (misconduct in a public office). On the basis of the law
      as it was in 1989 they correctly covered the required elements of a manslaughter
      involving "recklessness" as defined by Lord Diplock in R v Lawrence. They were
      quite rightly concerned as to the then uncertainty in the law about the application
      of the "gross negligence" test as a separate head of liability, following two recent
      cases at the time where it was held that manslaughter should not be defined in terms
      of negligence and that Lord Diplock’s test should be applied universally27. They
      therefore approached the evidence on the basis that the gross negligence test (in
      addition to that of "recklessness") was sufficient to establish the offence of
      manslaughter. As for culpable misfeasance they were satisfied that the offence
      existed and that it involved the wilful neglect of a police officer to perform a duty
      which he was bound to perform by common law or statute. They applied the
      definition from R v Dytham ante. They were of the opinion that this little known
      offence was a difficult one to prove to the satisfaction of the jury.

8.8   In considering the evidence to support manslaughter charges they dealt with each
      of the four organisations in turn:

      •      The Club: There was no sufficient evidence to support a prima facie case
             that the Club or any of its officials caused the deaths based on either
             recklessness or gross negligence.

      •      The consultant engineers: There was no evidence to support a charge of
             manslaughter.

      •      The Council: There was no evidence of recklessness or gross negligence on
             their part.

      •      The police: They were responsible for the heavily criticised policy whereby
             supporters were left "to find their own level" and not monitored as they
             entered the pens in semi-final matches. There was also a serious failure of
             policing in Leppings Lane. These errors were to be viewed as part of a


             Joint Opinion at page 21.

             Seymour (1983) 76 Cr App Rep 211 and
             Kong Cheuk Kwan v R (1985) 82 Cr App Rep 18.

                                                                                         29
     complex series of events, many of which were outside the control of the
     police. Once responsibility for the failure to postpone the kick-off and to
     cordon off the access tunnel was confined to Mr Duckenfield as it should be,
     then the police as an organisation cannot be said to have caused the deaths
     by their strategy and operational errors28. In considering the structure of the
     police command, the operational orders for 1988 and 1989, police practice
     at Hillsborough and the interviews of officers including Mr Murray, .they
     were of the opinion that while there were undoubted errors of judgement and
     practice, neither the police organisation nor any individual within it acted
     recklessly or in a grossly negligent manner. There was no basis on which
     to advise a charge of corporate manslaughter against any directing mind
     within the police organisation.

     Chief Superintendent Duckenfield: That Mr Duckenfield was criticised for
     the failure to cordon off the tunnel access and for his decision not to
     postpone the kick-off was thought to be entirely justified. However he had
     under his command officers who had considerable experience of policing the
     ground and who also made operational errors or failed to react as they should
     have done. It seemed likely that the operational orders and police
     intelligence were inadequate; this was not the fault of Mr Duckenfield who
     inherited a ready made match plan compiled by others and tried to follow it.
     Counsels’ opinion was that the slowness of his response to the disaster was
     due in part to his lack of experience of this type of match. In their view the
     officer’s errors in not cordoning off the tunnel or postponing the match were
     a substantial cause of the deaths. They then looked at the sufficiency of
     evidence on a charge of manslaughter as against the officer. They concluded
     that there was no unlawful and dangerous act for that head of manslaughter,
     and then went on to consider the other tests:

            "We consider that there are difficulties in proving that he intended to
            do an act which created an obvious and serious risk of causing
            personal injury. In the first place there was no "act" as such, but an
            omission or omissions to act which contributed to a rapidly
            developing state of affairs ending in serious risk of injury. But was
            it an obvious risk at the time? We think not. The complexity of the
            disaster as now known to those who have analysed it in hindsight
            demonstrates that there must be grave doubt as to whether the
            omissions created a risk which was obvious to anyone at the
            time We conclude, therefore, that there is insufficient evidence on
            which to found a charge of recklessness against Mr Duckenfield. Nor
            is there evidence that he was grossly negligent in failing to act as
            mentioned above..,..It follows, and we have come to the clear
            conclusion that there is no evidence that Mr Duckenfield was wilfully
            neglectful of his duty or was culpable so as to have committed the



28
     Joint Opinion at paras 80.

                                                                                 30
                          offence of culpable misfeasance29."

8.9         The final conclusion of counsel was that there was no sufficient evidence to support
            criminal proceedings of any kind against those persons mentioned in the West
            Midlands Report who counsel did not identify in their opinion.

8.10        In the autumn of 1990 the DPP announced that there would be no prosecutions.




       29
                   Joint Opinion at paras 88-89.

                                                                                             31
9.         THE INQUESTS

9.1        In April 1990 the Coroner for South Yorkshire commenced the 9530 mini inquests
            to decide the statutory questions as to who each of the deceased was and when and
            where he or she died. They were then adjourned to await the DPP’s decision on a
            criminal prosecution. They were resumed in November 1990 to decide the final
            statutory question as to how each of the deceased died. At the end of March 1991
            the jury returned majority verdicts of accidental death in all cases.

           Coroner’s Summing Up

9.2        The coroner described to the jury three possible conclusions that might be returned;
           that is, of an unlawful killing, accident/misadventure or an open verdict. For a
           verdict of unlawful killing the criminal standard of proof was required, and for
           accident/misadventure the standard would be that of the balance of probability. In
           the case of an open verdict there was no standard as such. He went on to describe
           the legal requirements for each of the possible verdicts which should be considered
           in turn.

9.3        For unlawful killing (the criminal equivalent being one of the forms of involuntary
           manslaughter) he paid particular attention to the case of R v West London Coroner
           ex parte Gray [1988] QB 467, which dealt with an alleged unlawful killing by a
           police officer by way of neglect.

9.4        For accident/misadventure he described it as an unforeseen event arising out of a
           situation that was meant to occur. Whether or not there was culpability due to
           negligence would depend on the circumstances.

9.5        If after due deliberation the jury came to the conclusion that there was insufficient
           evidence to reach either of the above two verdicts to the required standard of proof
           then the open verdict was appropriate.

9.6        The relevant points that the Coroner made to the jury concerning the actions of the
           police were:

           •      The police practice of letting the fans "find their own level" which had
                  appeared to work without problem until 1989. While criticised this had not
                  been condemned by any witness, although it was accepted that there had to
                  be some monitoring.

           •      The Chief Superintendent who was in command prior to Mr Duckenfield did
                  not know of any diversion of the fans from the tunnel in previous years,
                  however it was fairly conclusive that such diversion happened in 1988,
                  although it was not reported to senior officers.


      30
                   Subsequently the 96th victim, Mr Bland, died.

                                                                                             32
As there was no means of counting people into the pens the only way to
monitor the packing density of the fans there was by a visual perception.

Senior officers had indicated that if they had seen something which caused
them concern they would have expected to report it. They had a reliance
upon the initiative and the capability of the people within the ground,
whether or not that was a wise reliance that was the practice.

Virtually all the evidence pointed towards the decision to open the gates as
being a reasonable one in the circumstances.

A number of witnesses did not think that the centre pens were crowded while
others saw disaster looming. Mr Motson,the BBC commentator, noticed the
discrepancy between the centre and outer pens but not that the centre ones
were overcrowded. Mr Hicks appeared to have the earliest concern about the
overcrowding based on what he could see from his position close to the
police control box.

The Coroner considered that there was at least some evidence to put before
the jury on the question of an unlawful killing and therefore did not
withdraw that verdict from them.

Mr Duckenfield did not have a detailed knowledge of the Green Guide or of
the ground. He did have a plan and Operational Order that had been used
in the past without difficulties. He could be justified in taking the view that
he had staff that were sound and adequate, that the ground itself was safe,
and that the capacity of the ground was in accordance with the Safety
Certificate. He probably had no duty to satisfy himself on every item
relating to the running of the match. It was not surprising that he did not
know the detail of the signing (on the concourse and by the tunnel access).
It was not surprising that he did not relate the geographical locations of the
tunnel access and the exit gate (gate C). There was nothing to alert him that
an exit gate might be used as an entry point.

There was a great deal of criticism that the Operational Order adopted by Mr
Duckenfield did not include specific references to the monitoring of the pens
or to the distribution of the fans within the pens. Most of the police officers
took the view that they would act on their own initiative and that the safety
of the public was one of their primary functions31.

Mr Duckenfield’s briefing made a strong reference to the safety of the
spectators; it was of paramount importance. Would it have made any
difference if he had said "monitor the pens" rather than the word "safety"?
Did the briefing make it clear that in addition to their public order functions
safety was a matter of great importance.


Inquiry transcript 25 March 1991 at page 111.

                                                                            33
Mr Duckenfleld’s evidence is that his objective in opening the gates was to
save life.

       "...firstly he took the view that the concourse was larger than the
       turnstile area and therefore people would have room to expand.
       Secondly he knew there were three routes, although he did not know
       their detail and he certainly did not know their signing, on tQ the
       terraces....He also said that his attention was focused on Lepping
       Lane; firstly upon Gate C and then he was taken up with the issue of
       Gate A. The first time he realised that anything was happening on
       the terraces was when he saw the gate open and people climbing
       over....He certainly did not associate the entry - at least that is my
       understanding of his evidence - the entry through the gates with what
       appeared to him to be a pitch invasion. Mr Duckenfield, of course
       was supported by Mr Murray whose job it was to control the ground.
       He was entitled to assume, I think, that people in Mr Murray’s
       position would take appropriate action in the light of developments.
       Indeed, I think he was right to assume that people further afield
       would keep him informed as to what was happening, with a view to
       enabling him to take decisions."

The Coroner considered that the assessment of the terraces was a very
important factor to be weighed. None of the staff in the control room had
noticed any problems with the pens until people came over the fence or the
perimeter gates were opened. Their attention was focused on the outside.

       "...the evidence...is reasonably clear that...when Gate C was
       opened...the centre pens certainly were not empty but they were not
       necessarily so full and, indeed, they had been playing with beach
       balls and various other things in those pens very shortly before
       that...So you have two problems: one, would a prudent observer have
       noted at the point in time when the gates were opened that those pens
       were so full or so over full that diversion was something which had
       to be taken; and secondly, of course, would the connection, would a
       reasonably prudent, skilled police officer in the shoes if you like, of
       Mr Duckenfield or indeed Mr Murray, have connected the need, the
       opening of the gate, diversion of the tunnel, and conditions on the
       pen?"

The radio problems were said to have caused a considerable amount of
disruption.

Mr Murray saw his role as a communicator and disseminator, a man of rank
who was in a position to take decisions, and an adviser to Mr Duckenfield,




                                                                           34
particularly as the latter was a newcomer32. He says that he had no
knowledge of any diversion from the tunnel in 1988, he believed the ground
to be safe, the system under which he was operating to be safe and that it
had worked satisfactorily in 1987 and 1988. When gate C was opened it did
not cross his mind to close the tunnel. He expected people to disperse from
the concourse. He did not expect they would all go through the tunnel. He
said that his primary concern was to relieve pressure, to avoid injury, and he
went on to say that nothing else was obvious to him. Nothing of
significance was noted on the terraces.

Mr Duckenfield said that he operated on the assumptions that the ground was
safe, the system of policing and the Operational Plan were satisfactory and
had worked in previous years, and he had a team of officers who were
experienced and supportive. He expected to receive reports of overcrowding
if noted by officers on the track. He would expect officers to respond to a
"developing situation". As far as he was concerned, he did not accept that
there was on the day an obvious risk to people when the gates were opened.
He thought that the time interval in which he had to take various decisions
was short.




Inquest transcript at page 22 of 11 March 1991: "I saw my role as being sort
of monitoring the event as a whole, being responsible for the reception and
the transmission of all radio communications and saw myself as adviser to
Mr Duckenfield." Mr Murray accepted that his superior might have to make
decisions requiring his advice based on experience.

                                                                           35
10.    THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND JUDICIAL REVIEW

10.1   In April 1992 solicitors acting for the relatives of some of the deceased sent a
       ‘memorial’ to the Attorney General requesting him to grant them leave to apply to
       the High Court for the inquest verdicts to be quashed and a fresh series of inquests
       held. This was refused in August 1992 on the ground that he had concluded that
       there was nothing which would justify an application to the High Court for a new
       inquest, as the application would have no reasonable prospect of establishing that
       it was necessary or desirable in the interests of justice for a fresh inquest to be held.

10.2   In May 1992 an application was made to the Divisional Court for judicial review
       in respect of the various decisions made by the Coroner in the course of the inquest.
       Leave was granted in April 1993 and the case came before the Court in November
       1993. The relief sought was for a quashing of the verdicts and an ordering of fresh
       inquests.

10.3   One of the grounds put forward by the applicants was that the Coroner misdirected
       the jury on the law concerning unlawful killing when he defined it in terms of
       recklessness33, because a later and unreported case34 in the Court of Appeal had
       decided that the offence of involuntary manslaughter was established if there was
       proof of a grossly negligent act or omission causing death. It was submitted that if
       such a direction on gross negligence had been given then the jury would have found
       unlawful killing. The Court, however, was of the view that the actual verdict
       brought in by the jury was a perfectly rational one.

10.4   An interesting note is that when the Court asked counsel for the applicants, Alun
       Jones QC, what would be the point of sending the matter back for another inquest,
       he stated that whatever the verdict might prove to be, the function of the jury would
       have been fulfilled. He agreed that no prosecution of any police officer would result
       because the decision had been taken in 1990 that no one should be prosecuted. It
       was a point of legal purity.

10.5   The judgement of the Court was given by Lord Justice McCowan:

              "I would hold that the inquisition was correctly completed and the Coroner’s
              direction to the jury as to the manner in which they should approach its
              completion was impeccable....Accordingly, I have discovered no good reason
              for ordering a new inquest or for merely quashing the existing verdicts."




              Following the judgement of Watkins LJ in R v West London Coroner ex
              parte Gray and others [1987] 2 WLR 1020.

              R v Holloway and others [1994] QB 302.

                                                                                             36
11.    THE NEW EVIDENCE

11.1   In early December 1996, Granada TV screened a drama-documentary programme
       concerning the Hillsborough Stadium disaster. It was later said by the Hillsborough
       Family Support Group (HFSG) that the pre-production research for the programme
       and its subsequent airing brought fresh evidence and new witnesses to light proving
       that suppression of evidence, peijury and conspiracy to pervert the course of justice
       featured in the legal process that followed the disaster.

11.2   In March 1997 the HFSG made representations (supported by the opinion of their
       counsel, Alun Jones QC, and a large bundle of ‘new evidence’) to the DPP, the
       Home Secretary and the Attorney General. The Legal Secretariat to the Law
       Officers (LSLO) considered it important that while each of the various Government
       Departments formed their own judgement in relation to the discharge of their own
       duties, it was equally important that there was a coherent and co-ordinated response
       to the representations made. It was agreed that each of the three groups would
       report the results of their reviews to the Police Policy Directorate.

11.3   The new evidence was said to be a video tape of footage from the scoreboard
       camera on the Leppings Lane terraces that was alleged to have been suppressed by
       the police, the evidence of the Club engineer responsible for the CCTV systems, and
       a doctor’s statement also alleged to have been suppressed.

11.4   The Chairman of the HFSG, Mr Trevor Hicks, formally requested the CPS to
       examine the evidence and to initiate an urgent criminal investigation into the
       allegations. Their counsel had concluded that the new pieces of evidence called for
       a full police enquiry or public enquiry.




                                                                                         37
12.    THE 1997 CPS REVIEW

12.1   I was nominated to review the evidence and allegations and to prepare a report for
        the Director. This report was completed and sent to the Director on 8 May 1997 via
        the CCP for Central Casework.

12.2   My recommendations were that there were no grounds for the CPS to recommend
       to the Home Office that there should be a further investigation of criminal
       allegations against the police or other persons. In particular I found that:

              The police video tapes alleged to have been suppressed were available to the
              Taylor Inquiry and to the Coroner. One was actually shown to the inquest
              jury as part of the evidence.

       •      Tapes alleged to have been stolen from the Club CCTV room ( the inference
              being that the police were involved in suppressing material evidence of their
              complicity in criminal offences) were not relevant. One would have been a
              detailed study of a brick wall and the second of an area covered by other
              cameras.

       •      There was insufficient evidence of police control room officers perjuring
              themselves at the inquest when giving their opinion of the video quality seen
              on a CCTV monitor.

       •      There was no suppression of medical evidence by either the police or other
              persons. The ‘new’ evidence provided by the HFSG had little weight when
              compared to the overall evidence considered by the various judicial hearings.




                                                                                        38
13.    THE SCRUTINY

13.1   In June 1997 the Home Secretary announced to the House that his department, the
       Attorney General and the CPS had carefully considered all the evidence that had
       been put forward but were unable to find anything which would have materially
       affected the outcome of any of the investigations into the disaster. There was no
       evidence from which it could be concluded that a new public inquiry should be
       established, that would justify fresh criminal investigations or that an application for
       a new inquest would have any hope of succeeding. However, in order that no
       matter of significance was overlooked and a conclusion was not made without a full
       and independent examination of the evidence, it had been decided that there should
       be an independent scrutiny. It was to be conducted by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.
       As regards the CPS his terms of reference were:

               "To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
               Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available....to the
               Director of Public Prosecutions....for the purpose of discharging...
               (her)...statutory responsibilities....and to draw to (her) attention any evidence
               not previously considered by (her) which may be relevant to (her) duties...."

13.2   The scrutiny report was submitted to the Home Secretary in January 1998. It was
       made plain that the judge had looked at all the evidence that he was asked to
       consider whether or not it had been previously available to the legal advisers acting
       for the families or was in the public domain.

13.3   The judge was only invited by counsel for the HFSG to make recommendations to
       the DPP re criminal proceedings in the case of Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray. He
       stated that as the DPP had concluded that there was not sufficient evidence to justify
       charges against either of these two officers (having accepted the advice of two very
       experienced Queen’s Counsel), any fresh evidence would have to be of sufficient
       significance that there would be a real possibility that in considering it the DPP
       might change her mind and institute proceedings for manslaughter, or for any other
       offence, against one or both of these officers.

       Key Points from the Scrutiny

13.4 These are as follows:

       •       Chapter 1.22: "Lord Taylor had to decide a number of controversial issues,
               for example, why the police lost control of the crowd outside the Leppings
               Lane turnstiles. The evidence of the witnesses who have not previously
               come forward is unlikely significantly to affect the weight of the evidence
               already given on these controversial issues."

       •       Chapter 1.44: No fresh evidence had been heard about what had happened
               outside the ground before 1500 therefore there was no question of reviewing
               Lord Taylor’s findings on that.


                                                                                             39
Chapter 1.45 to 1.51: Lord Justice Stuart-Smith reiterated Lord Taylor’s
criticism of the police in not closing the access tunnel to the central pens
when gate C was opened, that was said to be "a blunder of the first
magnitude". However there was also criticism of others because of the
inadequate turnstiles, the unsatisfactory monitoring of the pens except by a
visual check, the misleading and inadequate signposting, and the lack of
stewards on the concourse directing people where to go. The result was that
most standing spectators going through the turnstiles or gate C did not realise
that there was any alternative but to go down the tunnel. He stated "None
of the evidence I have been invited to consider could make Lord Taylor’s
censure of the police more severe, and it does not add any separate or
additional ground of criticism in respect of events leading to the tragedy."

Chapter 1.53: In considering the joint opinion of Counsel the judge said that
they had set out a full, detailed and careful resume of the facts on the basis
of the evidence then available. There was no error or omission in that resume
nor was any particular aspect understated or exaggerated. In their statement
of the law, Counsel considered both the offences of manslaughter and
culpable misfeasance in a public office; they were plainly correct to consider
that the latter offence would be no easier to establish than manslaughter in
the circumstances of the case.

Chapter 1.54 to 1.57: In order to recommend that the DPP reconsider the
decision not to prosecute there would have to be fresh evidence to establish
facts not previously considered, or the significance of which was not fully
appreciated, that would make it more likely that charges of manslaughter
could be established.      He said that "Essentially this relates to Mr
Duckenfield’s and Mr Murray’s knowledge and appreciation of the risk of
injury in doing what they did or omitted to do....Any prosecution of an
individual police officer would have to establish his individual responsibility.
It would not be enough simply to prove the composite failure of the police
operation. The causes of the disaster were many and complex. So far as
these two officers were concerned the prosecution would have to prove to the
high standard required for a criminal conviction that the failure to give the
order to close off the tunnel when Gate C was opened amounted to the
serious degree of recklessness necessary to constitute manslaughter."

Chapter 1.66: The verdict of accidental death at the inquests did not
undermine or reverse Lord Taylor’s findings. In order to justify a further
application to the Divisional Court for judicial review any new evidence
must show that had it been presented to the jury they would have been likely
to reach the only other possible verdict, namely unlawful killing.

Chapter 2.18: The police video tapes that contained footage of the Leppings
Lane terraces were not suppressed as alleged but were available in their
entirety to the Inquiry and to the Coroner.

Chapter 2.22: The loss of the video tapes from the Club control room would

                                                                             40
not have shown anything relevant. There is no evidence for the suggestion
that they were taken by police officers as part of a ‘cover up’.

Chapter 2.61: The submission that the police blamed their failure to
appreciate the overcrowding onto a faulty CCTV camera is quite untenable.

Chapter 2.96 to 2.97: Mr Houldsworth (the Club CCTV engineer) gave
evidence that he realised from looking at coverage from police cameras that
the central pens were overcrowded and that the influx of people through gate
C would create a dangerous situation. This evidence is rejected. His
explanation as to why he did not come forward until 1996 is not convincing;
what he says now is inconsistent with what he said before. Like almost
everyone else observing the situation he thought he was looking at a pitch
invasion.    "The importance of Mr Houldsworth’s evidence has been
exaggerated out of all proportion."

Chapter 2.101: "There is nothing in any of the submissions about the video
evidence that calls for any further inquiry or consideration by the prosecuting
or disciplinary authorities ..."

Chapter 4.101: Here Lord Justice Stuart-Smith refers to Mr Duckenfield’s
"disgraceful lie" about gate C being forced open by fans as part of his
consideration of the allegation that there had been a cover-up by the police.
The other part was of malpractice and irregularities in the taking of witness
statements. The latter were not substantiated.

Chapter 5.26 to 5.34: South Yorkshire Police hold the extensive archive of
material about the Hillsborough disaster. The ‘body files’ are held on behalf
of the Coroner and access to them is at his discretion. Access to the rest of
the material in the archives is at the discretion of the police.

Chapter 6.7 to 6.20: Evidence from the structural engineer who advised the
South Yorkshire police in 1990 re the safety of the ground was not available
for either the Taylor Inquiry or the Coroner. It was available for the civil
contribution proceedings in October 1990. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says
that it is reasonable to assume that the engineer’s opinion was a material
factor in persuading the Club and others to make a substantial contribution
to the overall cost of the claims. Two matters which the engineer pointed
to had not been considered or fully considered by the Taylor Inquiry; the
height of the crush barriers resulted in the failure of one that contributed to
the substantially larger number of deaths in pen 3; and the wrongly
calculated overall capacity of the Leppings Lane terrace that resulted in
excessive number of tickets being sold over the safe capacity. While these
matters do not give any ground for the re-opening of any proceedings, and
would not change the central conclusion that the primary cause of the
disaster was the failure of police control, if the responsibility of the other
parties was somewhat greater than had earlier been appreciated, that might
have a bearing on any reconsideration of criminal proceedings against police

                                                                             41
              officers.

       •      Chapter 6.22 to 6.30: In his summing-up the Coroner dealt fully and fairly
              with all the evidence. The Divisional Court rejected the criticisms made of
              him.

13.5   In conclusion the judge said that none of the evidence that he had been asked to
       consider added anything significant to the evidence which was available to the
       Taylor Inquiry or to the Inquests. Also that the investigation of the disaster by the
       West Midlands Police was not biased in favour of the South Yorkshire force.

       Home Secretary’s Statement

13.6   On 18 February 1998 the Home Secretary announced to the House that he, the
       Attorney-General and the Director of Public Prosecutions had no reasons to doubt
       the conclusions of the scrutiny. Much of the evidence considered was already in the
       public domain but he was arranging for the other material (subject to certain
       overriding reasons) to be placed in the Library of the House.




                                                                                         42
14.    THE HFSG REPRESENTATIONS

14.1   The HFSG have provided us with a copy of a bundle of documents which they say
       is the kernel of their case. It comprises six large folders of their evidence and a
        further folder covering the law. It includes a number of witness statements of police
        officers and others (including details of amendments made to police statements),
        Taylor Inquiry transcripts of oral evidence, and the Inquest transcript of the evidence
        of Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray. I understand that they may not have the consent
        of many of the police witnesses that they would wish to call for the prosecution.

14.2 The folder containing the amended police statements has added notes describing
     what is said to have been deleted or amended. In addition the HFSG solicitor has
     made personal comments on the quality of this mainly opinion evidence as well as
     the failure of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to properly address some of the points
     raised.

14.3   The formal representations were received on 28 September 1998. They are said to
       be in opposition to the defendants’ request for the case to be taken over and
       discontinued. There is a discussion of the right to a private prosecution and the test
       which should be applied. The general points that they make are:

       •       In deciding to prosecute a private prosecutor is entitled to apply a test less
               strict than the CPS test of evidential sufficiency from the Code for Crown
               Prosecutors. The CPS should not approach a review of the present kind on
               the basis that it should apply its own test of evidential sufficiency. The
               Taylor findings alone show there is a realistic prospect of conviction for
               manslaughter and misfeasance.

       •       Except in the plainest of cases it would be a misuse of the discretion given
               to the CPS to take over a prosecution such as this in order to discontinue it.

       •      The significance of the witness statements disclosed in the course of the
              scrutiny and the hundreds of unsworn police statements disclosed by the
              Home Secretary in 1998 is difficult to overstate. They disclose a prima facie
              case of manipulation of evidence to the benefit of the defendants and the
              South Yorkshire Police. The independence of the West Midlands Police was
              a sham.

       •      There was calculated selection of the documents sent to the DPP in 1990.
              Many important statements were excluded, eg, edited statements of police
              officers.

       •      The South Yorkshire Police solicitors have acted under a serious conflict of
              interest in the course of previous inquiries and continue to deny access to the
              families to the South Yorkshire archive.


               In the opinion of leading counsel there is sufficient evidence on which to

                                                                                            43
              commit for trial already. The archive of statements and exhibits in the
              possession of the police will add significantly to the prosecution case at
              committal.

       Sufficiency of Evidence

14.4   The HFSG accept that the law follows Adomako (ante) and submit that all the
       elements of the offence of this specie of involuntary manslaughter are not disputed
       except for the last which is a jury question. The key points made are:

       •      The decision to open the gates without taking steps to divert the oncoming
              spectators was a "blunder of the first magnitude". The decision was taken by
              Duckenfield with the agreement or acquiescence of Murray.

       •     Certain police evidence, which was suppressed until 1998, suggests that it
             was the practice of senior officers to ensure that the tunnel was closed when
             the pens were full.

       •     Duckenfield and Murray were in the Control Box and could see the central
             pens. They had an even better view on the CCTV. Murray, who had been
             on duty in 1988, culpably failed to give the proper and obvious advice;
             Duckenfield "froze" and later admitting lying about how the gate came to be
             opened.

       •     Duckenfield’s lie was an obvious attempt to impede inquiries and to suppress
             the truth.

       Public Interest and Interests of Justice Factors

14.5   The key points made by the HFSG under this heading here are:

       •     The HFSG has been deprived of critical information, statements and
             documents about the disaster for years. When the DPP investigation began
              information and statements were closely guarded. Following the open
              approach of the Home Secretary in 1998, the information now available
              undermines the inquest verdicts of accidental death and calls into question
              the validity of all previous investigations.

       •     The findings of the Taylor Inquiry have survived for 9 years. Prosecutions
              for the present offences are justified. Prosecutions for additional offences on
              the basis of the new material are justified in spite of the "scrutiny".

       •     There has been a sustained suppression of the truth in the course of the
              original investigations. The scrutiny was misled on the practice of editing
              statements for the Taylor Inquiry. Some of those statements are still missing.
              The South Yorkshire Police adopted a policy of withholding information,
              critical to the issue of negligence, from the Taylor Inquiry, the DPP, the
              Coroner and presumably the Police Complaints Authority.

                                                                                          44
              The unedited statement of the Chief Constable of Merseyside, who was
              present at the match, contained hearsay, impression, commendation and
              comment. It bestows lavish praise on the senior officers at the match in
              sharp contrast to the edited statements of junior officers whose criticisms
              were painstakingly excused. In the Master Witness List for the Taylor
              Inquiry it was placed between the statements of Duckenfield and Murray.
              It has to be inferred that this was done in order to influence the reader
              against prosecutions.

              The HFSG argue that only if the West Midlands Police as the investigating
              force was truly independent of those it investigated, and impartial, could any
              of the four inquiries ( Taylor, DPP, Coroner and PCA) be regarded as full,
              independent and complete. If it was not then no weight could be attached
              to its report and the value of the conclusions of those to whom their officers
              reported is diminished.

              The inquest, ostensibly objective and dispassionate, is now shown to have
              been manipulated by South Yorkshire Police for their own ends, and by West
              Midlands Police. For this reason the defendants are not entitled to rely upon
              the inquest verdicts to put an end to this prosecution.

       The Limitations of the Stuart-Smith Report

14.6   The HFSG consider that caution has to be employed in accepting facts set out in the
       report. They cite the conclusions about the edited statements being seriously wrong.
       The scale of the editing now revealed exceeds anything shown to the scrutiny. The
       report is economical with information. Only small parts of advice of counsel in
       1990 are set out. The provision of the whole advice is required so that the whole
       reasoning is apparent. They say it is clear that privilege has been waived by the
       provision of the report to the scrutiny. Justice requires that the West Midlands
       Police report and the advice of counsel be disclosed to the HFSG.

14.7   They state that there is no evidence that the judge saw the Master Witness List or
       knew what the DPP had considered, and that there was no ground to believe that he
       sought to compare the evidence available to the Director with the total evidence
       available.

14.8   Their final word is that it would be a most serious injustice to discontinue the
       prosecution.

       Supplementary Representations

14.9   These were received on 2 October 1998. As to the allegation of PCOJ the HFSG
       say that previous inquiries were seriously misled by Mr Duckenfield and both the
       police forces. At the Taylor Inquiry the officer made a half hearted admission
       followed by a denial of an intent to deceive and a claim to have been in a ‘state of
       shock’. Earlier in his evidence when asked if he could help as the genesis of the
       lie, he replied "No". This was a lie as his later admissions demonstrated. The ‘lie’

                                                                                         45
       was transmitted to the Fire Service, the Ambulance Service and the BBC. The
       management of the Club were misled. The officer admitted that he withheld the
       correct information but said it was for "good motives". There was an attempt to
       limit the number and effect of his lies by the omission of this detail from police
       witness statements. At the inquest he said that he could not remember what he had
       said on the topic. He lied to the Coroner’s jury about this.

14.10 It is said that the scrutiny report suggests that the DPP may not have considered in
      1990 the question of the attempt to pervert the course of justice. The true position
      is that the ‘lie’ was repeated to a number of persons, carefully and deliberately, by
      Duckenfield or by others with his encouragement. The HFSG is actively studying
      the significance of these matters in relation to the integrity of the investigations by
      the two police forces.

14.11 The HFSG argue that Duckenfield’s admissions "...show gross negligence causative
      of death, and that they disclose a wanton and perhaps angry disregard for the safety
      of people in the pens, when other people, whom Duckenfield regarded as of the
      same ilk, were causing him a serious problem outside the ground."

14.12 They submit that the responsibility of Murray for the offences is greater than that
      of his superior as can be seen from the admissions made during his evidence to the
      Inquiry and the inquest.

14.13 Much of the rest of the representations are a recital of the evidence at the various
      inquiries, allegations of evidence suppression by witnesses in the making of their
      statements and a final submission. This latter concludes that the PCA rightly
      recognised that the charge of neglect was joint and that the reckless or grossly
      negligent decision to open the gates without closing off the pens was the
      responsibility of both defendants.

       Further Supplementary Representations

14.14 These were received on 12 October 1998. They concerned the obtaining of
      documents, including the West Midlands Police report, from the Public Record
      Office. There is a complaint about the denial of access to the report by the CPS.

14.15 An example of the quality of representation being put forward is based on a
      comparison between a paragraph from the report on how the tunnel to the central
      pens came to be cordoned off, and the statement of an officer who closed off the
      tunnel access in 1988:

              West Midlands Report: "Enquiries have found just one retired officer who
              recalls this happening. He, it must be said, is vague in his recollection but
              the probability is that some officers acting on their own initiative....(turned
              spectators away)".

              HFSG: They say that the retired officer, Higgins, is not vague. He said this
              in his statement of 2 June 1989: "I received instructions to close the gates to

                                                                                          46
              the entrance and thereafter direct fans to the outer pens of the stand. I
              cannot recall where the instruction came from. Under normal circumstances
              instruction came from a Serial Inspector or via radio from control. I cannot
              say from which the instruction came. Bearing in mind the time lapse and
              having attended several matches at Hillsborough, it is difficult to relate detail
              regarding this particular match."

              HFSG: "The significance of this evidence is that ‘control’ used as a matter
              of habit to give this instruction, as did an Inspector, no doubt in liaison with
              each other. This instruction was given in 1988 when Murray was in the
              Control Box. It is to be assumed that the DPP was given the same account
              in 1990 about the opening of the gates in 1988, as appears in the Interim
              Report of October 1989. If so, he was demonstrably misled."

14.16 The alleged ‘forcing’ of the perimeter gate was often raised by South Yorkshire
      officers at the Taylor Inquiry. The purpose of the suggestion was to imply that the
      lying assertion made repeatedly by Duckenfield that the fans had broken down the
      gates might have had some basis in fact, and been the result of some confusion.

14.17 The appendices to the Police Interim Report appear to demonstrate that much time
      was devoted by police officers (probably both West Midlands and South Yorkshire)
      to collecting statements from officers of other forces to bolster what Lord Taylor
      derided as the ‘conspiracy theory’ that there was a plot by ticketless, late arriving
      and intoxicated supporters to force an admission into the ground.

14.18 As the Police Interim Report is now in the public domain, there can be no
      justification of any kind for withholding the final report, or the advice of counsel
      that was made on the basis of that report. The CPS is asked to produce them.




                                                                                            47
15.    THE DEFENCE REPRESENTATIONS

15.1   The initial request for the CPS to take over the case in order to discontinue was
       received from the defence solicitors on 2 July 1998 and was on the basis that
       continuation would be contrary to the public interest. The points raised to support
       this were:

       •      The conclusions of the joint opinion of counsel in 1990;

       •      The accidental death verdicts of the inquest jury;

       •      The conclusion of the scrutiny that there was no ‘new evidence’ which
              would influence the decision not to prosecute;

       •      The intensity of the media coverage and the effect on public opinion;

       •      The emotional stress that the two officers have been under since the disaster;

       •     Witness recollection of events after the passage of time;

       •     Nothing would be served by the expenditure of resources on a trial that
             would achieve nothing in addressing the causes of the disaster.

15.2   Further new representations were received from Mr Murray’s solicitors in early July:

              That Mr Murray had suffered a complete breakdown in his health;

       •     That following the clear conclusions of the scrutiny report there is under
              section 23 of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 insufficient evidence;

              The view of the Home Secretary and Lord Justice Stuart-Smith that re­
              opening the inquiries would serve no useful purpose whatsoever.

15.3 Thefinal batch of defence representations were sent to the CPS on 9 October 1998.
     The solicitors for Mr Murray make comments on the quality of the HFSG
     submissions on the law and the reasoning put forward.              Solicitors for Mr
     Duckenfield say that the HFSG have concentrated on the evidential basis for the
      summons issued. They submit that the Director is well placed to consider the public
      interest as well. They disagree with the HFSG assertion that a clear prima facie
      case exists. They counter the HFSG allegations of the suppression of evidence by
      the police and support the scrutiny findings that there was no improper interference
     with witnesses or manipulation of evidence. They cite examples where the
      representations made by the HFSG are clearly wrong in their criticisms, for example,
      that Mr Duckenfield met Lord Justice Stuart-Smith who then failed to refer to this
      in his report. No such meeting took place and that criticism is therefore unfounded.




                                                                                          48
15.4        They submit that the HFSG concedes that the findings of the Taylor Inquiry fall
            short of those needed to establish a prima facie case when it was said that "The
            Taylor findings in themselves amount almost to a prima facie case."35

15.5        There is no evidence that Mr Duckenfield was ever told about the police action in
            1988 (closing off the tunnel access) or should have been aware of it. The analysis
            of the ‘new evidence’ from the HFSG adds no strength to the their case.

15.6        The solicitors take issue with the stated CPS Policy of taking over a private
            prosecution in order to discontinue it only where there is ‘clearly no case to answer’.
            They request clarification for the justification of the policy and cite the observation
            made by the Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure (Phillips Commission)
            (1981):

                   "The test applied to the Director’s cases (ie, whether or not there is a realistic
                   prospect of conviction) should be applied by all who make the decisions that
                   bring a case to court".36

15.7        They consider that pursuant to the Code for Crown Prosecutors, if there is
            insufficient evidence for a realistic prospect of conviction, the Director will be
            bound to take over the conduct of the proceedings and discontinue. However on the
            basis that the Director applies a lesser standard they ask the CPS to consider the
            admissibility and reliability of the evidence. They emphasise that from the material
            so far submitted by the prosecution there is a clear paucity of evidence relating to
            vital issues. They argue that admissions of liability by the South Yorkshire Police
            in negligence proceedings have no force in relation to the specific actions of
            individual officers.

15.8        As regards the allegation of perverting the course of justice, they say that it has
            never been suggested that Mr Duckenfield ever uttered the words complained of to
            anyone charged with investigating the disaster. There is no evidence that he played
            any role in the transmission of the comment to those who were not present at the
            time, or that he engaged in what is said to be a damage limitation exercise where
            witness statements are taken without any mention of the ‘lie’.

15.9        They put forward a number of representations as to the public interest factors that
            should be considered if that test becomes relevant . Their concerns are especially
            addressed to the matter of the 9 year delay, that the offence was committed as a
            result of a genuine mistake or misunderstanding (as balanced against the seriousness
            of the offence) rather than any pre-meditation, and of the ill health of the defendant.

15.10 Finally, they are o f the view that the Director is bound to give full and detailed
      reasons for the decision taken addressing the issues raised by all the parties.


       35
                   HFSG submission of 24 September 1998 at para 12.
       36
                   Phillips Commission at para 8.9

                                                                                                  49
16.    KEY CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE CPS REVIEW

       An Overview

16.1   The correspondence and formal representations from the private prosecutor and the
       solicitors for the two defendants raise many points. Some of these are relevant to
       this review, others are not. The key issue to be resolved is whether or not there is
       clearly no case to answer and/or the public interest/interests of justice circumstances
       do not require a prosecution for the charges against Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray.
       Once that point is decided then other more minor issues, such as disclosure, will fall
       into place.

16.2   In conducting this review and in the making of my recommendations in chapter 17,
       I have looked at material in the public domain, material provided to me by the
       parties to the prosecution, other non-sensitive material in my possession and also
       confidential papers subject to public interest immunity or legal privilege. A
       schedule of this material as attached at Appendix 2. Some of the material is not in
       a form admissible in the criminal courts, however I have proceeded on the basis
       that, if relevant, it is capable of being adduced by the HFSG in an acceptable
       format. I accept the findings of the Taylor Inquiry, the Coroner’s Inquests, the
       judicial review in the Divisional Court, and the scrutiny. I have no reason not to
       accept those relevant findings of fact made by the police in the course of their
       investigations, however I do not necessarily accept their conclusions on the
       evidence. I find persuasive the conclusions of joint counsel in their advice of 1990
       to the Director.

16.3   While I note the concern expressed as to the validity of the CPS policy on the
       taking over and subsequent discontinuance of a private prosecution, I consider that
       I am bound by what the Director has laid down as guidance and my later
       recommendations will reflect this.

       CPS Policy Guidelines

16.4   I have considered the Code for Crown Prosecutors and the Explanatory
       Memorandum. The Code discusses the two stages in the decision to prosecute. Only
       when the evidential test, ‘the realistic prospect of conviction’, is passed does a
       Crown Prosecutor go on to consider if a prosecution is needed in the public interest.
       If the first test is not passed then there must not be a prosecution.

16.5 The CPS decision of 1990, following Counsels’ advice and based on the evidence
      provided by the West Midlands Police, stated that the evidential test had not been
      passed. Until late 1996 nothing was put before the Director which would have
      affected that decision. Following my review in 1997, it was decided that the so-
      called ‘new evidence’ provided by the HFSG did not provide new grounds for a
      recommendation of a further criminal investigation. There was no suppression of
      medical or video evidence as alleged by Alun Jones QC. The scrutiny report of
      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith fully supported this stance. In the latest representations
      from the HFSG it is being said that all the judicial inquiries and proceedings to date

                                                                                           50
       have been misled. They make a strong inference that this is because of a criminal
       conspiracy between the South Yorkshire and the West Midlands Police. They point
       to the editing of statements taken by the police in 1989 which they say was not put
       before the scrutiny. They consider that all previous hearings are therefore tainted.
       The HFSG ‘evidence’ shows that while there were details of opinion and fact that
       were not put before Lord Taylor (because of the editing that was done by the police
       solicitors in 1989), or were allegedly not considered by the scrutiny, my examination
       of them has not found anything material that would affect the previous CPS
       decisions. Quite simply, there is still no realistic prospect of conviction on the
       allegations of manslaughter and misconduct in a public office. The matter of the
       alleged PCOJ is discussed separately under the evidential test sub-heading.

16.6 The defendants through their legal representatives have asked the CPS to take over
     the proceedings. That should only be done in accordance with the principles set out
     in chapter 7 of Volume 1 of the Prosecution Manual where there is a particular need
     to do so on behalf of the public. Para 7.11 applies and I requested copies of
     relevant papers from the defendants and the prosecutor. These have been supplied,
     although all the parties consider that I or the police have more evidence that would
     be relevant to their case. The South Yorkshire Police have assisted me in the
     obtaining of other material that I wished to consider.

16.7 In view of my conclusions as to the prospect of conviction it follows that it would
      not be appropriate to take over the case in order to prosecute it under para 7.12.

16.8   Para 7.13 pointed me towards the provisions of para 7.8 and 7.10 in the taking over
       of a prosecution in order to discontinue it. As the overall evidence on the seven
       charges now before the Magistrates’ Court (a short discussion on the merits or
       otherwise of the PCOJ allegation will follow later in the chapter) falls short of the
        evidential sufficiency test set out in the Code for Crown prosecutors, I next
       considered the circumstances for discontinuance:

       i)     There is clearly no case to answer: This is the main question to be
              resolved.

       ii)    The public interest factors tending against prosecution clearly outweigh
              those factors tending in favour; especially a consideration of a malicious
              or vexatious prosecution under section 42 of the Supreme Court Act 1982 as
              amended by section 24 of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985. This
              provision concerns an application by the Attorney General to the High Court
              where it is perceived that a person is instituting a vexatious prosecution. I
              also looked at the delay of 9 years in bringing the criminal prosecution to
              court. While the two defendants may have general health problems, I have
              seen no medical evidence or representations which would affect the decision
              to be made.

       iii)    The prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests of justice: I have
               found nothing to support this point.


                                                                                         51
16.9   The policy guidelines in chapter 7 discuss a duty to take over a private prosecution
       No mention is made about the division of a case into the separate charges, where,
       following the application of para 7.10, only some offences may be suitable for
       taking over and subsequent discontinuance and it would be for the private prosecutor
       to continue with the remainder. However section 23 of the Prosecution of Offences
       Act 1985 describes the power to discontinue where the DPP has the conduct of
       proceedings for an offence. Section 6 of the Act refers only to "criniinal
       proceedings" without reference to an offence. As the Director has the power to
       discontinue the proceedings for one offence where she has the conduct of
       proceedings for a number of related matters, it must surely be that the term
       "criminal proceedings" in section 6 should be read as referring to individual charges
       within the total proceedings.    In which case all of the options below may be
       considered:

       i)     Allowing the private prosecution to proceed in its entirety.

       ii)    Taking over the whole of the prosecution in order to discontinue all charges.

       iii)   Taking over only that part of the prosecution where:

              •     there is clearly no case to answer and/or public interest factors apply
                     on a particular charge, for example, on the allegation of the pervert
                     course of justice rather than that of manslaughter/misconduct, or

              •     there is clearly no case to answer and/or public interest factors apply
                     against a particular defendant on all the charges against him.

16.10 Para 7.10 shows that the test to be applied is not the two part test from the Code.
      Rather it is a consideration of all the circumstances both as to evidence and the
      noted public interest criteria. These are reviewed below under the various sub­
      headings.

       Application of CPS Policy

16.11 The test of ‘clearly no case to answer’ can be said to be broadly similar in its
      application to the Galbraith Test37 which Archbold accepts as being applicable to
      the Magistrates’ Court:

              "(1) If there is no evidence that the crime alleged has been committed by the
              defendant there is no difficulty - the judge will stop the case. (2) The
              difficulty arises where there is some evidence but it is of a tenuous nature,
              for example, because of inherent weakness or because it is inconsistent with
              other evidence, (a) Where the judge concludes that the prosecution evidence,
              taken at its highest, is such that a jury properly directed could not properly


              R v Galbraith [1981] 73 Cr App R 124 CA referred to in Archbold 1998 at
              paras 4.294 to 297.

                                                                                         52
              convict on it, it is his duty, on a submission being made, to stop the case,
              (b) Where however the prosecution evidence is such that its strength or
              weakness depends on the view to be taken of a witness’s reliability, or other
              matters which are generally speaking within the province of the jury and
              where on one possible view of the facts there is evidence on which the jury
              could properly come to the conclusion that the defendant is guilty, then the
              judge should allow the matter to be tried by the jury" (per Lord Lane CJ).

       A Crown Court case, R v Shippey38, is often quoted to show that the requirement
       to take the prosecution evidence at its highest did not mean "picking out all the
       plums and leaving the duff behind". The judge said that it was necessary to make
       an assessment of the evidence as a whole.

16.12 However the use of the word "clearly" in our present test implies that we have to
      be satisfied (or perhaps in a stronger sense, ‘to be sure’) that there is no case to
      answer before taking over and discontinuing a private prosecution. It is submitted
      that it is a slightly lower standard than the prima facie test used in Galbraith. This
      can be seen as a parallel to the way in which we apply the evidential test from the
      Code, where we do not look for the same high standard of proof that a jury or bench
      of magistrates needs to find before it can convict. If it is considered that the case
      is finely balanced as to the merits then the scales should fall on the side of the
      private prosecutor.

16.13 The test from R v Adomako sets out the four essential elements of gross negligence.
      For the purpose of this review I accept the findings of previous courts and inquiries
      that the first three elements are sufficiently proved; that there was a duty of care by
      the police generally towards the deceased, that there was a breach of that duty, and
      the deaths of the victims then ensued. Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray were the two
      senior officers available to make decisions that would affect the events resulting in
      the death of the fans in the central pens. They were the representatives of the police
      force who were involved in the making of the decision that led to what was
      described as a "blunder of the first magnitude". The general duty of the police force
      as a whole was therefore visited upon them for their specific acts. There was a
      breach of that duty by them, as on an objective assessment of what happened they
      could have prevented the deaths by taking certain actions rather than omitting to act.

16.14 The private prosecutor and I have recently agreed as to what constitutes the alleged
      acts or omissions said to constitute gross negligence. I doubt that the defendants
      would take issue at the narrowing of the grounds. For the purposes of the main
      charges the prosecution say that while the decision to open gate C was a proper one,
      the omission of the two defendants in properly considering where the resultant
      inrush of fans would go and in not taking the necessary action in preventing
      crushing in pens known to be full, was the act of gross negligence.




              R v Shippey ( 1988) Crim L R 767, Turner J.

                                                                                          53
16.15 The fourth element from R v Adomako is whether the act complained of should be
      characterised as gross negligence and therefore a crime. It was held that this is
      supremely a question for the jury. As previously stated in R v Khan the appropriate
      course would be to leave to the jury the four questions posed based on the above
      principles where the allegation is of manslaughter by omission.

       Evidential Test: Manslaughter

16.16 In my view there is clearly evidence that the two officers were negligent. However
      it can at least be argued that their individual culpability differs because of their own
      particular responsibilities for the policing of the match. The evidence for and
      against a prosecution of the officers has been discussed in previous chapters but may
      be summarised in point form below.

       Mr Duckenfield

16.17 For Prosecution:

              While it can be said that both officers had a joint responsibility, in the
              circumstances of their respective duties in the control box, to take such
              action as was necessary to secure the safety of the fans and others, it must
              be accepted that it was Mr Duckenfield who had overall responsibility for the
              conduct of the policing at the match as well as an assumed command role
              within the control box itself. Lord Justice Taylor at para 282 of the Interim
              report said that it was Mr Duckenfield’s capacity to take decisions and to
              give orders that seemed to collapse; it was this officer who failed to give the
              necessary consequential orders or to exert any control when the disaster
              occurred.

       •      There was a lack of monitoring of the terraces by the police and in particular
              by this senior officer who had a direct eye-view of the central pens as well
              as by the use of the CCTV monitors.

              He failed to realise that there was serious overcrowding or potential
              overcrowding in the central pens prior to gate C being opened.

       •      He failed to consider the foreseeable consequences of allowing a large
              number of fans to enter the ground through gate C without supervision and
              direction.

       •      He failed to warn police officers on the concourse of the overcrowding in the
              central pens and of the gate being opened in order to relieve the crush
              outside. If such warning had been given those officers on the concourse
              would have had the opportunity to take the appropriate action as occurred in
              1988.




                                                                                           54
      •     He failed to direct police officers under his overall control to close off the
            access to the central tunnel in order to prevent a foreseeable crushing
            incident.

      •     He should have realised that the policy of "letting the fans find their own
            level" was not one to apply in the circumstances of this particular match.

16.18 Against Prosecution:

      •     Mr Duckenfield was newly promoted and was in a position where he had to
            depend on the experience of others (especially that of Mr Murray on whom
            he would have leant heavily) in advising him on the policing of this type of
            match. His general experience of policing football matches or of this
            particular stadium was not sufficient to prepare him for problems that had
            not been foreseen in the Operational Order for the match.

      •     Mr Duckenfield was dependent on an operational order that he had no part
            in preparing. It was a virtual copy of the previous year’s order which was
            seen as being satisfactory in the light of the perceived success by senior
            officers of their policing of that match. That there had been some foresight
            of possible crushing in the central pens by junior officers, resulting in the
            tunnel access being blocked, was not known to officers of the rank of
            Inspector or above and therefore did not feature in the considerations for the
            1989 game.

      •     Mr Duckenfield had emphasised at his pre match briefing that the safety of
            the spectators was of paramount importance, although the monitoring of the
            pens to that end was not specifically mentioned. He was entitled to depend
            on other officers under his command to react appropriately. Unfortunately
            some failed to react as they should have done.

      •     In the circumstances of his recent appointment Mr Duckenfield had little
             chance to fully familiarise himself with the detailed layout of the entire
             stadium, and in particular the entrances and exits at the Leppings Lane end.
             He could not be expected to have the knowledge of the ground’s layout that
             would be necessary to make the connection between the opening of gate C
             and the potential serious crushing in the centre pens resulting from the fans’
             use of the tunnel access.

      Mr Murray

16.19 For Prosecution:

      •     Regardless of Mr Duckenfield’s overall command of policing at the match,
             it was Mr Murray that had the experience of the layout of the ground, the
             previous semi-final match in 1988 and also of acting as the officer in charge
             of the Control Room. He had a duty to advise Mr Duckenfield of any
             circumstances within his knowledge that might affect that officer’s decisions.

                                                                                        55
              He failed to discharge that duty.

      •      There was a lack of monitoring of the terraces by the police and specifically
             by Mr Murray who had a direct-eye of the central pens as well as by use of
             the CCTV monitors.

      •      He failed to realise that there was serious overcrowding or potential
             overcrowding in the central pens prior to gate C being opened.

      •      He failed to consider the foreseeable consequences of allowing a large
             number of fans to enter the ground through gate C without supervision and
             direction.

      •      As the officer in charge of communications in the Control Room he failed
             to warn police officers on the concourse of the overcrowding in the central
             pens and of the gate being opened in order to relieve the crush. If such
             warning had been given those officers on the concourse would have had the
             opportunity to take appropriate action as occurred in 1988.

      •      He failed to direct police officers under his control to close off the access to
             the central tunnel in order to prevent a foreseeable crushing incident.

             He should have realised that the policy of "letting the fans find their own
             level" was not one to apply in the circumstances of this particular match.

16.20 Against Prosecution:

      •      Mr Murray was only acting in an advisory role when considering the
             decision to open gate C. This is as advised by Counsel at para 49 of their
             joint opinion of 1990. It was Mr Duckenfield’s responsibility alone for the
             serious error in failing to give any order to accommodate the influx. The
             officer saw his role as monitoring the event as a whole, being responsible for
             the reception and the transmission of all radio communications and as an
             adviser to Mr Duckenfield. Para 282 of the Interim Report appears to
             endorse this point of view.

      •      Mr Murray did attempt of his own volition to warn the Club Security Officer
             of the crushing outside prior to the opening of gate C but was unable to send
             a message on the radio due to temporary communication problems. By the
             time the communications were restored it was too late to control the tunnel
             access.

      •      Mr Murray did attempt to prompt his senior officer into making the decision
             as to the opening of gate C when time was of the essence in alleviating the
             crush outside.

16.21 The following factors are of general application and apply equally to both officers
      as mitigating against a prosecution:

                                                                                           56
       •      It was not surprising that the two senior officers did not notice that the
              central pens were "full" prior to the opening of the gate as overcrowding was
              not apparent to almost all other observers.

       •      At the time of the opening of gate C, the attention of both officers was on
              the obvious life threatening situation of the crush by the turnstiles. Their
              failure to take an all round view of this incident instead of a single minded
              concentration on the gate is perhaps understandable and should make them
              liable for negligence in civil law only. Their attention was focused on a
              known risk of serious injury or death outside the gate, to the prejudice of any
              regard of the possible risk inside the ground if the further correct action was
              not taken. What is obvious in hindsight was difficult to appreciate as the
              emergency was unrolling.

       •      Although the main cause of the disaster is placed at the door of the police
              generally, the individual actions of Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray form
              only a part of that liability. The congestion outside the turnstiles that led to
              gate C being opened had a number of causes that were for the most part
              outside the control of the two defendants. Other persons should take a
              greater share in the blame as was recognised by the scrutiny.

       •      There is no new evidence that might have affected the verdicts of the Inquest
              jury. They were not misled as a result of any alleged suppression of
              evidence by the police. They rejected the option of verdicts of unlawful
              killing based on the criminal standard of proof. Their verdicts were of
              accidental death on the balance of probabilities. Therefore it can be argued
              that the jury found that they had sufficient information before them to reject
              even a prima facie case of unlawful killing. If they had not then it is
              submitted that they would otherwise have brought open verdicts.

       Public Interest Circumstances for Manslaughter

16.22 While some might have a view that the prosecution by the HFSG is being
      undertaken for reasons of revenge, or a perverse desire to obtain ‘justice’ that
      allegedly is being denied them, the HFSG are properly taking the various legal
      channels open to them. That others may disagree is part of the judicial process. I
      recognise the considerable distress that members of the HFSG have suffered since
      the disaster, and do not consider that their private prosecution is either malicious or
      vexatious.

16.23 Delay is said to be a relevant factor. After 9 years the memories of witnesses may
      have faded or been coloured by what has happened since. However the allegations
      are extremely serious and on the basis of the large number of written statements
      taken at the time on each and every aspect of the disaster, I accept that those
      memories can be sufficiently refreshed to alleviate the problem.

16.24 There is no medical evidence which would justify serious consideration as a factor
      against prosecution.

                                                                                           57
         Misconduct in a Public Office

16.25 The evidential and public interest considerations are as above.

         Evidential Test: Perverting the Course of Justice

16.26 This is a new allegation which has not featured in previous reviews. The ‘lie’ about
      gate C being forced by the fans has been admitted by Mr Duckenfield but with a
      number of explanations (i) that he was not being deceitful but may have referred to
      an earlier time when the gate was briefly forced open, and (ii) he was in shock and
      wanted to collect his thoughts and assess the situation before communicating the
      truth. Lord Taylor may have been close to the truth when he gave his assessment
      that the officer could not face the enormity of the decision to open the gates and
      what happened afterwards: "He froze"39

16.27 I consider that in the circumstances the deliberate misdirection of the various
      witnesses, including his own Assistant Chief Constable, was conduct that might have
      had the tendency to pervert the course of public justice. That judicial proceedings
      were going to result from the disaster was not just a possibility it was a certainty40,
      and must have been within Mr Duckenfield’s contemplation. However the ‘lie’ had
      no impact on judicial proceedings except to bring vilification upon the officer.
      Further I have grave concern about the proof required to show that Mr Duckenfield
      intended to pervert the course of justice. There is no good and sufficient evidence
      that the officer was attempting a cover up of his own and other police actions at
      1515 on the day as victims were still dying on the field. Lord Taylor had the
      opportunity to observe Mr Duckenfield and the relevant witnesses on this point
      during his Inquiry. His conclusions were the result of those observations coupled
      with his vast experience. I find nothing in the evidence that would bring me to any
      other conclusion. Mr Duckenfield could not cope with the great stress he was put
      under, his reaction was out of character. He did not have the intent necessary so as
      to have a realistic prospect of conviction on this allegation. For that reason I do not
      go to consider the public interest test from the Code. However policy guidelines are
      that this offence is reserved for the more serious cases of interference with the
      course of justice rather than where proceedings are at an early stage (or had not
      started), and there was little impact on them.

16.28 The above argument applies equally to the consideration of the test for taking over
      the case in order to discontinue it, both as regards the quality of the evidence and
      also the stated policy on the public interest (where those two matters should be
      applied together).




    39
               See page 24 of this review.
    40
               See R v Rafique at page 10 o f this review.

                                                                                          58
       The Interests of Justice

16.29 I have found no factors that would affect any of the CPS recommendations as being
      clearly likely to damage the interests of justice. None of the stated examples in para
      7.10 of Volume 1 of the CPS Prosecution Manual apply. Although disclosure may
      involve voluminous material, it should not pose any real difficulty. Documents
      subject to claims of public interest immunity or legal privilege can be dealt with
      under the normal rules applicable to third party disclosure.




                                                                                         59
17.    RECOMMENDATIONS

       Mr Duckenfield

17.1   On the charges of manslaughter and misconduct in a public office I find that while
       there is both insufficient evidence for a realistic prospect of conviction and for a
       prima facie case (on the balance of probabilities), there is some evidence of
       negligence that can be put before a jury. I am unable to say that there is clearly no
       case to answer. In coming to this opinion I have taken into account not only the
       verdicts of the jury but also the Coroner’s summing up and his consideration that
       there was some evidence to go before the jury on the question of unlawful killings.

       Recommendation: That the private prosecution be allowed to continue on these
       three charges.

17.2   As regards the PCOJ, this charge adds little to the private prosecutor’s case. In my
       opinion there is clearly no case to answer as well as there being valid public interest
       factors against this matter proceeding. There is no evidence of the required intent
       and I do not consider that in the circumstances of the timing of the ‘lie’ being
       within minutes of the deaths in the pens that it can be inferred that the officer had
       then formed such intent. There is no evidence that the subsequent investigation was
       in any way imperilled. The ‘lie’ only brought vilification from the media and the
       public upon the officer and his police force.

       Recommendation: That this part of the proceedings be taken over and then
       discontinued.

       Mr Murray

17.3   I consider that the individual responsibility of this officer for the omission to act
       after gate C was opened is less than that of Mr Duckenfield. Mr Murray deferred
       to his superior for the making of the crucial decision, although he quite properly
       prompted him when delay set in. While I note Lord Taylor’s comments about the
       joint misjudgment by the two officers concerning the buildup of fans at the
       turnstiles, he appears then to place the blame for the failure to give orders
       consequential to the opening of the gate at the feet of Mr Duckenfield. I also
       appreciate that in 1990 our two Counsel were of the opinion that the sole blame for
       the omission to act after the gate was opened lies with Mr Duckenfield. However
        it was Mr Murray who had the most recent and extensive knowledge of the ground
        and he failed to pass on the benefit of his experience because he too was distracted
       by the serious incident outside. Even though the evidence is weaker against this
        officer than against his superior and the balancing act is therefore more difficult, I
        am still unable to say that there is ‘clearly no case to answer’. Where the decision
        is as close as this then it is my submission that the benefit must fall to the
        prosecutor.

       Recommendation: That the private prosecution be allowed to continue on these
       three charges.

                                                                                           60
       Disclosure

17.4   The disclosure of material'in our possession should normally follow in accordance
       with our stated policy.    The South Yorkshire Police are likely to require advice
       based on the voluntarydisclosure that we may decide to give. A number of the
       documents in this case that would usually attract public interest immunity or legal
       privilege have already been divulged in whole or part.It will be necessary to
       consider the issues involved and the relevance of the information and opinion
       contained within those documents. The HFSG wish to obtain a copy of the joint
       opinion as well as the various CPS reports in the case. When appropriate our
       material may be inspected at York by prior arrangement.




                                                                                      61
18.    CONCLUSIONS

18.1   My review of all the evidence and representations has caused me some difficulty as
       I find that there is a fine balance between the arguments for and against. It is a
       matter of judgement as to whether or not there is clearly no case to answer (in
       conjunction with the public interest factors) on the issue of gross negligence. I
       accept that another reviewing lawyer could come to a different, although still
       justifiable, decision. It may be that the Director has certain policy views that would
       affect his decision.

18.2   The potential ramifications of the various decision options are:

       (i)     Decision to take over and discontinue the case in its entirety: The HFSG will
               take the matter to judicial review of the CPS decision.

       (ii)    Decision to let the private prosecution proceed in its entirety: The defendants
               are unlikely to proceed by way of judicial review of the CPS decision. They
               have already intimated that they are prepared to put forward abuse of process
               arguments to the Magistrates’ Court. A committal will be strongly contested,
               and if my arguments are correct will fail.

       (iii)   Decision to accept the review recommendations: There would be pressure on
               the HFSG to decide between continuing with the remaining charges or
               accepting delay while they go to the Divisional Court. Those representing
               Mr Duckenfield would have more fuel for their abuse of process arguments
               on a fair trial.

18.3   Whatever our decision may be, if the eventual proceedings are not favourable to the
       HFSG they are most likely to take further action, either by way of their
       representations that all previous judicial proceedings are invalid because of an
       alleged conspiracy by the police to suppress evidence, or by use of the European
       Convention on Human Rights.




George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
CPS Central Casework

27 October 1998




                                                                                           62
  HILLSBOROUGH REPORT




       APPENDIX 1




1990 BRIEFING NOTE FOR THE
     ATTORNEY GENERAL
ATTORNEY GENERAL

               Background Note: Hillsborough Disaster


1.      On the 15th April 1989 at the Hillsborough stadium,
        Sheffield 95 people died and over 400 were injured due to
        gross overcrowding and crushing in the two pens behind
        the goal at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

2.      A public enquiry headed by Lord Justice Taylor produced
        an interim report in August 1989.  The West Midlands
        Police assisted in the preparation of the report and
        later conducted a criminal investigation which was
        requested by the D.P.P. The criminal investigation was
        extensive producing bulky documentation and a full
        transcript of the evidence given at the enquiry.   The
        police investigation was meticulous.

3.      A copy of Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report and a copy
        of Counsel's opinion by Gareth Williams Q.C. and Peter
        Birts Q.C. are attached.  It would be useful to refer to
        the plans at Appendix 1 and Appendix 4 of the report.


Facts

4.      There is little, if any, dispute as to what actually
        happened.Chief Superintendent Duckenfield was the police
        officer responsible for policing the match.

5.      At 2.5 2 pm (8 minutes before kick-off) Duckenfield
        ordered one of the exit gates, Gate C, at the Leppings
        Lane end to be opened. This was to relieve massive
        overcrowding and crushing at the turnstiles caused by a
        build up of supporters arriving after 2.30 pm.   In the
        five minutes after the gate was opened 2000 supporters
        entered the ground and went into a tunnel under the west
        stand which gave access only to the central pens 3 and 4.
        Those pens were already full.   There was no controlled
        way in which supporters were allowed in to the pens.    The
        additional influx caused intense pressure and resulted in
        the collapse of a crush barrier 124A near the front of
        pen 3. Many died from suffocation and crushing and some
        were trampled on. Perimeter gates were not opened by the
        police partly because of orders not to do so without
        permission and partly because officers did not appreciate
        the severity of what was occurring initially.   Later when
        the emergency was appreciated the small size and number
        of the gates made evacuation extremely difficult.

6.      The build up of fans outside the ground was due to the
        geography of the turnstiles, their marking and numbers
        and to a loss of police control of supporters outside
        becoming keen to get inside before the kick-off.
7.    The three major causal factors were:-

      i.   the layout of the ground
      ii. the opening of the exit gate (gate C)
      iii. the build up outside the ground

Layout of the Ground

8.    The club were advised by a structural engineer, Dr
      Eastwood.  The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 required
      expert advice to obtain a safety certificate under the
      Act from the local council.  Dr Eastwood advised
      additional crush barriers, these were installed in 1979.
      A certificate was granted.

9.    The safety certificate did not specify maximum numbers
      for the pens.  This, with turnstile monitoring of
      numbers, would have limited entrance to the pens.

10.   It was the policy of the police at semi-finals to allow
      movement of supporters between pens before the kick-off
      after which the radial gates would be closed and locked.
      Hence without a control on the numbers entering the
      tunnel access pens 3 and 4 were liable to become grossly
      overcrowded.  The police had accepted responsibility for
      monitoring the pens and their policy of "letting the fans
      find their own level" was severely criticized by Taylor.

11.   The exit gate C, opened following Duckenfield's
      instruction, is opposite the tunnel.  No steps were taken
      to cordon off the tunnel or divert the fans around the
      sides of the West stand.  The supporters had nowhere to
      go but the already crowded pens 3 and 4.

12.   At 3.04 pm a surge forward in pen 3 caused the crush
      barrier 124A to break.  This appears to have been a major
      factor in the deaths since there were far fewer deaths in
      pen 4 where no barrier collapsed.  Barrier number 144 had
      been removed in 1986, its absence meant there was no
      retarding structure as fans emerged from the tunnel into
      pen 3. There was unbroken diagonal pressure from the
      mouth of the tunnel down to barrier 124A.  the collapse
      of barrier 124A was a major factor in the cause of the
      deaths.  Barrier 124A was slightly corroded but it had
      been tested in July 1988 and had passed loading tests
      specified in the Government's Green Guide.  Taylor found
      that corrosion played a part in the collapse but the
      effective cause was the excessive unanticipated pressure
      exerted at the time of the forward surge.

13.   The crushing in pens 3 and 4 was not recognised by police
      either in the control box or on the perimeter of the
      pitch.  Even supporters nearby, broadcasters and stewards
      were not immediately aware.

14.   Even after the crush, and until 3.06 pm, the main police
      concern was to prevent a pitch invasion..
The build up outside the Ground

15.   The opening of gate C which precipitated the disaster was
      made necessary by the massive build up of supporters at
      the Leppings Lane turnstiles between 2.30 and 2.50 pm.
      As kick-off time approached the crushing increased.    The
      police lost control of the crowd.  The crush became
      unmanageable, many feared for their lives.  The kick-Qff
      was not postponed.  This course was only to be taken if
      there was a major cause of delay eg. a motorway accident
      or fog. Taylor concluded that the kick-off should have
      been postponed.

16.   There was considerable evidence that people would be
      killed if gate C was not opened and that Duckenfield had
      no alternative but to do so.  That being so neither
      Duckenfield nor other officers took any steps to deal
      with the consequences of opening the gat e. The tunnel
      was not closed off even though such action had been taken
      by the police in 1988.  Duckenfield did order the influx
      at gate A, which had been opened earlier, to be
      monitored.  His omission to do so at gate C was said by
      Taylor to be "a blunder of the first magnitude".  This
      was the immediate cause of the crushing in pens 3 and 4.
      It was not the sole cause.

17.   The layout of the turnstiles, inadequate space for the
      formation of orderly queues and the limited extent of the
      waiting area combined with poor designation and marking
      of turnstiles contributed to slow turnstile operation.

18.   There were only 7 turnstiles to admit 10,100 fans at the
      other end of the ground there were 60 turnstiles to admit
      29,800. Taylor concluded that the police and club should
      have foreseen potential queuing and waiting to admit
      fans.

19.   Many supporters arrived after 2.30 pm.   Tickets advised
      arriving 15 minutes before kick-off. Some arrived
      without tickets. The evidence shows many had been
      drinking.   Taylor concluded the majority had not been
      affected by drink.   Unruliness contributed to the pushing
      effect.   This contributed to the loss of control by the
      police.

20.   The main factor in the police loss of control was
      ineffective strategy planning for the large number of
      arrivals. Taylor concluded that by controlling the fans
      and postponing the kick-off gate C could have remained
      closed.

Responsibilities

21.   The layout of the ground was the responsibility of the
      Club, Eastwood, the Council and the police.  No one
      foresaw that up to 2000 fans would ever be allowed to
      enter pens 3 and 4 when they were already overcrowded.
      No one anticipated gate 3 being opened or the crushing
      outside the ground.  The police must take the main
      responsibility for letting the fans "find their own
      level", however, the Club must share responsibility for
      the way in which supporters were allowed to fill the pens
      at semi-finals.

22.   The opening of gate C was Duckenfield's responsibility.
      In the circumstances his decision was correct. His
      failure was to give no order to deal with the sudden
      influx of fans.  Had the tunnel been cordoned off the'
      disaster would almost certainly have been averted.

23.   The layout of the turnstiles, their numbers and marking
      are primarily matters for the police and the Club, but
      the Council have a partial responsibility to ensure safe
      access to the ground.

Criminal Offences

24.   The two offences would be Manslaughter and Culpable
      Misfeasance.  These potential offences were considered
      against all parties, i e . the club, the Council, the
      police and the structural engineers (Mr Eastwood).

The Club

25.   The Club's responsibility for the layout and alterations
      inside the ground and for the layout of the turnstiles is
      where any potential liability exists.  It is clear that
      these were not the sole, or even the major causes and
      that any actions and omissions by the club only partly
      contributed to the crushing and deaths. The Club not
      only relied on its own consultant engineer Dr Eastwood
      but it responded to the suggestions and advice of the
      police in important matters.

26.   There is insufficient evidence to establish the actus
      reus of manslaughter against the Club. Additionally the
      evidence does not show either the recklessness or gross
      negligence required for the manslaughter offence.
Eastwood and Partners

27.   Eastwood's advice formed only part of the events that
      lead tot he structural condition at the groujid. It could
      not be said that his advice caused the deaths. In fact
      some of his advice, not acted on for financial reasons,
      may have lead to maximum limits being set for pens 3 and
      4.

28.   Again there is insufficient for the actus reus of
      manslaughter nor can the required recklessness or
      negligence be established against Eastwood or his firm.

The Council

29.   The Council is responsible for the safety certificate and
      compliance with the Green Guide.  There were minor errors
      on the council's part but these only contributed in part
      to the ground conditions.   These are too remote to
      amount to the actus reus of manslaughter.  Again there is
      no evidence of recklessness or gross negligence.

The Police

30.   It is agreed that the main responsibility for the
      disaster must rest with the police.   They have partial
      responsibility for the ground layout.   They were
      responsible for the "find their own level" policy with
      the supporters and also for supervising the Leppings Lane
      turnstiles.  The difficulties of large scale admission to
      the ground should have been foreseen.   However, the
      police failures occurred as part of a complex sequence of
      events, often outside the control of the police.   The
      difficulties at Leppings Lane were partly geographical
      and resulted largely in the arrival of vast numbers of
      supporters after 2.30 pm.  Those matters were beyond
      police control.  Unruly behaviour by a minority created
      problems.

31.   Responsibility for the failure to postpone the kick-off
      and to cordon off the access tunnel is confined to
      Duckenfield.   As an organisation the police cannot be
      said to have caused the deaths by their strategy and
      operational shortcomings.   Whilst there were errors of
      judgement/ and practice there is no evidence that the
      police acted recklessly or in a grossly negligent manner
      as an organisation.

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield

32.   The failure to cordon off the access tunnel and not to
      postpone the kick-off were bad errors of judgement.  They
      were his ultimate responsibility.  He failed to notice
      the overcrowding in pens 3 and 4. He was recently
      promoted and had little experience for this semi-final
      match.  His slowness to respond to what was happening was
      a result of is lack of experience.
33.   His failures significantly contributed to the crowd
      pressure which caused the crushing and collapse of
      barrier 124A.  Had' Duckenfield the requisite intention to
      support a charge of manslaughter? Clearly there was no
      unlawful or dangerous act on his part.   In failing to
      postpone the kick-off or order closure of the tunnel
      after opening gate C did he do an act which created an
      obvious and serious risk of causing personal injury
      either not giving thought to the possibility of such risk
      or having recognised that there was some risk involved
      nevertheless gone ahead and taken it?

34.   There are difficulties in proving that he intended to do
      an act which created an obvious and serious risk of
      causing personal injury.  The Director and Counsel
      concluded that it was not an obvious risk at the time.
      It is easy with hindsight to judge, but there must be a
      grave doubt as to whether the omissions created a risk
      which was obvious to anyone on the ground at the time.

35.   The Director concluded that there was insufficient
      evidence under the recklessness head of manslaughter
      against Duckenfield.  Nor was there evidence that he was
      grossly negligent in his failures to act.

36.   Counsel and the Director concluded that there was no
      evidence that Duckenfield was wilfully neglectful of his
      duty or was culpable so have to committed the offence of
      Culpable Malfeasance by a public official.

Conclusions

37.   The Director's decision not to issue proceedings was
      reached solely on the basis of an insufficiency of
      evidence to prove any criminal offence against any
      individual or body corporate ie. the City Council, the
      Police, the Engineers.   The decision was reached in
      accordance with the Director's code for Crown
      Prosecutors.  The Public Interest factor was not one
      which came into play as the evidential sufficiency
      criterium had not been established in respect of any
      potential defendant.   Full consideration was given to the
      possibility of the proseuction of each of the bodies
      involved despite their corporate status.

38.   The disaster was caused not by one single error or
      failure but by the combined effect of a series of
      mistakes, misjudgments and poor decisions, made by groups
      of people both over a period of time and by individuals
      on the day of the disaster.

Coroner's Inquests

39.   The Inquests began after the disaster and were adjourned
      when the Director requested a criminal investigation.
      The Coroner is obliged to adjourn an inquest when the
      Director makes such a request under the Coroner's Rules.
                                 *7.


      Once the Coroner has received notification that the
      Director has decided not to issue criminal proceedings
      (or after such proceedings have concluded) the Coroner
      may resume the Inquest hearing.  The Hillsborough Inquest
      recently recommenced in November 1990.  The latest
      estimate is that the Inquests will continue hearing
      evidence and are likely to conclude in March 1991.

40.   The point made by Kenneth Hind MP about the matter being
      forgotten if action is not taken against those
      responsible can be answered by pointing to the detailed
      interim and final report of the Public Inquiry conducted
      by Lord Justice Taylor, the civil proceedings at which
      the police admitted liability and the fact that
      disciplinary action is being considered by the Police
      Complaints Authority against various officers.

41.   The Coroner's jury may be influenced by the publicity
      surrounding the Director's decision.  The criminal
      investigation and any prosecution must take precedence
      over the Coroner's Inquisitorial hearing where no
      individual can be held responsible.  The Public Inquiry
      itself has been widely reported and such publicity can
      also be said to influence the jury's conclusions.
 HILLSBOROUGH REPORT




       APPENDIX 2




 SCHEDULE OF MATERIAL
CONSIDERED IN 1998 REVIEW
                         HILLSBOROUGH REPORT

      SCHEDULE OF MATERIAL CONSIDERED IN THE 1998 REVIEW



Number    Description of Item

1.        Taylor Inquiry Interim Report

2:        Taylor Inquiry Final Report

3.        Inquiry Transcripts:          Evidence of Duckenfield, Murray & others

4.        West Midlands PoliceInterim Report 2

5.        West Midlands Police Report:        Part I       Introduction
                                              Part II      Statements & documents
                                              Part VII     Report conclusions
                                              Appendices    Transcripts of interviews

6.        Joint Opinion of Counsel (1990)

7.        Coroner’s Summing Up

8.        Inquest Transcripts:                Evidence of Duckenfield,       Murray,
                                              Kelly and Jackson

9.        Judgement of the Divisional Court

10.       HFSG Files and Representations (1997)

11.       CPS Review Report (1997)

12.       Report of the Scrutiny

13.       HFSG Files and Representations (1998)

14.       Defence Representations
                                m
                                CPS




Crown Prosecution Service   •   Working in the interests of justice
                          THE
                    HILLSBOROUGH
                        REPORT

                                  1998




Prepared at CPS Central Casework, York
                        HILLSBOROUGH REPORT

LIST OF CONTENTS                                                    Page


Chapter 1     The Background                                        2-3

Chapter 2     The Private Prosecution                               4-5

Chapter 3     Charges                                               6-7

Chapter 4     The Law                                              8-10

Chapter 5     CPS Policy                                          11-13

Chapter 6     The Taylor Inquiry & initial police investigation   14-24

Chapter 7     The Criminal Investigation                          25-27

Chapter 8     CPS Review of 1990                                  28-31

Chapter 9     The Inquests                                        32-35

Chapter 10    The Attorney General & Judicial Review                 36

Chapter 11    The New Evidence                                       37

Chapter 12    CPS Review of 1997                                     38

Chapter 13    The Scrutiny                                        39-42

Chapter 14    The HFSG Representations                            43-47

Chapter 15    The Defence Representations                         48-49

Chapter 16    Key Considerations for the CPS Review               50-57

Chapter 17    Recommendations                                        58

Chapter 18    Conclusions                                            59



Appendix 1    1990 Briefing Note for the Attorney General

Appendix 2    Schedule of material considered in 1998 Review



                                                                      1
1.    THE BACKGROUND

1.1   While the main facts of the Hillsborough Disaster in 1989 may be familiar to the
      reader, the more detailed background note which was prepared for the Attorney
      General in 1990 is attached at Appendix 1.

1.2   The relevant history of the various judicial inquiries and hearings will be dealt with
      comprehensively in later chapters. However in brief, following the Taylor Inquiry
      the South Yorkshire Police accepted that they (with others) had civil liability for the
      negligence of some of their police officers involved in the events of 15 April 1989.
      The Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police had assisted the Taylor Inquiry
      in the initial enquiries and in the taking of statements from the many witnesses.

1.3   The then Director of PublkfProsecutions considered the recommendations contained
      within Lord Justice Taylor’s Interim Report and asked the South Yorkshire Police
      to conduct a full criminal erttjuiry. As the West Midlands Police had been appointed
      to conduct the initial investigation, the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
      requested that they also conduct the criminal investigation as being an independent
      investigating force. This was agreed and in 1990 a report was supplied by the West
      Midlands Police to the Director who then asked two leading counsel for a joint
      advice as to the merits-, of a criminal prosecution against any organisations or
      individuals. Counsels’ view was that there was no sufficient evidence to support
      criminal proceedingV-tfi any kind against either the police or civilians whether as
      individuals or as an organisation. The Director was in agreement with this advice
      and a Press Release released on his behalf stated that there was "insufficient
      evidence to justify the institution of proceedings against any officer in the South
      Yorkshire Police Force or any other person for any offence".

1.4   The Coroi/erVmquests, which had been adjourned pending the CPS decision, were
      resumed, nn early 1991 verdicts of accidental death were returned. In 1992 an
      application for judicial review of the Inquests was refused and the Divisional Court
      held that the inquisition was correctly completed and that the Coroner’s direction to
      the jury was "impeccable".

1.5   There the matter rested until in December 1996 when a drama documentary of the
      disaster was shown on national television. It specifically mentioned allegations of
      a cover-up by the police re their knowledge of crowd density in the two central
      Leppings Lane terrace pens where 96 people died. The Home Secretary became
      involved by way of an Adjournment Debate in the House and requested the
      assistance of the South Yorkshire Police in answering ten questions concerning the
      disaster. In January 1997 the CPS asked for a preliminary briefing from the police
      on the impact of any new material facts.

1.6   In March 1997 the Hillsborough Family Support Group (HFSG) sent to the Director
       a large volume of papers concerning what was said to be fresh evidence. In their
       supporting letter the HFSG said that the pre-production research for the television
       programme and its subsequent airing had brought to light this fresh evidence and/or
       new witnesses proving that suppression of evidence, perjury and conspiracy to

                                                                                            2
      pervert the course of justice featured in the legal process that followed the disaster.
      A number of letters had also been received from families of some of the deceased
      requesting a re-examination of the circumstances of the tragic events.

1.7   Following consultation between the CPS, the LSLO and the Home Office it was
      decided that while each of the various Government Departments should form their
      own judgement in relation to the discharge of their own duties, there would be a
      co-ordinated response to the HFSG representations.

1.8   The report of the CPS Review was submitted to the Director via the Chief Crown
      Prosecutor for Central Casework in early May 1997. It concluded that there was no
      sufficient evidence on allegations of suppression of either video or medical evidence.
      Accordingly there were no grounds for the CPS to recommend to the Home Office
      that there should be further investigation of criminal allegations against the police
      or other persons. In June 1997, in a statement to the House, the Home Secretary
      said that his department, the Attorney General and the CPS had carefully considered
      the evidence recently put forward and had been unable to find anything which would
      have materially affected the outcome of any of the investigations into the disaster.

1.9    He then appointed Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to conduct a scrutiny into whether there
      was any fresh evidence which might have a bearing on the various legal procedures
      and decisions that had been taken. The resulting scrutiny report is a very detailed
      review of both old and new evidence and concludes that nothing the judge was
      asked to consider added anything significant to the evidence available to Lord
      Taylor’s Inquiry or to the Inquests. In particular there was no material which should
      be put before the Director which might cause her to reconsider the decision already
      taken.

1.10 ^Previously there had been an intimation that if the HFSG did not receive the
     °ju sti(^ y to which they felt they were entitled, then they would be taking out a
      private prosecution. The next chapter describes how this occurred.




                                                                                            3
2.     THE PRIVATE PROSECUTION

2.1    On 26 June 1998 Ann Adlington, a solicitor acting on behalf of the HFSG, laid
       informations before South Sefton Magistrates’ Court on Merseyside. They alleged
       that ex Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, who had been in overall control of the
       policing at the football match had:

               1.     Unlawfully killed John Alfred Anderson
               2.     Unlawfully killed James Gary Aspinall
               3.     Wilfully neglected to perform a public duty
               4.     Perverted the course of justice by lying about the circumstances in
                       which Gate C at the Football Stadium became open.

2.2    It was also alleged that ex Superintendent Murray, who was the senior officer in
       charge of the policing of the groundJtself, h a d ^ c o r^ \tt0 th e \ first three offences   .
       above.|y?^p<Sj^pf\hg^if’^                 atta6M ® -at^p^rim jM ^rhe HFSG have not
       been specific in their correspondence to datev^sto theepd^nce upon which they
       rely for the first three allegations, except to say that the third matter (Misconduct in
       a Public Office) is based on the same circumstances as the two manslaughter
       charges.                                                   (r@           (s (r?               Wy

       The Iff SG then requested disclosure of all the material in CPS possession including
       police reports and counse(?)advices. Solicitors for the two defendants were prompt
       in asking us to take over the prosecution in order to discontinue it. I was appointed
       to review the evidence in order to make appropriate recommendations to the Chief
       Crown Prosecutor of Central Casework and to the Director as to what action, if any,
       should be taken by the CPS.

       There was then animated and at times heated discussions between the legal
       representatives for the prosecutor and the        as to the legality of laying
       informations in a commission area that              er the offences allegedly
               ce or the defendaQt3\ reside-              e informations were laid
      y&gaio Leeds Magistrates’ JZourt (within which   ission area Mr Murray now
                and were retumal     to 20 AugusTT9

       During July the CPS policy on voluntary disclosure and review of private
       prosecutions where we have been asked to take over in order to discontinue, was
       promulgated to all the parties. They were informed that the issue of voluntary
       disclosure would not be considered by the CPS until the review decision had been
       made. The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police requested advice on
       disclosure under the provisions of section 3(2) of the Prosecution of Offences Act
       1985. He was concerned about the vast amount of potential disclosure. He was
       advised of our present policy and it was suggested that he might wish to follow that.
       He considered that he should do so.

2.6    Leeds MagistralgsyCourt were informed of the CPS review and that the defendants’
       solicitors would likely require an adjournment of the case so that this review could
       be completed and either the case be discontinued or for voluntary disclosure to be

                                                                                                4
      given to all parties. On 20 August the case was adjourned to 30 October with a
      provisional date for an old style committal set for 7 to 17 December 1998.

2.7   The HFSG are saying that the new information now available to them undermines
      the inquest verdicts of accidental death, and calls into question the validity of all the
      previous investigations. In particular they point out that:

      •     The alleged independence of the West Midlands Police was a sham;

      •     the significance of the statements disclosed in the course of the scrutiny
             discloses manipulation of the evidence to the past benefit of the defendants
             and the South Yorkshire Police in general;

      •     the DPP was not given full and proper disclosure for the purposes of the
             CPS review in 1990;

      •     the scrutiny report has conclusions that are seriously wrong about the edited
             statements and therefore caution should be employed in accepting facts set
             out in that report.

2.8   The submissions made in this latest opinion from theCflFSG counsel are far more
      wide reaching than the charges before the Magistrates’ Court and indeed go to the
      very heart of the validity of all previous judicial and'dim inal investigations.




                                                                                              5
3.        CHARGES

3.1      In his opinion of 24 September 1998, Alun Jones QC, who acts for the HFSG, has
          said that "...the Taylor findings in themselves amount almost to a prima facie case
          of manslaughter by gross negligence and of misfeasance. The decision to open the
          gates without tgking steps to divert the oncoming spectators was/a ‘blunder of the
          first magnituc|e\)and was an immediate (and therefore substantiafy-cause of death.
          The decision was taken by Duckenfield with the agreement or acquiescence of
          Murray." He also says that the basis of the charges of misfeasance and attempting
          to pervert the course of justice (PCOJ) is clear from the Taylor Interim Report and
          the information and submissions made at Leeds. The PCOJ allegation is based on
          the argument that the "disgraceful lie" was an obvious attempt to impede inquiries
          and to suppress the truth.

3.2.      The charges of manslaughter ap<fr^iscond^^are ntot specific as to the circumstances
        /giving rise to these allegations. Hal&assrte Lhave heen informed by Ann Adlington,
      /   a solicitor acting for the HjjFSG that tnear paggx-re contained within their counsel’s
          opinion of 24.9.98. In whiekxase the^gmSsnegligence alleged must be the failure
          to divert the fans after the opening of gate C. What the Taylor Report described as
          a "blunder of the first magnitude". The CPS review should therefore be based on
          this specific ground rather than the other innumerable allegations of negligence,
          many of which can be laid at the foot of the other parties criticised in the Taylor
          Report and were subject to successful civil claims for damages. In a recent
          telephone conversation, Ms Adlington has confirmed that the relevant circumstances
          concern the failure by the defendants to close off the access tunnel to the central
         pens once gate C was opened by the police.

3.3      However, the HFSG in their letter of 13 August enclose what is a provisional
         committal bundle containing the submissions made by Alun Jones QC in the laying
         of the informations at Leeds Magistrates’ Court. Here it is said that the facts set out
         in chapters 1 to 5, 9 to 11, and 16 of the Taylor Report form the basis of the
         allegations. Chapter 9 covers the lack of effective monitoring on the terraces,
         chapter 10 is about the build up at the turnstiles, chapter 11 is on the "blunder on
         opening the gates" and chapter 16 gives a brief summary of the causes. The causes
         of the gross overcrowding and hence the disaster were said to be fourfold.

          •      The immediate cause was the failure to cut off the access to the already
                 overfull centre pens when gate C was opened.

          •      The pens were overfull because, as regards the police, no attempt was made
                 to control the entry of fans into the individual pens numerically and there
                 was no effective visual monitoring of crowd density.

          •      It was not the police responsibility that no safe maximum capacities had been
                  laid down for the pens. Neither was it their responsibility that the layout of
                  the barriers within the pens afforded less protection than it should or that the
                  eventual rescue efforts were retarded by the type of exit gates leading from
                  the pens onto the pitch. However there was a lack of leadership involved in
       the early stages of the rescue effort.

•      The need to open gate C was due to the dangerous congestion at the
       turnstiles. This was the fault of both the Club and the police in not
       foreseeing, as they should have done, that large numbers of fans might arrive
       at once. Both the police Operational Order and their tactics failed to provide


This review will therefore consider the level of negligence to be attributed to the
police
4.    THE LAW

      Involuntary M anslaughter by Gross Negligence

4.1   Before 1982 the ‘Bateman Test’1 was used to define the degree of negligence
      required to be a sufficient basis of liability for manslaughter:

             "... the facts must be such that, in the opinion of the jury, the negligence of
             the accused went beyond a mere matter of compensation between subjects
             and showed such disregard for the life and safety of others as to amount to
             a crime against the State and conduct deserving punishment."

      In 1937 an element of ‘recklessness’ was imported into the test2 when it was said
      that in order to summarise the very high degree of negligence required, the word
      ‘reckless’ most nearly covered the case. Two authoritative House of Lords decisions
      in 1982 on the meaning of recklessness3 appeared to confirm that the test was of
      recklessness rather than gross negligence. However in 1989 there was still some
      uncertainty as to whether or not gross negligence continued to exist as a head of
      liability.

4.2   The decision in R. v. Adomako [1995] 1 AC 171 has clarified the law considerably.
      The House of Lords held that the Bateman/Andrews test was of general application
      and there was therefore an immediate reversion from Lawrence recklessness to gross
      negligence. Lord Mackay LC set out the essentials of gross negligence:

             A duty of care towards a victim based on the ordinary principles of the law
             of negligence; and

             a breach of that duty;

             which caused the death of the victim; and

             if so should the act be characterised as gross negligence and therefore a
             crime4.




             Laid down by Lord Hewart CJ in Bateman [1925] 19 Cr App R at pp. 11-12.

             Judgement of Lord Atkin in Andrews v DPP [1937] AC 576 at p. 583.

             MPC v Caldwell [1982] AC 341 and Lawrence [1982] AC 510

             At page 187 Lord Mackay says "...the jury must go on to consider whether
             that breach of duty should be characterised as gross negligence and therefore
             as a crime. This will depend on the seriousness of the breach of duty
             committed by the defendant in all the circumstances in which the defendant
             was placed when it occurred. M
      He said that ”... essence of the matter which is supremely a jury question is whether,
      having regard to the risk of death involved, the conduct of the defendant was so bad
      in all the circumstances as to amount in their judgement to a criminal act or
      omission." The Court of Appeal in R v Khan and another [1998]5 confirmed that
      the appropriate course would be to leave to the jury the four questions posed based
      on the above principles where the allegation is of manslaughter by omission.

      Misconduct in a Public Office

4.3   This previously little used common law offence is now being prosecuted more often.
      Until the case of R v Dytham [1979]6 it was considered that the offence required
      either malfeasance or misfeasance and was restricted to corruption or dishonesty.
      That case, which concerned a police officer, established that there was an offence
      of a public officer wilfully neglecting to perform a duty that he was bound to
      perform by common law or statute. The neglect had to be wilful and not merely
      inadvertent and had to be culpable in the sense of being without reasonable excuse
      or justification. The element of culpability had to be of such a degree that the
      misconduct impugned was calculated to injure the public interest so as to call for
      condemnation and punishment and it was for the jury to decide whether the evidence
      revealed the necessary culpability.

      Perverting the Course of Public Justice

4.4   This common law offence is committed when a person or persons acts or embarks
      upon a course of conduct, which has a tendency to, and is intended to pervert the
      course of public justice7. A positive act is required. Inaction is insufficient to
      constitute the offence8. Archbold gives a number of examples of that conduct
      which is capable of amounting to the offence and in particular where a person
      conceals the commission of an offence, even though no proceedings in respect of
      it are pending or have commenced.

4.5   To establish a tendency or a possibility to pervert the prosecution does not have to
      prove that the tendency or possibility in fact materialised; there must be a possibility
      that what the accused has done, without more, might lead to injustice. Proof of the
      accused’ intent is also required.




             R v Khan and another [1998] Independent Law Report, 25 March 1998

             R v Dytham [1979] 69 Cr App R 387, the judgement of the Courtof Appeal
             being given by Lord Widgery CJ.

             R v Vreones [1891] 1 QB 360.

             R v Headley [1995] Crim L R 757 CA.

                                                                                             9
4.6        The Court of Appeal has held9 that in order to lay the charge a course of justice
            must have been embarked upon in the sense that proceedings of some kind are in
            being or imminent, or investigations which could or might bring proceedings about
            are in progress. In particular the Court of Appeal had well in mind that:

                   "... conduct which relates to judicial proceedings, civil or criminal, whether
                   or not they have yet been instituted but which are within the contemplation
                   of the wrong-doer whose conduct was designed to affect the outcome of
                   them. That conduct includes giving false information to the police with the
                   object of among other things putting the police on a false trail..."

4.7        In R v Rafique [1993]10 the Court of Appeal said that if an intention to pervert the
            course of justice in relation to the matter was proved, the conduct had the same
            quality whether performed before the matter was investigated, or even discovered,
            as it would have had at a later stage. In the particular case they said that it had been
            open to the jury to conclude that the possibility of judicial proceedings must have
            been within the contemplation of the appellants; an act had occurred which was
            likely to lead to a charge in judicial proceedings and at the very least there was
            bound to be a an inquest.




      9
                   R v Selvage and Morgan [1982] 73 Cr App R 333.
      10
                   R v Rafique [1993] 97 Cr App R 395.

                                                                                                  10
5.    CPS POLICY

      Gross Negligence Manslaughter

5.1   The CPS Prosecution Manual Volume 3 at para 2.23 and 2A.9 contains guidance on
      charging practice which accepts the law as noted above.

      Misconduct in a Public Office

5.2   There is no guidance available in the Prosecution Manual or Central Casework
      Manual. However as the culpability required for this offence must be such as to call
      for condemnation and punishment, it involves misconduct that goes beyond that of
      pure civil liability or mere negligence. It is submitted that as the misconduct
      impugned is said to be so serious as to merit a criminal prosecution then a similar
      test to that used in manslaughter by gross negligence should be used. There is no
      intermediate grade of culpability between that required for civil liability and that of
      the manslaughter charge. In the instant case the ‘actus reus’ of the two offences is
      said to be the same. While the elements of culpability and ‘mens rea’ may be
      described in different terms I see little point in attempting to differentiate between
      them for the purposes of a prosecution. Both offences, as here, may involve
      omissions to act in circumstances where necessary action is called for. They stand
      or fall on the same evidence and should stand or fall together.

      Perverting the Course of Justice

5.3   The Manual in chapter 20 of Volume 3 states that the offence should be reserved
      for a serious case of interference with the course of justice (which must be shown
      to have commenced). In the particular circumstances of this case which we are
      asked to take over, I shall not consider possible alternative charges. The general
      public interest considerations concern the nature of the proceedings to be interfered
      with and the consequences/likely consequences of that interference. It is said that
      a prosecution might not be in the public interest if the principal proceedings are at
      an early stage and the action taken by the defendant had only a minor impact on
      those proceedings.

      Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 Section 6(2)

5.4   The 1990 CPS review supported by the joint opinion of two eminent leading counsel
      decided that the evidential sufficiency test from the Code for Crown Prosecutors was
      not satisfied in that there was not a realistic prospect of conviction on any of the
      charges considered". During the CPS review of 1997 we came to the conclusion
      that, following the consideration of the ‘new’ evidence provided by the HFSG,
      there was no new material that might have affected the previous decision. There
      were no grounds for the CPS to recommend to the Home Office that there should
      be a further investigation of criminal allegations against the police or other persons.


             See chapter 8 for a more detailed discussion of this issue.

                                                                                          11
         The scrutiny that followed confirmed that there was no material to put before the
         Director which might cause her to reconsider decisions already taken. The HFSG
        have now put more ‘new’ material before the CPS which is claimed calls into
         question the validity^Sf^all previous investigations. For reasons which will be
         explained in chapter lftHJdo not accept this claim and this review will therefore
    /   proceed on its origiaaWjasis which is that of considering the joint defendants’
'       request to take over the private prosecution in order to discontinue it.

5.5     Our policy is found in the Prosecution Manual Volume 1 at chapter 7. This policy
        builds on the criteria for prosecution contained within the Code for Crown
        Prosecutors. As the right to bring a private prosecution is preserved by section 6(1)
        of the Act, subject to the power under section 6(2), the CPS will only exercise that
        power to take over the private prosecution where there is a particular need for it to
        do so on behalf of the public. If there is no need for the CPS to be involved then
        the private prosecutor should be allowed to carry on with the case. Paras 7.13 and
        7.10 apply in this case, and the circumstances in which the power to take over (and
        then discontinue) the prosecution are:

        •     There is clearly no case to answer12. A prosecution commenced in these
              circumstances would be unfounded, and would therefore be a an abuse of the
              right to bring a prosecution.

        •     The public interest factors tending against prosecution clearly outweigh
              those factors tending in favour. A relevant factor might be that of a
              prosecution that can be seen as malicious or vexatious. The other suggested
              examples are not likely to apply, neither should delay be a factor in the
              present case where there has been a history of active judicial hearings.

        •     The prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests of justice. For
              example, the disclosure of sensitive material.

        Disclosure of Material

5.6     In order for all relevant material to be considered in the course of this CPS review,
        the private prosecutor and both defendants were asked to voluntarily provide the
        CPS with firstly schedules of such papers in their possession, and then copies of
        fresh evidence not previously seen by the CPS. The HFSG have now provided both
        the CPS and defence solicitors with detailed bundles of evidence and
        representations. The defendants have done the same. These papers as well as a


               However see R v Bow Street Stipendiary Magistrate and another, ex parte
               South Coast Shipping Company Ltd and others [1993] 96 Cr App R 405
               where it was said, per curiam, that "The Director may take over proceedings
               instituted by a private prosecutor which he might otherwise institute himself
               and if he does so, he may then discontinue them under section 23 of the
               1985 Act if the evidence is insufficient.


                                                                                          12
      provisional committal bundle have been taken into consideration during the review.

5.7   All the parties to the private prosecution have requested the CPS to provide
      voluntary disclosure of material in our possession. Chapter 7 of Volume 1 of the
      Manual gives guidance on disclosure to a third party. Any disclosure by us prior
      to a successful committal is on a voluntary basis. After committal the Crown Court
      may grant witness orders for the production of relevant material from third parties.
      The general rule is that we should give disclosure whenever it is in the interests of
      justice to do so, and that it should be even-handed as between the parties.
      Following discussion within Central Casework it was agreed that the decision to
      give voluntary disclosure would be deferred until after the section 6(2) decision was
      made. If the decision was to exercise the power in order to discontinue then
      disclosure was no longer an issue. This was advised to the parties and has
      grudgingly been accepted. The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police requested
      legal advice from the CPS on the point of their voluntary disclosure to the HFSG
      (he is in control of an extremely large archive of material generated during the
      various investigations), and was advised that he might wish to consider exercising
      his discretion in a manner similar to ours. While his decision to do so generated
      lengthy argument from the HFSG, that is still the present position.




                                                                                        13
6.     THE TAYLOR INQUIRY & INITIAL POLICE INVESTIGATION

6.1   Two days after the disaster the then Lord Justice Taylor was appointed to carry out
      a Public Inquiry with the West Midlands Police assisting in the gathering of
      evidence both for the Inquiry and the Coroner. This consisted of almost 5000 CJA
       and non CJA statements, approximately 8000 completed questionnaires, 1740
      documents and 71 hours of film. The hearing lasted 31 days. There was no power
      to administer the oath to witnesses but Lord Justice Taylor was satisfied that there
      was no instance of witnesses giving evidence that would have otherwise been
      different. While he accepted that the witnesses called were only a small fraction of
      those available, he was satisfied that they were sufficient in number and reliability
      to enable him to reach the necessary conclusions. Also he took into account many
      written statements in addition to the oral testimony13. Submissions had been made
      to him that it would be unsafe for findings of fact to be made while evidence was
      still being gathered, but he was assured by the police that it was most unlikely that
      significant further evidence would later emerge. He paid tribute to the West
      Midlands Police for their speed and dedication in the gathering of evidence, as did
      the Secretary of the Football Supporters Association who said that their initial
      anxiety that the investigation would not be fair and objective was wholly dispelled
      when the evidence that they had obtained privately entirely accorded with that of the
      police.

6.2   I have read all the transcripts of the Inquiry that were sent to York. They are not
       complete however they do cover the evidence of the two defendants as well as many
       of the other senior officers who were present on the day. I find, not surprisingly,
       that this evidence accords with the views expressed in the Interim Report. I
       therefore propose to adopt what Lord Justice Taylor has said in his conclusions
       contained within that report.

6.3   In his sermon at the Hillsborough Memorial Service the Archbishop of York said
       that "...Disasters happen because a whole series of mistakes, misjudgments and
       mischances happen to come together in a deadly combination." This was the finding
       of Taylor LJ14.

6.4   The overcrowding up until 1452 hours was due to:

             The layout of the Leppings Lane end;

      •      Lack of fixed capacities for the pens;

      •      Lack of effective monitoring of the terraces.

      The crushing and fatalities after 1452 were due to:


             Interim Report at para 14.

             Interim Report at paras 116 & 117.

                                                                                        14
      •      The build-up at the turnstiles;

      •      The blunder on opening the gates;

      •      The barriers in pen 3;

      •      The crushing not recognised;

      •      The response of the police;

      •      The perimeter gates were too small.

      The factors emphasised above are those that may be attributed either wholly or part
      to the police and are the only ones I shall consider.

      Monitoring of the Terraces

6.5   In 1985 there was considerable controversy in the course of a public inquiry held
      by Mr Justice Popplewell as to the respective responsibilities of the club and the
      police in controlling crowd behaviour. He said in his Final Report that "It cannot
      be too strongly emphasised that it is upon the club, or the occupier of the ground
      who is putting on the function, that the primary and continuing obligation rests".
      However what Lord Justice Taylor found was that de facto the police at
      Hillsborough had accepted responsibility for the control of the pens at the Leppings
      Lane end. At League matches their practice where only modest crowds were
      anticipated was to sequentially fill the pens as required. It was impractical and
      unsafe for police officers and stewards to go into the terraces with away supporters.
      This meant that the monitoring of the numbers of fans in any pen had to be done
      from vantage points outside it. There was said to be a good view from the control
      box and on the television screens there. Police in the West Stand, just above the
      terraces, and on the perimeter track were able to provide a good appreciation of the
      state of the terraces. Action to cut off access to the pens could be taken when
      necessary.

6.6   At Cup semi-finals a different approach was adopted. All the pens were opened and
      the police practice was "to let the fans find their own level". No specific direction
      was given to fans entering through the turnstiles. If they became uncomfortable or
      wished to move for any reason then they could theoretically move elsewhere. They
      would level themselves out and distribution would be achieved without police
      intervention. Lord Justice Taylor found this argument to be wrong in both theory
      and practice. The effect of the policy was that at semi-finals where overcrowding
      was more likely the police would only intervene when there was some overt sign
      that an area was "full". The Green Guide (Guide on Safety at Sports Grounds)
      sought to improve safety and comfort by laying down criteria for maximum
      capacity, ie defining what is "full". The figures considered appropriate in the centre
      pens at Hillsborough were too high. An experiment was conducted at the ground
      and in a Health and Safety Executive laboratory where it was found that the
      maximum density set out in the Green Guide left considerably more room than

                                                                                         15
       monitoring the terraces would have left before declaring an area "full".

6.7    There had been occasions at the ground when packing on the terraces had caused
       discomfort and sometimes fear to the fans. At a 1981 semi-final at the ground
       crushing occurred on the Leppings Lane terraces that necessitated the opening of the
       perimeter gates. 38 persons were treated for injuries including broken limbs. The
       capacity figure for the terraces had been exceeded. As a result of this the terrace
       was divided into three pens. At the 1987 Cup semi-final there was evidence that the
       central pens were uncomfortably overcrowded. This occurred again at the 1988 Cup
       semi-final although here the entry to the tunnel into pens 3 and 4 was blocked off
       by the police shortly before kick-off because the pens were deemed to be "full".

6.8    The conclusion was that by 1452 when gate C was opened, pens 3 and 4 were over­
       full even by the test of leaving the fans to "find their own level". Many of the fans
       there were uncomfortable. To allow any more into those pens was likely to cause
       injuries, to allow in a large stream was courting disaster15.

       The Build-up at the Turnstiles

6.9    The decision to open gate C, and subsequently gates A and B too, was forced on the
       police by the crowd conditions which developed outside the turnstiles. The crush
       was so severe that injuries were being suffered and deaths were feared unless the
       pressure could be swiftly relieved. There were a number of causes why the crowd
       pressure had built to such an intensity16:

       •     The layout of the turnstiles and the number of fans they were required to
             serve left no margin of safety against an uneven flow of fans.

       •     Police strategy did not cater for the arrival of a large number of
             supporters between 1430 and 1440 that created an unmanageable crush
             of over 5,000 fans.

       •     The presence of a substantial minority of fans who had drunk too much
             aggravated that problem.

6.10   The police Operational Order for the day closely followed that laid down for 1988.
       In the light of known previous experience it was not thought necessary to change
       it for the 1989 game.

6.11   Lord Justice Taylor found that having lost control outside the Leppings Lane
       turnstiles and having rejected the option of postponing the kick-off, the police were
       left with no alternative but to open the gates. Superintendent Marshall, who was in
       control outside the ground was right to ask for it and Mr Duckenfield was right to


              Interim Report at para 184.

              Interim Report at para 228.

                                                                                          16
       agree. But the possible effects of so dramatic a step required other action.

       The Blunder on Opening the Gates

6.12   As this issue would appear to be the most crucial part of the HFSG allegation I have
       reproduced in full the findings of Lord Justice Taylor:

       "229. The decision to order the opening of the gates was not accompanied or
       followed by any other order to deal with the consequences. When gate C was
       opened, a steady stream of about 2,000 fans poured through it over some five
       minutes. Clearly they were going into the ground somewhere and unless they were
       diverted their likeliest route was through the tunnel for the reasons given. No
       warning was issued from the control room that the gate was to be opened. Serials
       on the concourse were not alerted. Neither the Club control room nor the Chief
       Steward at the Leppings Lane end was warned. Not even Mr Greenwood, the
       Ground Commander, was informed. From 2.47 pm when Mr Marshall made his
       first request until 2.52 pm when Mr Duckenfield acceded to it , there were five
       minutes in which orders could have been given as to how the influx was to be
       absorbed. It was not done. In evidence, Mr Duckenfield began by saying that no
       officer made any wrong decision but he later conceded he had erred in this regard.
       He said he did not consider where the people would go when the gate was opened.
       Even after it opened, when he could see the influx on the television screens, no
       order was given to steer the fans to the wing pens. Mr Duckenfield said it did not
       cross his mind to detail officers on the concourse to shut off the tunnel. Those
       officers could not have known from their position how full pens 3 and 4 were. That
       was a matter for the control room to monitor from its own observations and using
       intelligence from around the ground.

         230. Since pens 3 and 4 were full by 2.50 pm the tunnel should have been closed
       off whether gate C was to be opened or not. The exercise was a simple one and had
       been carried out in 1988. All that was necessary was for a few officers to act as a
       cordon at the entrance to the tunnel and divert fans elsewhere. Unfortunately, the
       1988 closure seems to have been unknown to the senior officers on duty at the time.
       It did not figure in the debriefing notes. It therefore had no influence on the
       planning for 1989.

         231. Planning apart, however, it should have been clear in the control room where
       there was a view of the pens and of the crowd at the turnstiles that the tunnel had
       to be closed. If orders had been given to that effect when gate C was opened, the
       fans could have been directed to empty areas of the wings and this disaster could
       still have been avoided. Failure to give the order was a blunder of the first
       magnitude.

         232. Significantly, when permission was given to open gate A, Mr Duckenfield
       did order serials to go to that part of the concourse to monitor the influx towards the
       north stand. He did this because he feared that if fans went to the north stand
       without tickets, they would not get seats and, there being no perimeter fences at the
       north side they might invade the pitch. This illustrates again the preoccupation with

                                                                                           17
       avoiding pitch invasion as against safety and the risks of overcrowding. Because
       those entering through gate C could not get onto the pitch, it was not thought
       necessary to alert officers to monitor them. The possibility of overcrowding simply
       was not considered."

       The Crushing not Recognised

6.13   The Report considers that as the stream from gate C flowed through the tunnel, the
       officers in the control room could be expected to keep a close watch on pens 3 and
       4. They had a direct view of them from an elevated position and by using the zoom
       facility on the TV camera. Attempts could have been made using the now
       functioning radio to alert officers on the perimeter track to watch for overcrowding
       and to report their observations. As the pens became more and more crowded, fans
       were showing and signalling their distress. None of this was seen or recognised in
       the control room. The written instructions to the perimeter track officers made no
       reference to the avoidance or detection of overcrowding. The 1988 Operational
       Order instructed officers to forbid fans access to the pitch without a senior officer’s
       consent. This prohibition was further emphasised in the 1989 Order. The
       combination of no instructions as to overcrowding and the strong prohibition on
       opening the perimeter gates was likely to make police recognition of crushing slow
       and their response reluctant. Even after the recognition of a problem it still required
       consent to open the gates. However, action was taken to alleviate the situation once
       officers recognised the distress, although there was a period during which the failure
       to recognise the problem and the inhibition against tackling it caused vital time to
       be lost.

       The Response of the Police

6.14   Even when the realisation of the problem came to the officers on the track, it was
       some minutes before it reached the control room where the immediate assumption
       was that there was a pitch invasion. John Motson, the BBC commentator,
       considered that the trouble appeared to be overcrowding and not misbehaviour17.
       Until Mr Murray rang for ambulances at about 1506 the assumption in the control
       room persisted. Only then was the Major Disaster Plan started. Initially there was
       no effective leadership either from control or on the pitch to harness and organise
       rescue efforts. Despite this many officers did all they humanly could to rescue and
       revive the victims.




              Although in his statement of 4 May 1989 he says that at about 1445 hours
              "...I suddenly spotted that two end sections of the Leppings Lane terrace
              were only just over half full....I must also Stress that the two central sections
              were fully occupied and gave the usual impression of a solid heaving mass
              of fans who were chanting, singing and clapping." He was not aware of
              anything untoward, of any panic or if anyone was experiencing discomfort.

                                                                                            18
            The Evidence of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield

6.15        The relevant points from his statement made on 5.5.89 were :

            •      At 1430 there was space at the front and sides of the Leppings Lane terraces.

            •      At that time he was told by Superintendent Murray that all the fans would
                   be in by kick-off. He then took the view that there was no reason to delay
                   the match.

            •     At 1440 he was aware from the CCTV of the increasing crowd situation at
                  the Leppings Lane end.

            •     Shortly after 1445, being aware of the increasing pressure on the turnstiles,
                  he looked at the Leppings Lane terraces and saw there was room for
                  supporters. He then considered delaying the kick-off but as one of the teams
                  ran out onto the pitch (hi 1454 hours) he discarded that option.

            •     On receiving the demand from Superintendent Marshall to open the gates
                  before someone was killed, thoughts about monitoring and control of
                  supporters entering the ground crossed his mind but there was still space on
                  the terrace and the concourse to ease the situation.

            •     If the gates were opened there might be crushing and injury on the inside as
                  compared to the serious situation outside the gates where people could be
                  seriously injured or killed.

            •     On being asked by Superintendent Murray if he was going to open the gates
                  he said "If there’s likely to be serious injury or death I’ve no option but to
                  open the gates - open the gates."

            •     He watched the Leppings Lane terraces for any development as a result of
                  the gate opening. He noted that the centre pens were almost full but that
                  there was room in the two side pens.

            •     He saw officers opening perimeter gates to let fans onto the pitch but was
                  unable to assess the situation and the need to open these gates. He then saw
                  an increasing number of people spilling onto the perimeter track by way of
                  the gates or over the fence. He was still unaware of what the exact problem
                  was.

6.16        The relevant points from his evidence given to the Inquiry18 are:

            •     While he had walked around looking at the ground, he had not appreciated
                  that the lack of signs at the Leppings Lane turnstiles would cause problems.


       18
                   Inquiry transcript of 24 to 26 May 1989.

                                                                                              19
His understanding was that the filling and monitoring of the pens was a Club
responsibility. He was aware of the importance of ensuring there was no
overcrowding in the pens.

If at 1430 Superintendent Murray had said there was a problem in getting the
fans into the ground in time, he would have seriously considered delaying the
kick-off.

At 1440 while he considered that he could still get 5 to 6,000 people through
the turnstiles by kick-off he was concerned, but this was overtaken by events
(disruption by loss of radio communications).

At 1445 he considered that there was still plenty of room in the centre pens,
but it was becoming clear that not all the fans would be in by 1500 with the
situation outside the turnstiles. He did not make a decision to delay the kick-
off because his mind was taken up with these difficulties.

At 1447 when the first request was made for gate C to be opened, he was
reluctant to agree. On receiving Superintendent Marshall’s demand at 1448
that the gates be opened he accepted that he took until 1452 to make a
decision.

He appreciated that if people came through gate C they would have to go
somewhere though not necessarily through the tunnel. He had no option but
to order the gates to be opened because of the risk of serious injury or death
outside. His thoughts at this time were concentrated on the gate and not on
the tunnel. It did not cross his mind to issue an instruction for officers to
direct the flow of fans.

He was concerned about the effects of opening the gates and allowing people
to enter the ground, He anticipated that there would be pushing. He watched
the Leppings Lane terraces intently for developments. He did not see
anything untoward on the terraces until the perimeter gates there were
opened.

He considered that it was the responsibility of the Club stewards to be
present at the tunnel entrance in order to prevent overcrowding in the pens.

While he made a mistake in not following up the consequences of opening
gate C, he would have hoped that officers in the area should have remedied
the mistake by using their initiative.

He considered that it was a matter for the fans to level themselves out on the
terraces.

At about 1515 he saw Mr Kelly, the Chairman of the FA, and others in the
police control room. On being asked by them what had happened he accepted
that he had told them a lie about a gate being forced by fans when in fact it

                                                                            20
              was opened on his instruction. He was not being deceitful, he believed he
              may have referred to the first time the gate was opened (at 1447 when some
              fans pushed through after one was ejected). He was in a state of shock, and
              wanted to collect his thoughts and assess the situation. At that stage he did
              not want to communicate fully the situation until he had seen a senior
              officer.

       •     He was concerned about the crowd situation and did not want the public to
             become aware of what had happened as he feared there would be massive
             disorder. He agreed that there was nothing to stop him telling his Assistant
             Chief Constable the truth or the full picture when he saw him, but he did not
             do so.

       •     When asked why he told a lie about the supporters he apologised and said
             that "In the crisis of the moment, sir, with all those pressures that are so
             evident, I can’t give an honest answer other than the stress of the situation."

       The Evidence of Superintendent Murray

6.17   The relevant points from his statement made on 2.5.89 are:

       •     As the previous year’s fixture had passed without serious incident it was
             decided by Chief Superintendent Mole, himself and others to base the 1989
             operational order on that of 1988. There was concern in preventing a pitch
             invasion. The order and planning was discussed with Chief Superintendent
             Duckenfield in the two weeks before the match.

       •     At 1430 on the day the centre pen was filling but there were large clear
             sections still.

       •     At 1445 there was a compacting crowd outside the turnstiles and then a
             message was received from Superintendent Marshall requesting that gate C
             be opened. He was asked to standby. That officer then asked for the
             Leppings Lane gates to be opened or people would be crushed. At this stage
             he was attempting to contact the Club Security Officer on the radio to inform
             him of the problems at the turnstiles, but was unable to do so (due to poor
             communications).

       •     The officer is somewhat confused as to the exact timing of the various calls
             made about the gates between 1445 and 1452 hours. He does state that there
             were calls to open gates otherwise people would be killed and that gate C
             was opened as a result.

       •     At 1452 he was aware that the centre two pens were almost full.

       •     At 1458 he saw fans from the centre pens going onto the track but was
             unaware of the real problem until about 1506 hours.


                                                                                         21
6.18   The relevant points from his evidence given to the Inquiry19 are:

              His role on the day was to be in overall control of the control room and as
              adviser to Mr Duckenfield20.

              It was the duty of police to monitor the filling of the pens at league matches.
              At the game on the day of the disaster the fans were given the whole terrace
              to go where they wanted to. No officer was given the specific duty to
              monitor the filling of the centre pens. It was not considered to be a problem.

              When the centre pens were filling up he never considered that there might
              come a time there would be a need to divert people from them.

              At 1445 he was concerned about the crowd at the turnstiles andtried to
              contact the Club Security Officer on the radio but could not raise him. He
              was then overtaken by the serious events that followed. No attempt was then
              made to instruct the stewards to close off the tunnel.

             After gate C was opened he didn’t consider where the fans would go, he
             thought that they would disperse throughout the ground. He did not realise
             that people going through gate C would necessarily go towards the tunnel.
             He had not envisaged that gate as an entry point. However it was obvious
             after the event.

             When people were let out of the centre pens onto the perimeter track he did
             not see anything untoward about them or that there was any overcrowding.
             It was only when he went down onto the field at Mr Duckenfield’s request
             that he saw the distress there.

             He understood that it was the responsibility of both the police and the
             stewards to monitor and report any concern about the numbers on the
             terraces.

              When the last request to open the gates was made, he did not think that Mr
              Duckenfield was dithering in coming to a decision but was weighing the
              considerations.

             It was only in hindsight that it was obvious that the number of fans still
             trying to get into the ground at 1447 would cause a problem of overcrowding


              Inquiry transcript of 31 May and 1 June 1989.

              The operational order for 1989 has Mr Duckenfield in overall command of
              the event, three superintendents being responsible for their own sectors (the
              inside of the football stadium, and outside the ground designated to either the
              home or away fans, and Mr Murray was noted as being in the control room
              in overall control of overseeing the entire operation.

                                                                                          22
              unless checked. He had not foreseen problems with the centre pens.

       The Evidence of Mr Kelly

6.19   He was the Chief/^cecut^e of tne Football Association. When he went to the
       police control boxpolind out whm was happening he spoke to Mr Duckenfield who
       told him that the gates had-te€en forced and there had been an in-rush of Liverpool
       Supporters. At that time ACC Jackson was also present

       Inquiry Conclusions re Police and Others

6.20   The performance by the City Council of its duties in regard to the Safety certificate
       was inefficient and dilatory. Their failure to revise the certificate over the previous
       three years was a serious breach of duty. As a result there were no fixed capacities
       for the pens. Breaches of the Green Guide standards were permitted.

6.21   The Club had in general adopted a responsible and conscientious approach to its
       responsibilities. However it was aware of the problems involving the shortage of
       turnstiles and the number of fans expected to turn up at the Leppings Lane end.
       Although the police had assumed responsibility for the monitoring of the pens, the
       Club’s officials ought to have alerted the police to the grossly uneven distribution
       of fans on the terraces. The onus here was on the Club as well as on the police.
       The poor signposting outside the turnstiles and on the concourse before the tunnel
       tended to produce under-filling of the wing pens and over-filling of pens 3 and 4.

6.22   There can be no valid criticism of the emergency services (by which he meant the
       various ambulance services or the fire brigade).

6.23   The 1989 Operational Order left much unsaid. There was no provision for the late
       or congested arrivals, nor for the avoidance of overcrowding on the terraces.
       Satisfaction with the 1988 event led to complacency. That some thought the pens
       to be overfull in 1988 and that the tunnel was closed off on that occasion did not
       figure in or influence the plan for 1989. While it was understandable that the newly
       promoted Mr Duckenfield should have been expected to take command of events
       in his Division from the date of that promotion, in view of the lack of his experience
       at the ground it was imperative that he be fully briefed. It might have been wiser
       to have left Mr Mole, who had been in command both in 1987 and 1988, in charge
       of the operation.

6.24   The policing on 15 April 1989 broke down in the ways already described, and
       although there were other causes, the main reason for the disaster was the failure of
       police control. Some senior officers in command were defensive and evasive
       witnesses to the Inquiry, neither their handling of problems on the day nor the
       account of it in evidence showed the qualities of leadership to be expected of their
       rank. Mr Duckenfield leant heavily on Mr Murray’s experience. Between them
       they misjudged the build-up at the turnstiles and did little about it until they received



                                                                                             23
        Mr Marshall’s request to open the gate21. At this stage Mr Duckenfield’s capacity
        to take decisions and to give orders seemed to collapse. Having sanctioned, at last,
        the opening of the gates, he failed to give necessary consequential orders or to exert
        any control when the disaster occurred. He misinterpreted the emergence of fans
        from pens 3 and 4. When he was unsure of the problem, he sent others down to
        assess the situation rather than descend to see for himself. He gave no information
        to the crowd22.

6.25    Lord Justice Taylor said that it was most surprising that Mr Duckenfield gave the
        Chairman of the FA, his Assistant Chief Constable and others to think that there had
        been an inrush due to Liverpool fans forcing the gate. This was not only untruthful,
        it set off a widely reported allegation against the supporters which caused grave
        offence and distress. He could only assume that Mr Duckenfield’s lack of candour
        on this occasion had been out of character. The reason given for not telling the
        truth was that if the crowd had been aware of the real situation there might have
        been a very hostile reaction that might impede rescue work. However the reluctance
        to tell the truth did not require that a falsehood be told.

               "284. The likeliest explanation of the officer’s conduct was that he simply
               could not face the enormity of the decision to open the gates and all that
               flowed therefrom. That would explain what he said to (the FA Chairman),
               what he did not say to (the Assistant Chief Constable), his aversion to
               addressing the crowd and his failure to take effective control of the disaster
               situation. He froze."




   21
               Interim Report at Para 281.
   22
               Interim Report at para 282.

                                                                                           24
7.    THE CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION

      Interim Report II

7.1   Following the publication of the Interim Report the Chief Constable of West
      Midlands Police immediately referred it to the DPP asking for a decision on the
      question of criminal liability of any member of South Yorkshire Police. On 15
      August 1989 the Director advised that the matter should be the subject of a full
      criminal investigation. As the West Midlands Police had done considerable work
      in gathering evidence for the Taylor Inquiry it seemed sensible that they should be
      invited to continue. In October 1989 Assistant Chief Constable Mervyn-Jones, who
      was in charge of the Hillsborough Inquiry Team of the West Midlands Police, sent
      to the Head of the CPS Police Complaints Division a revised copy of the report
      prepared for the Taylor Inquiry (known as Interim Report II). Though it was up to
      date there were still some other statements being taken. The findings worthy of note
      some of which have been covered previously are as follows:

      •     The barrier breaking in pen 3 must be a primary factor for the high
            proportion of deaths in pen 3 as compared to pen 4;

      •     The 1988 blockade of the tunnel by police officers was not documented, and
            was not a decision made by the senior officers present at the 1988 game.
            One retired officer recalled what had happened and his recollection is
            vague23. The probability is that some officers acting on their own initiative
            turned supporters away having recognised that part of the terrace was full;

      •     The fact that access to the tunnel was not controlled was a significant factor
            in the deaths;

      •     The visual evidence available shows supporters at the rear of pens 3 and 4
            to be totally oblivious to the unfolding events as their fellow supporters died.

      The Report

7.2   This was produced by the Chief Constable of West Midlands Police, Geoffrey Dear,
      on 30 March 1990 following the formal commencement of the criminal and
      disciplinary investigation on 27 September 1989. The Police Complaints Authority
      were supervising the conduct of the investigation. The Chief Constable had major
      concerns about the admissibility of much of the evidence adduced before the Inquiry
      and on which his report was based24. A number of his findings are reproduced
      below:

      •     Following the media attention and what was seen as the adverse effects of


             Statement number R516 of PS Trevor HIGGINS dated 2.6.89.

             THE REPORT, Part VII at pp 181-5.

                                                                                          25
             a public inquiry it was seriously questionable whether Mr Duckenfield would
             receive a fair trial if a prosecution for manslaughter was pursued against him.

      •      At 1451 hours on the day the video evidence shows that the fans in pens 3
             and 4 were enjoying the event, singing, raising arms and acting seemingly
             quite normally.

      •      Criminal interviews should be conducted of those police officers subject to
             formal complaint as well as members of other organisations.

      •     Whatever the understanding between the Club and the police re the
            monitoring of the terraces, in the event neither police nor Club employee
            recognised the fact that pens 3 and 4 were overcrowding. Nor did any other
            observer recognise that fact including professionals who regularly attend
            matches. A photograph taken at 1454, two minutes after gate C was opened
            still suggests that there was no real crush at the time.

      •     Mr Murray was part of the decision making team at the match. His post in
            the control box placed him in a position of overall responsibility with Mr
            Duckenfield.

7.3   Subject to the analysis of interviews under caution the interim recommendation was
      there was insufficient evidence for a prosecution for Corporate Manslaughter in
      respect of any of the identified organisations. Criminal responsibility of individuals
      could only be assessed following interviews.

      Interview of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield on 3.7.90

7.4   The officer declined to answer any questions.

      Interview of Superintendent Murray on 25.6.90

7.5   Relevant points from the transcript of interview are:

      •      He had no knowledge of any problems of overcrowding in either 1981 or
             1987.

             Although he was in the control room in 1988 at the semi-final match it had
             not been brought to his attention that fans had been injured because of
             overcrowding, or that the centre tunnel to pens 3 and 4 had been closed off.

      •      His responsibility on the day was to have overall command of the control
             room.     That would involve overseeing the event, arranging the
             communications and acting on information received. Mr Duckenfield’s role
             was to be in overall command of the event, which he conducted from the
             control room.



                                                                                         26
      •     He considered that any question of opening gates was for Mr Duckenfield
            and not for him to make. If his senior officer had not been in the control
            room at the time he would have had to contact him for a decision to be
            made.

      •     At about 1430 he did consider that all the fans would be in by 1500.

      •     As the requests to open the gate were coming in he was trying to contact the
            Club Security Officer for him to take action on the problem at the turnstiles.
            He had no discussion with Mr Duckenfield about the decision to be made
            except to ask his superior if we were going to open the gates.

      •     Prior to the decision to open the gates he saw nothing on the terraces to give
            him cause for concern.

      •     At about 1508 when the Assistant Chief Constable, Mr Jackson, asked Mr
            Duckenfield what had happened, he was not told that the gate had been
            opened at police request. At that stage Mr Murray did not associate the
            deaths with the opening of the gate.

      Interview of ACC Jackson on 28 June 1990

7.6   He believes that it was Mr Duckenfield who told him that the gates had been
      stormed. It was about 1615 when he first learnt the true situation.

      Police Complaints Authority

7.7   On 11 July 1990 the PCA directed that disciplinary charges of neglect of duty be
      preferred against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray. In
      November 1990 Mr Duckenfield retired on grounds of ill health and subsequently
      the PCA announced that they would not pursue the charge against Mr Murray on
      the ground that it would be unfair to pursue what was in essence a joint charge
      against one officer only.




                                                                                       27
8.     CPS REVIEW OF 1990

8.1   The Director sought the advice of two very experienced Queen’s Counsel, Gareth
      Williams QC and Peter Birts QC. They produced a joint opinion on 6 August 1990.
      They considered the police report and documentation produced for the Taylor
      Inquiry as well as the Police Interim Report II. The terms of their brief was to
      advise whether there existed sufficient evidence to justify bringing criminal
      proceedings against any of the organisations or individuals concerned.

      Joint Opinion

8.2   Counsel commented that a notable feature of the disaster was the absence of conflict
       of fact as to what had happened, and that the criminal investigation, for all its
       thoroughness, had not significantly added to or contradicted the Inquiry findings.
       The layout of the ground was the responsibility of four organisations, the Club, the
       consultant structural engineers, the Council and the police. None of them foresaw
       that the progressive alterations made to the ground from 1977 onwards in the
       interest of safety and good order would come to constitute in effect a death trap for
       supporters entering pens 3 and 425. The circumstances of the crushing at the
       turnstiles and the opening of gate C were also not foreseen. While all four
       organisations must share some responsibility for the lack of safe maximum
       capacities, the lack of controlled entry to the pens, the absence of any proper system
       of monitoring and the inadequacy of the Safety Certificate, it is the police that had
      the main responsibility for the policy of letting the fans find their own level.

8.3   That there had been a crushing incident in 1981 where large numbers of fans were
       admitted to the West terraces via the tunnel access and were crushed against the
      perimeter fence was not such as to have alerted the police and Club to potential
      problems in 1989. That earlier problem was believed to have been properly
       addressed by the installation of radial fences. It had no direct bearing on the
       disaster and did not add to the potential criminal responsibility of the Club or the
       police.

8.4   Mr Duckenfield’s decision to open gate C was correct in the circumstances. That
      was his responsibility alone as was his serious error in failing to give any order to
      accommodate the influx. While the competence of this newly promoted Chief
      Superintendent to take charge of a match of this importance could be questioned,
      there is no evidence that those responsible for his promotion should share the
      responsibility for his errors.

8.5   That the tunnel was cordoned off in 1998 by a handful of junior officers was
       apparently on their own initiative - an action that would have almost certainly
       averted the disaster of 1989. At first sight the operational organisation of the police
       might seem responsible for failing to incorporate that tactic into the match planning.
       However that Mr Duckenfield despatched a serial to deal with the opening of gate


              Joint Opinion at page 18-19.

                                                                         -<r               28
       A demonstrates that it was within his power to accommodate the opening of gate
       C, and the blame for his not doing so cannot in our view be laid elsewhere26.

8.6   The buildup outside the ground was again the responsibility of the four
       organisations. While the layout and slow admission rate of the turnstiles gave rise
       to policing difficulties, the loss of police control and the failure to follow the
       filtering employed in 1988 was solely a police responsibility, but it was a collective
       one that could not be attributed to any individual officer.

8.7   Counsel gave lengthy consideration to the relevant law for involuntary manslaughter
      and culpable misfeasance (misconduct in a public office). On the basis of the law
      as it was in 1989 they correctly covered the required elements of a manslaughter
      involving "recklessness" as defined by Lord Diplock in R v Lawrence. They were
      quite rightly concerned as to the then uncertainty in the law about the application
      of the "gross negligence" test as a separate head of liability, following two recent
      cases at the time where it was held that manslaughter should not be defined in terms
      of negligence and that Lord Diplock’s test should be applied universally27. They
      therefore approached the evidence on the basis that the gross negligence test (in
      addition to that of "recklessness") was sufficient to establish the offence of
      manslaughter. As for culpable misfeasance they were satisfied that the offence
      existed and that it involved the wilful neglect of a police officer to perform a duty
      which he was bound to perform by common law or statute. They applied the
      definition from R v Dytham ante. They were of the opinion that this little known
      offence was a difficult one to prove to the satisfaction of the jury.

8.8   In considering the evidence to support manslaughter charges they dealt with each
       of the four organisations in turn:

      •      The Club: There was no sufficient evidence to support a prima facie case
             that the Club or any of its officials caused the deaths based on either
             recklessness or gross negligence.

      •      The consultant engineers: There was no evidence to support a charge of
             manslaughter.

      •      The Council: There was no evidence of recklessness or gross negligence on
             their part.

      •      The police: They were responsible for the heavily criticised policy whereby
              supporters were left "to find their own level" and not monitored as they
             entered the pens in semi-final matches. There was also a serious failure of
             policing in Leppings Lane. These errors were to be viewed as part of a


              Joint Opinion at page 21.

              Seymour (1983) 76 Cr App Rep 211 and
              Kong Cheuk Kwan v R (1985) 82 Cr App Rep 18.

                                                                                          29
complex series of events, many of which were outside the control of the
police. Once responsibility for the failure to postpone the kick-off and to
cordon off the access tunnel was confined to Mr Duckenfield as it should be,
then the police as an organisation cannot be said to have caused the deaths
by their strategy and operational errors28. In considering the structure of the
police command, the operational orders for 1988 and 1989, police practice
at Hillsborough and the interviews of officers including Mr Murray, they
were of the opinion that while there were undoubted errors of judgement and
practice, neither the police organisation nor any individual within it acted
recklessly or in a grossly negligent manner. There was no basis on which
to advise a charge of corporate manslaughter against any directing mind
within the police organisation.

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield: That Mr Duckenfield was criticised for
the failure to cordon off the tunnel access and for his decision not to
postpone the kick-off was thought to be entirely justified. However he had
under his command officers who had considerable experience of policing the
ground and who also made operational errors or failed to react as they should
have done. It seemed likely that the operational orders and police
intelligence were inadequate; this was not the fault of Mr Duckenfield who
inherited a ready made match plan compiled by others and tried to follow it.
Counsels’ opinion was that the slowness of his response to the disaster was
due in part to his lack of experience of this type of match. In their view the
officer’s errors in not cordoning off the tunnel or postponing the match were
a substantial cause of the deaths. They then looked at the sufficiency of
evidence on a charge of manslaughter as against the officer. They concluded
that there was no unlawful and dangerous act for that head of manslaughter,
and then went on to consider the other tests:

       "We consider that there are difficulties in proving that he intended to
       do an act which created an obvious and serious risk of causing
       personal injury. In the first place there was no "act" as such, but an
       omission or omissions to act which contributed to a rapidly
       developing state of affairs ending in serious risk of injury. But was
       it an obvious risk at the time? We think not. The complexity of the
       disaster as now known to those who have analysed it in hindsight
       demonstrates that there must be grave doubt as to whether the
       omissions created a risk which was obvious to anyone at the
       time We conclude, therefore, that there is insufficient evidence on
       which to found a charge of recklessness against Mr Duckenfield. Nor
       is there evidence that he was grossly negligent in failing to act as
       mentioned above It follows, and we have come to the clear
       conclusion that there is no evidence that Mr Duckenfield was wilfully
       neglectful of his duty or was culpable so as to have committed the



Joint Opinion at paras 80.
                         offence of culpable misfeasance29."

S.9        The final conclusion of counsel was that there was no sufficient evidence to support
           criminal proceedings of any kind against those persons mentioned in the West
           Midlands Report who counsel did not identify in their opinion.

S.10       In the autumn of 1990 the DPP announced that there would be no prosecutions.




      29
                  Joint Opinion at paras 88-89.

                                                                                            31
9.         THE INQUESTS

9.1        In April 1990 the Coroner for South Yorkshire commenced the 9530 mini inquests
            to decide the statutory questions as to who each of the deceased was and when and
            where he or she died. They were then adjourned to await the DPP’s decision on a
            criminal prosecution. They were resumed in November 1990 to decide the final
            statutory question as to how each of the deceased died. At the end of March 1991
            the jury returned majority verdicts of accidental death in all cases.

           Coroner’s Summing Up

9.2        The coroner described to the jury three possible conclusions that might be returned;
           that is, of an unlawful killing, accident/misadventure or an open verdict. For a
           verdict of unlawful killing the criminal standard of proof was required, and for
           accident/misadventure the standard would be that of the balance of probability. In
           the case of an open verdict there was no standard as such. He went on to describe
           the legal requirements for each of the possible verdicts which should be considered
           in turn.

9.3        For unlawful killing (the criminal equivalent being one of the forms of involuntary
           manslaughter) he paid particular attention to the case of R v West London Coroner
           ex parte Gray [1988] QB 467, which dealt with an alleged unlawful killing by a
           police officer by way of neglect.

9.4        For accident/misadventure he described it as an unforeseen event arising out of a
           situation that was meant to occur. Whether or not there was culpability due to
           negligence would depend on the circumstances.

9.5        If after due deliberation the jury came to the conclusion that there was insufficient
           evidence to reach either of the above two verdicts to the required standard of proof
           then the open verdict was appropriate.

9.6        The relevant points that the Coroner made to the jury concerning the actions of the
           police were:

           •      The police practice of letting the fans "find their own level" which had
                  appeared to work without problem until 1989. While criticised this had not
                  been condemned by any witness, although it was accepted that there had to
                  be some monitoring.

           •      The Chief Superintendent who was in command prior to Mr Duckenfield did
                  not know of any diversion of the fans from the tunnel in previous years,
                  however it was fairly conclusive that such diversion happened in 1988,
                  although it was not reported to senior officers.


      30
                  Subsequently the 96th victim, Mr Bland, died.

                                                                                             32
As there was no means of counting people into the pens the only way to
monitor the packing density of the fans there was by a visual perception.

Senior officers had indicated that if they had seen something which caused
them concern they would have expected to report it. They had a reliance
upon the initiative and the capability of the people within the ground,
whether or not that was a wise reliance that was the practice.

Virtually all the evidence pointed towards the decision to open the gates as
being a reasonable one in the circumstances.

A number of witnesses did not think that the centre pens were crowded while
others saw disaster looming. Mr Motson,the BBC commentator, noticed the
discrepancy between the centre and outer pens but not that the centre ones
were overcrowded. Mr Hicks appeared to have the earliest concern about the
overcrowding based on what he could see from his position close to the
police control box.

The Coroner considered that there was at least some evidence to put before
the jury on the question of an unlawful killing and therefore did not
withdraw that verdict from them.

Mr Duckenfield did not have a detailed knowledge of the Green Guide or of
the ground. He did have a plan and Operational Order that had been used
in the past without difficulties. He could be justified in taking the view that
he had staff that were sound and adequate, that the ground itself was safe,
and that the capacity of the ground was in accordance with the Safety
Certificate. He probably had no duty to satisfy himself on every item
relating to the running of the match. It was not surprising that he did not
know the detail of the signing (on the concourse and by the tunnel access).
It was not surprising that he did not relate the geographical locations of the
tunnel access and the exit gate (gate C). There was nothing to alert him that
an exit gate might be used as an entry point.

There was a great deal of criticism that the Operational Order adopted by Mr
Duckenfield did not include specific references to the monitoring of the pens
or to the distribution of the fans within the pens. Most of the police officers
took the view that they would act on their own initiative and that the safety
of the public was one of their primary functions31.

Mr Duckenfield’s briefing made a strong reference to the safety of the
spectators; it was of paramount importance. Would it have made any
difference if he had said "monitor the pens" rather than the word "safety"?
Did the briefing make it clear that in addition to their public order functions
safety was a matter of great importance.


Inquiry transcript 25 March 1991 at page 111.

                                                                            33
Mr Duckenfield’s evidence is that his objective in opening the gates was to
save life.

       "...firstly he took the view that the concourse was larger than the
       turnstile area and therefore people would have room to expand.
       Secondly he knew there were three routes, although he did not know
       their detail and he certainly did not know their signing, on to the
       terraces....He also said that his attention was focused on Lepping
       Lane; firstly upon Gate C and then he was taken up with the issue of
       Gate A. The first time he realised that anything was happening on
       the terraces was when he saw the gate open and people climbing
       over....He certainly did not associate the entry - at least that is my
       understanding of his evidence - the entry through the gates with what
       appeared to him to be a pitch invasion. Mr Duckenfield, of course
       was supported by Mr Murray whose job it was to control the ground.
       He was entitled to assume, I think, that people in Mr Murray’s
       position would take appropriate action in the light of developments.
       Indeed, I think he was right to assume that people further afield
       would keep him informed as to what was happening, with a view to
       enabling him to take decisions."

The Coroner considered that the assessment of the terraces was a very
important factor to be weighed. None of the staff in the control room had
noticed any problems with the pens until people came over the fence or the
perimeter gates were opened. Their attention was focused on the outside.

      "...the evidence...is reasonably clear that...when Gate C was
      opened...the centre pens certainly were not empty but they were not
      necessarily so full and, indeed, they had been playing with beach
      balls and various other things in those pens very shortly before
      that...So you have two problems: one, would a prudent observer have
      noted at the point in time when the gates were opened that those pens
      were so full or so over full that diversion was something which had
      to be taken; and secondly, of course, would the connection, would a
      reasonably prudent, skilled police officer in the shoes if you like, of
      Mr Duckenfield or indeed Mr Murray, have connected the need, the
      opening of the gate, diversion of the tunnel, and conditions on the
      pen?"

The radio problems were said to have caused a considerable amount of
disruption.

Mr Murray saw his role as a communicator and disseminator, a man of rank
who was in a position to take decisions, and an adviser to Mr Duckenfield,




                                                                          34
particularly as the latter was a newcomer32. He says that he had no
knowledge of any diversion from the tunnel in 1988, he believed the ground
to be safe, the system under which he was operating to be safe and that it
had worked satisfactorily in 1987 and 1988. When gate C was opened it did
not cross his mind to close the tunnel. He expected people to disperse from
the concourse. He did not expect they would all go through the tunnel. He
said that his primary concern was to relieve pressure, to avoid injury, and he
went on to say that nothing else was obvious to him. Nothing of
significance was noted on the terraces.

Mr Duckenfield said that he operated on the assumptions that the ground was
safe, the system of policing and the Operational Plan were satisfactory and
had worked in previous years, and he had a team of officers who were
experienced and supportive. He expected to receive reports of overcrowding
if noted by officers on the track. He would expect officers to respond to a
"developing situation". As far as he was concerned, he did not accept that
there was on the day an obvious risk to people when the gates were opened.
He thought that the time interval in which he had to take various decisions
was short.




Inquest transcript at page 22 of 11 March 1991: "I saw my role as being sort
of monitoring the event as a whole, being responsible for the reception and
the transmission of all radio communications and saw myself as adviser to
Mr Duckenfield." Mr Murray accepted that his superior might have to make
decisions requiring his advice based on experience.

                                                                           35
10.    THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND JUDICIAL REVIEW

10.1   In April 1992 solicitors acting for the relatives of some of the deceased sent a
       ‘memorial’ to the Attorney General requesting him to grant them leave to apply to
       the High Court for the inquest verdicts to be quashed and a fresh series of inquests
       held. This was refused in August 1992 on the ground that he had concluded that
       there was nothing which would justify an application to the High Court for a new
       inquest, as the application would have no reasonable prospect of establishing that
       it was necessary or desirable in the interests of justice for a fresh inquest to be held.

10.2   In May 1992 an application was made to the Divisional Court for judicial review
       in respect of the various decisions made by the Coroner in the course of the inquest.
       Leave was granted in April 1993 and the case came before the Court in November
       1993. The relief sought was for a quashing of the verdicts and an ordering of fresh
       inquests.

10.3   One of the grounds put forward by the applicants was that the Coroner misdirected
       the jury on the law concerning unlawful killing when he defined it in terms of
       recklessness33, because a later and unreported case34 in the Court of Appeal had
       decided that the offence of involuntary manslaughter was established if there was
       proof of a grossly negligent act or omission causing death. It was submitted that if
       such a direction on gross negligence had been given then the jury would have found
       unlawful killing. The Court, however, was of the view that the actual verdict
       brought in by the jury was a perfectly rational one.

10.4   An interesting note is that when the Court asked counsel for the applicants, Alun
       Jones QC, what would be the point of sending the matter back for another inquest,
       he stated that whatever the verdict might prove to be, the function of the jury would
       have been fulfilled. He agreed that no prosecution of any police officer would result
       because the decision had been taken in 1990 that no one should be prosecuted. It
       was a point of legal purity.

10.5   The judgement of the Court was given by Lord Justice McCowan:

              "I would hold that the inquisition was correctly completed and the Coroner’s
              direction to the jury as to the manner in which they should approach its
              completion was impeccable....Accordingly, I have discovered no good reason
              for ordering a new inquest or for merely quashing the existing verdicts."




              Following the judgement of Watkins LJ in R v West London Coroner ex
              parte Gray and others [1987] 2 WLR 1020.

              R v Holloway and others [1994] QB 302.

                                                                                            36
11.    THE NEW EVIDENCE

11.1   In early December 1996, Granada TV screened a drama-documentary programme
       concerning the Hillsborough Stadium disaster. It was later said by the Hillsborough
       Family Support Group (HFSG) that the pre-production research for the programme
       and its subsequent airing brought fresh evidence and new witnesses to light proving
       that suppression of evidence, perjury and conspiracy to pervert the course of justice
       featured in the legal process that followed the disaster.

11.2   In March 1997 the HFSG made representations (supported by the opinion of their
       counsel, Alun Jones QC, and a large bundle of ‘new evidence’) to the DPP, the
       Home Secretary and the Attorney General. The Legal Secretariat to the Law
       Officers (LSLO) considered it important that while each of the various Government
       Departments formed their own judgement in relation to the discharge of their own
       duties, it was equally important that there was a coherent and co-ordinated response
       to the representations made. It was agreed that each of the three groups would
       report the results of their reviews to the Police Policy Directorate.

11.3   The new evidence was said to be a video tape of footage from the scoreboard
       camera on the Leppings Lane terraces that was alleged to have been suppressed by
       the police, the evidence of the Club engineer responsible for the CCTV systems, and
       a doctor’s statement also alleged to have been suppressed.

11.4   The Chairman of the HFSG, Mr Trevor Hicks, formally requested the CPS to
       examine the evidence and to initiate an urgent criminal investigation into the
       allegations. Their counsel had concluded that the new pieces of evidence called for
       a full police enquiry or public enquiry.




                                                                                          37
12.    THE 1997 CPS REVIEW

12.1   I was nominated to review the evidence and allegations and to prepare a report for
       the Director. This report was completed and sent to the Director on 8 May 1997 via
       the CCP for Central Casework.

12.2   My recommendations were that there were no grounds for the CPS to recommend
       to the Home Office that there should be a further investigation of criminal
       allegations against the police or other persons. In particular I found that:

       •     The police video tapes alleged to have been suppressed were available to the
             Taylor Inquiry and to the Coroner. One was actually shown to the inquest
             jury as part of the evidence.

       •     Tapesalleged to have been stolen from the Club CCTV room ( the inference
             being that the police were involved in suppressing material evidence of their
             complicity in criminal offences) were not relevant. One would have been a
             detailed study of a brick wall and the second of an area covered by other
             cameras.

       •     There was insufficient evidence of police control room officers perjuring
             themselves at the inquest when giving their opinion of the video quality seen
             on a CCTV monitor.

       •     There was no suppression of medical evidence by either the police or other
             persons. The ‘new’ evidence provided by the HFSG had little weight when
             compared to the overall evidence considered by the various judicial hearings.




                                                                                       38
13.    THE SCRUTINY

13.1   In June 1997 the Home Secretary announced to the House that his department, the
       Attorney General and the CPS had carefully considered all the evidence that had
       been put forward but were unable to find anything which would have materially
       affected the outcome of any of the investigations into the disaster. There was no
       evidence from which it could be concluded that a new public inquiry should be
       established, that would justify fresh criminal investigations or that an application for
       a new inquest would have any hope of succeeding. However, in order that no
       matter of significance was overlooked and a conclusion was not made without a full
       and independent examination of the evidence, it had been decided that there should
       be an independent scrutiny. It was to be conducted by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.
       As regards the CPS his terms of reference were:

              "To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
              Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available....to the
              Director of Public Prosecutions....for the purpose of discharging...
              (her)...statutory responsibilities....and to draw to (her) attention any evidence
              not previously considered by (her) which may be relevant to (her) duties...."

13.2   The scrutiny report was submitted to the Home Secretary in January 1998. It was
       made plain that the judge had looked at all the evidence that he was asked to
       consider whether or not it had been previously available to the legal advisers acting
       for the families or was in the public domain.

13.3   The judge was only invited by counsel for the HFSG to make recommendations to
       the DPP re criminal proceedings in the case of Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray. He
       stated that as the DPP had concluded that there was not sufficient evidence to justify
       charges against either of these two officers (having accepted the advice of two very
       experienced Queen’s Counsel), any fresh evidence would have to be of sufficient
       significance that there would be a real possibility that in considering it the DPP
       might change her mind and institute proceedings for manslaughter, or for any other
       offence, against one or both of these officers.

       Key Points from the Scrutiny

13.4   These are as follows:

       •      Chapter 1.22: "Lord Taylor had to decide a number of controversial issues,
              for example, why the police lost control of the crowd outside the Leppings
              Lane turnstiles. The evidence of the witnesses who have not previously
              come forward is unlikely significantly to affect the weight of the evidence
              already given on these controversial issues."

       •       Chapter 1.44: No fresh evidence had been heard about what had happened
               outside the ground before 1500 therefore there was no question of reviewing
               Lord Taylor’s findings on that.


                                                                                            39
        Chapter 1.45 to 1.51: Lord Justice Stuart-Smith reiterated Lord Taylor’s
        criticism of the police in not closing the access tunnel to the central pens
        when gate C was opened, that was said to be "a blunder of the first
        magnitude". However there was also criticism of others because of the
        inadequate turnstiles, the unsatisfactory monitoring of the pens except by a
        visual check, the misleading and inadequate signposting, and the lack of
        stewards on the concourse directing people where to go. The result was that
        most standing spectators going through the turnstiles or gate C did not realise
        that there was any alternative but to go down the tunnel. He stated "None
        of the evidence I have been invited to consider could make Lord Taylor’s
        censure of the police more severe, and it does not add any separate or
        additional ground of criticism in respect of events leading to the tragedy."

        Chapter 1.53: In considering the joint opinion of Counsel the judge said that^

y   /
        they had set out a full, detailed and careful resum tfpf the facts on thtfUasis
        of the evidence then available. There was no error or omission in that resume-"
        nor was any particular aspect understated or exaggerated. In their statement^-
        of the law, Counsel considered both the offences of manslaughter and
        culpable misfeasance in a public office; they were plainly correct to consider
        that the latter offence would be no easier to establish than manslaughter in
        the circumstances of the case.

•       Chapter 1.54 to 1.57: In order to recommend that the DPP reconsider the
        decision not to prosecute there would have to be fresh evidence to establish
        facts not previously considered, or the significance of which was not fully
        appreciated, that would make it more likely that charges of manslaughter
        could be established.      He said that "Essentially this relates to Mr
        Duckenfield’s and Mr Murray’s knowledge and appreciation of the risk of
        injury in doing what they did or omitted to do....Any prosecution of an
        individual police officer would have to establish his individual responsibility.
        It would not be enough simply to prove the composite failure of the police
        operation. The causes of the disaster were many and complex. So far as
        these two officers were concerned the prosecution would have to prove to the
        high standard required for a criminal conviction that the failure to give the
        order to close off the tunnel when Gate C was opened amounted to the
        serious degree of recklessness necessary to constitute manslaughter."

•       Chapter 1.66: The verdict of accidental death at the inquests did not
        undermine or reverse Lord Taylor’s findings. In order to justify a further
        application to the Divisional Court for judicial review any new evidence
        must show that had it been presented to the jury they would have been likely
        to reach the only other possible verdict, namely unlawful killing.

•       Chapter 2.18: The police video tapes that contained footage of the Leppings
        Lane terraces were not suppressed as alleged but were available in their
        entirety to the Inquiry and to the Coroner.

•       Chapter 2.22: The loss of the video tapes from the Club control room would

                                                                                     40
not have shown anything relevant. There is no evidence for the suggestion
that they were taken by police officers as part of a ‘cover up’.

Chapter 2.61: The submission that the police blamed their failure to
appreciate the overcrowding onto a faulty CCTV camera is quite untenable.

Chapter 2.96 to 2.97: Mr Houldsworth (the Club CCTV engineer) gave
evidence that he realised from looking at coverage from police cameras that
the central pens were overcrowded and that the influx of people through gate
C would create a dangerous situation. This evidence is rejected. His
explanation as to why he did not come forward until 1996 is not convincing;
what he says now is inconsistent with what he said before. Like almost
everyone else observing the situation he thought he was looking at a pitch
invasion.    "The importance of Mr Houldsworth’s evidence has been
exaggerated out of all proportion."

Chapter 2.101: "There is nothing in any of the submissions about the video
evidence that calls for any further inquiry or consideration by the prosecuting
or disciplinary authorities ..."

Chapter 4.101: Here Lord Justice Stuart-Smith refers to Mr Duckenfield’s
"disgraceful lie" about gate C being forced open by fans as part of his
consideration of the allegation that there had been a cover-up by the police.
The other part was of malpractice and irregularities in the taking of witness
statements. The latter were not substantiated.

Chapter 5.26 to 5.34: South Yorkshire Police hold the extensive archive of
material about the Hillsborough disaster. The ‘body files’ are held on behalf
of the Coroner and access to them is at his discretion. Access to the rest of
the material in the archives is at the discretion of the police.

Chapter 6.7 to 6.20: Evidence from the structural engineer who advised the
South Yorkshire police in 1990 re the safety of the ground was not available
for either the Taylor Inquiry or the Coroner. It was available for the civil
contribution proceedings in October 1990. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says
that it is reasonable to assume that the engineer’s opinion was a material
factor in persuading the Club and others to make a substantial contribution
to the overall cost of the claims. Two matters which the engineer pointed
to had not been considered or fully considered by the Taylor Inquiry; the
height of the crush barriers resulted in the failure of one that contributed to
the substantially larger number of deaths in pen 3; and the wrongly
calculated overall capacity of the Leppings Lane terrace that resulted in
excessive number of tickets being sold over the safe capacity. While these
matters do not give any ground for the re-opening of any proceedings, and
would not change the central conclusion that the primary cause of the
disaster was the failure of police control, if the responsibility of the other
parties was somewhat greater than had earlier been appreciated, that might
have a bearing on any reconsideration of criminal proceedings against police

                                                                            41
              officers.

       •      Chapter 6.22 to 6.30: In his summing-up the Coroner dealt fully and fairly
              with all the evidence. The Divisional Court rejected the criticisms made of
              him.

13.5   In conclusion the judge said that none of the evidence that he had been asked to
       consider added anything significant to the evidence which was available to the
       Taylor Inquiry or to the Inquests. Also that the investigation of the disaster by the
       West Midlands Police was not biased in favour of the South Yorkshire force.

       Home Secretary’s Statement

13.6   On 18 February 1998 the Home Secretary announced to the House that he, the
       Attorney-General and the Director of Public Prosecutions had no reasons to doubt
       the conclusions of the scrutiny. Much of the evidence considered was already in the
       public domain but he was arranging for the other material (subject to certain
       overriding reasons) to be placed in the Library of the House.




                                                                                         42
14.      THE HFSG REPRESENTATIONS

14.1      The HFSG have provided us with a copy/ofatrundle of documents which they say
          is the kernel of their case. It comprises^£^laj/ge folders of their evidence and a
       /'further folder covering the law. It includes amtmber of witness statements of police
          officers and others (including details of amendments made to police statements),
C         Taylor Inquiry transcripts of oral evidence, and the Inquest transcript of the evidence
          of Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray. I understand that they may not have the consent
          of many of the police witnesses that they would wish to call for the prosecution.

14.2     The folder containing the amended police statements has added notes describing
         what is said to have been deleted or amended. In addition the HFSG solicitor has
         made personal comments on the quality of this mainly opinion evidence as well as
         the failure of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to properly address some of the points
         raised.

14.3     The formal representations were received on 28 September 1998. They are said to
         be in opposition to the defendants’ request for the case to be taken over and
         discontinued. There is a discussion of the right to a private prosecution and the test
         which should be applied. The general points that they make are:

         •      In deciding to prosecute a private prosecutor is entitled to apply a test less
                strict than the CPS test of evidential sufficiency from the Code for Crown
                Prosecutors. The CPS should not approach a review of the present kind on
                the basis that it should apply its own test of evidential sufficiency. The
                Taylor findings alone show there is a realistic prospect of conviction for
                manslaughter and misfeasance^— ^

                Except in the plainest/of cas^it would be a misuse of the discretion given
                to the CPS to take ovej^a prosecujiem such as this in order to discontinue it.

                The significance of the witness statements disclosed in the course of the
                scrutiny and the hundreds of unsworn police statements disclosed by the
                Home Secretary in 1998 is difficult to overstate. They disclose a prima facie
                case of manipulation of evidence to the benefit of the defendants and the
                South Yorkshire Police. The independence of the West Midlands Police was
                a sham.

                There was calculated selection of the documents sent to the DPP in 1990.
                Many important statements were excluded, eg, edited statements of police
                officers.

                 The South Yorkshire Police solicitors have acted under a serious conflict of
                 interest in the course of previous inquiries and continue to deny access to the
                 families to the South Yorkshire archive.


                 In the opinion of leading counsel there is sufficient evidence on which to
              commit for trial already. The archive of statements and exhibits in the
              possession of the police will add significantly to the prosecution case at
              committal.

       Sufficiency of Evidence

14.4   The HFSG accept that the law follows Adomako (ante) and submit that all the
       elements of the offence of this specie of involuntary manslaughter are not disputed
       except for the last which is a jury question. The key points made are:

       •      The decision to open the gates without taking steps to divert the oncoming
              spectators was a "blunder of the first magnitude". The decision was taken by
              Duckenfield with the agreement or acquiescence of Murray.

       •     Certain police evidence, which was suppressed until 1998, suggests that it
             was the practice of senior officers to ensure that the tunnel was closed when
             the pens were full.

       •     Duckenfield and Murray were in the Control Box and could see the central
             pens. They had an even better view on the CCTV. Murray, who had been
             on duty in 1988, culpably failed to give the proper and obvious advice;
             Duckenfield "froze" and later admitting lying about how the gate came to be
             opened.

       •     Duckenfield’s lie was an obvious attempt to impede inquiries and to suppress
             the truth.

       Public Interest and Interests of Justice Factors

14.5   The key points made by the HFSG under this heading here are:

       •     The HFSG has been deprived of critical information, statements and
             documents about the disaster for years. When the DPP investigation began
             information and statements were closely guarded. Following the open
             approach of the Home Secretary in 1998, the information now available
             undermines the inquest verdicts of accidental death and calls into question
             the validity of all previous investigations.

       •     The findings of the Taylor Inquiry have survived for 9 years. Prosecutions
             for the present offences are justified. Prosecutions for additional offences on
             the basis of the new material are justified in spite of the "scrutiny".

       •     There has been a sustained suppression of the truth in the course of the
             original investigations. The scrutiny was misled on the practice of editing
              statements for the Taylor Inquiry. Some of those statements are still missing.
             The South Yorkshire Police adopted a policy of withholding information,
              critical to the issue of negligence, from the Taylor Inquiry, the DPP, the
              Coroner and presumably the Police Complaints Authority. ^

                                                                                         44
       •       The unedited statement of the Chief Constable of Merseyside, who was
              present at the match, contained hearsay, impression, commendation and
              comment. It bestows lavish praise on the senior officers at the match in
              sharp contrast to the editecFstatements of junior officers whose criticisms      JPXP
              were painstakingly excused. In the Master Witness List for the Taylor
              Inquiry it was placed between7the statements of Duckenfield and Murray.            7
              It has to be inferred thaf~1ms was done in order to influence the reader
              against prosecutions.

       •       The HFSG argue that only if the West Midlands Police as the investigating
              force was truly independent of those it investigated, and impartial, could any
              of the four inquiries ( Taylor, DPP, Coroner and PCA) be regarded as full,
              independent and complete. If it was not then no weight could be attached
              to its report and the value of the conclusions of those to whom their officers
              reported is diminished.

       •       The inquest, ostensibly objective and dispassionate, is now shown to have
              been manipulated by South Yorkshire Police for their own ends, and by West
              Midlands Police. For this reason the defendants are not entitled to rely upon
              the inquest verdicts to put an end to this prosecution.

       The Limitations of the Stuart-Smith Report

14.6   The HFSG consider that caution has to be employed in accepting facts set out in the
       report. They cite the conclusions about the edited statements being seriously wrong.
       The scale of the editing now revealed exceeds anything shown to the scrutiny. The
       report is economical with information. Only small parts of advice of counsel in
       1990 are set out. The provision of the whole advice is required so that the whole
       reasoning is apparent. They say it is clear that privilege has been waived by the
       provision of the report to the scrutiny. Justice requires that the West Midlands
       Police report and the advice of counsel be disclosed to the HFSG.

14.7   They state that there is no evidence that the judge saw the Master Witness List or j      Q
       knew what the DPP had considered, and that there was no ground to believe that he
       sought to compare the evidence available to the Director with the total evidence
       available.

14.8   Their final word is that it would be a most serious injustice to discontinue the
       prosecution.

       Supplementary Representations

14.9   These were received on 2 October 1998. As to the allegation of PCOJ the HFSG
       say that previous inquiries were seriously misled by Mr Duckenfield and both the
       police forces. At the Taylor Inquiry the officer made a half hearted admission
       followed by a denial of an intent to deceive and a claim to have been in a ‘state of
       shock’. Earlier in his evidence when asked if he could help as the genesis of the
       lie, he replied "No". This was a lie as his later admissions demonstrated. The ‘lie’

                                                                                         45
       was transmitted to the Fire Service, the Ambulance Service and the BBC. The
       management of the Club were misled. The officer admitted that he withheld the
       correct information but said it was for "good motives". There was an attempt to
       limit the number and effect of his lies by the omission of this detail from police
       witness statements. At the inquest he said that he could not remember what he had
       said on the topic. He lied to the Coroner’s jury about this.

14.10 It is said that the scrutiny report suggests that the DPP may not have considered in
      1990 the question of the attempt to pervert the course of justice. The true position
      is that the ‘lie’ was repeated to a number of persons, carefully and deliberately, by
      Duckenfield or by others with his encouragement. The HFSG is actively studying
      the significance of these matters in relation to the integrity of the investigations by
      the two police forces.

14.11 The HFSG argue that Duckenfield’s admissions "...show gross negligence causative
      of death, and that they disclose a wanton and perhaps angry disregard for the safety
      of people in the pens, when other people, whom Duckenfield regarded as of the
      same ilk, were causing him a serious problem outside the ground."

14.12 They submit that the responsibility of Murray for the offences is greater than that
      of his superior as can be seen from the admissions made during his evidence to the
      Inquiry and the inquest.

14.13 Much of the rest of the representations are a recital of the evidence at the various
      inquiries, allegations of evidence suppression by witnesses in the making of their
      statements and a final submission. This latter concludes that the PCA rightly
      recognised that the charge of neglect was joint and that the reckless or grossly
      negligent decision to open the gates without closing off the pens was the
      responsibility of both defendants.

       Further Supplementary Representations

14.14 These were received on 12 October 1998. They concerned the obtaining of
      documents, including the West Midlands Police report, from the Public Record
      Office. There is a complaint about the denial of access to the report by the CPS.

14.15 An example of the quality of representation being put forward is based on a
      comparison between a paragraph from the report on how the tunnel to the central
      pens came to be cordoned off, and the statement of an officer who closed off the
      tunnel access in 1988:

              West Midlands Report: "Enquiries have found just one retired officer who
              recalls this happening. He, it must be said, is vague in his recollection but
              the probability is that some officers acting on their own initiative....(turned
              spectators away)".

              HFSG: They say that the retired officer, Higgins, is not vague. He said this
              in his statement of 2 June 1989: "I received instructions to close the gates to

                                                                                          46
I
I
                  the entrance and thereafter direct fans to the outer pens of the stand. I
I                 cannot recall where the instruction came from. Under normal circumstances
                  instruction came from a Serial Inspector or via radio from control. I cannot

1                 say from which the instruction came. Bearing in mind the time lapse and
                  having attended several matches at Hillsborough, it is difficult to relate detail
                  regarding this particular match."
■
■                 HFSG: "The significance of this evidence is that ‘control’ used as a matter
                  of habit to give this instruction, as did an Inspector, no doubt in liaison with
I                 each other. This instruction was given in 1988 when Murray was in the
®                 Control Box. It is to be assumed that the DPP was given the same account
                  in 1990 about the opening of the gates in 1988, as appears in the Interim
|                 Report of October 1989. If so, he was demonstrably misled."

    14.16 The alleged ‘forcing’ of the perimeter gate was often raised by South Yorkshire

1
^
          officers at the Taylor Inquiry. The purpose of the suggestion was to imply that the
          lying assertion made repeatedly by Duckenfield that the fans had broken down the
          gates might have had some basis in fact, and been the result of some confusion.

    14.17 The appendices to the Police Interim Report appear to demonstrate that much time
          was devoted by police officers (probably both West Midlands and South Yorkshire)
I         to collecting statements from officers of other forces to bolster what Lord Taylor
          derided as the ‘conspiracy theory’ that there was a plot by ticketless, late arriving
          and intoxicated supporters to force an admission into the ground.
I   14.18 As the Police Interim Report is now in the public domain, there can be no

I         justification of any kind for withholding the final report, or the advice of counsel
          that was made on the basis of that report. The CPS is asked to produce them.


I
I
I
I
I
I
I
                                                                                                47
I
1
I
I   15.    THE DEFENCE REPRESENTATIONS

I   15.1   The initial request for the CPS to take over the case in order to discontinue was
            eceived from the defence solicitors on 2 July 1998 and was on the basis that
            ontinuation would be contrary to the public interest. The points raised to support
I           his were:

                  The conclusions of the joint opinion of counsel in 1990;
I
                  The accidental death verdicts of the inquest jury;
I                 The conclusion of the scrutiny that there was no ‘new evidence’ which
                  would influence the decision not to prosecute;
I                 The intensity of the media coverage and the effect on public opinion;

I                 The emotional stress that the two officers have been under since the disaster;

                  Witness recollection of events after the passage of time;
I                 Nothing would be served by the expenditure of resources on a trial that

I   15.2
                  would achieve nothing in addressing the causes of the disaster.

           Further new representations were received from Mr Murray’s solicitors in early July:

I          •     That Mr Murray had suffered a complete breakdown in his health;

           •     That following the clear conclusions of the scrutiny report there is under
1                section 23 of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 insufficient evidence;


I          •     The view of the Home Secretary and Lord Justice Stuart-Smith that re­
                 opening the inquiries would serve no useful purpose whatsoever.

    15.3   Thefinal batch of defence representations were sent to the CPS on 9 October 1998.
1          The solicitors for Mr Murray make comments on the quality of the HFSG
           submissions on the law and the reasoning put forward.             Solicitors for Mr
I          Duckenfield say that the HFSG have concentrated on the evidential basis for the
           summons issued. They submit that the Director is well placed to consider the public
           interest as well. They disagree with the HFSG assertion that a clear prima facie
1          case exists. They counter the HFSG allegations of the suppression of evidence by
           the police and support the scrutiny findings that there was no improper interference
           with witnesses or manipulation of evidence. They cite examples where the
1          representations made by the HFSG are clearly wrong in their criticisms, for example,
           that Mr Duckenfield met Lord Justice Stuart-Smith who then failed to refer to this
           in his report. No such meeting took place and that criticism is therefore unfounded.
I
1
                                                                                             48

I
I
15.4        They submit that the HFSG concedes that the findings of the Taylor Inquiry fall
            short of those needed to establish a prima facie case when it was said that "The
            Taylor findings in themselves amount almost to a prima facie case."35

15.5        There is no evidence that Mr Duckenfield was ever told about the police action in
            1988 (closing off the tunnel access) or should have been aware of it. The analysis
            of the ‘new evidence’ from the HFSG adds no strength to the their case.

15.6        The solicitors take issue with the stated CPS Policy of taking over a private
            prosecution in order to discontinue it only where there is ‘clearly no case to answer’.
            They request clarification for the justification of the policy and cite the observation
            made by the Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure (Phillips Commission)
            (1981):

                   "The test applied to the Director’s cases (ie, whether or not there is a realistic
                   prospect of conviction) should be applied by all who make the decisions that
                   bring a case to court".36

15.7        They consider that pursuant to the Code for Crown Prosecutors, if there is
            insufficient evidence for a realistic prospect of conviction, the Director will be
            bound to take over the conduct of the proceedings and discontinue. However on the
            basis that the Director applies a lesser standard they ask the CPS to consider the
            admissibility and reliability of the evidence. They emphasise that from the material
            so far submitted by the prosecution there is a clear paucity of evidence relating to
            vital issues. They argue that admissions of liability by the South Yorkshire Police
            in negligence proceedings have no force in relation to the specific actions of
            individual officers.

15.8        As regards the allegation of perverting the course of justice, they say that it has
            never been suggested that Mr Duckenfield ever uttered the words complained of to
            anyone charged with investigating the disaster. There is no evidence that he played
            any role in the transmission of the comment to those who were not present at the
            time, or that he engaged in what is said to be a damage limitation exercise where
            witness statements are taken without any mention of the ‘lie’.

15.9        They put forward a number of representations as to the public interest factors that
            should be considered if that test becomes relevant . Their concerns are especially
            addressed to the matter of the 9 year delay, that the offence was committed as a
            result of a genuine mistake or misunderstanding (as balanced against the seriousness
            of the offence) rather than any pre-meditation, and of the ill health of the defendant.

15.10 Finally, they are of the view that the Director is bound to give full and detailed
      reasons for the decision taken addressing the issues raised by all the parties.


       35
                   HFSG submission of 24 September 1998 at para 12.
       36
                   Phillips Commission at para 8.9

                                                                                                  49
16.    KEY CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE CPS REVIEW

       An Overview

16.1   The correspondence and formal representations from the private prosecutor and the
       solicitors for the two defendants raise many points. Some of these are relevant to
       this review, others are not. The key issue to be resolved is whether or not there is
       clearly no case to answer and/or the public interest/interests of justice circumstances
       do not require a prosecution for the charges against Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray.
       Once that point is decided then other more minor issues, such as disclosure, will fall
       into place.

16.3   In conducting this review and in the making of my recommendations in chapter 17,
        I have looked at material in the public domain, material provided to me by the
        parties to the prosecution, other non-sensitive material in my possession and also
        confidential papers subject to public interest immunity or legal privilege. A
        schedule of this material as attached at Appendix 2. Some of the material is not in
        a form admissible in the criminal courts, however I have proceeded on the basis
        that, if relevant, it is capable of being adduced by the HFSG in an acceptable
        format. I accept the findings of the Taylor Inquiry, the Coroner’s Inquests, the
       judicial review in the Divisional Court, and the scrutiny. I have no reason not to
        accept those relevant findings of fact made by the police in the course of their
        investigations, however I do not necessarily accept their conclusions on the
        evidence. I find persuasive the conclusions of joint counsel in their advice of 1990
        to the Director.

16.4   While I note the concern expressed as to the validity of the CPS policy on the
       taking over and subsequent discontinuance of a private prosecution, I consider that
       I am bound by what the Director has laid down as guidance and my later
       recommendations will reflect this.

       CPS Policy Guidelines

16.5   I have considered the Code for Crown Prosecutors and the Explanatory
       Memorandum. The Code discusses the two stages in the decision to prosecute. Only
       when the evidential test, ‘the realistic prospect of conviction’, is passed does a
       Crown Prosecutor go on to consider if a prosecution is needed in the public interest.
       If the first test is not passed then there must not be a prosecution.

16.6 The CPS decision of 1990, following Counsels’ advice and based on the evidence
      provided by the West Midlands Police, stated that the evidential test had not been
      passed. Until late 1996 nothing was put before the Director which would have
      affected that decision. Following my review in 1997, our decision was that the so-
      called ‘new evidence’ provided by the HFSG did not provide new grounds for a
      recommendation of a further criminal investigation. There was no suppression of
      medical or video evidence as alleged by Alun Jones QC. The scrutiny report of
      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith fully supported this stance. In the latest representations
      from the HFSG it is being said that all the judicial inquiries and proceedings to date

                                                                                           50
       have been misled. They make a strong inference that this is because of a criminal
       conspiracy between the South Yorkshire and the West Midlands Police. They point
       to the editing of statements taken by the police in 1989 which they say was not put
       before the scrutiny. They consider that all previous hearings are therefore tainted.
       The HFSG ‘evidence’ shows that while there were details of opinion and fact that
       were not put before Lord Taylor (because of the editing that was done by the police
       solicitors in 1989), or were allegedly not considered by the scrutiny, my examination
       of them has not found anything material that would affect the previous CPS
       decisions. Quite simply^Jher^ is still no realistic prospect of conviction on the
                                                   act in a public office. The matter of the
 /     alleged PCOJ is discussed/under the. ev; .ential test sub-heading.

                                                   jntatives have asked the CPS to take over
       the proceedings. Thai-should-oniy
                         That-shoul(Lorrty be done in accordance with the principles set out
       in chapter 7 of Volume 1 of the Prosecution Manual where there is a particular need
       to do so on behalf of the public. Para 7.11 applies and I requested copies of
       relevant papers from the defendants and the prosecutor. These have been supplied,
       although all the parties consider that I or the police have more evidence that would
       be relevant to their case. The South Yorkshire Police have assisted me in the
       obtaining of other material that I wished to consider.

16.8   I have looked at para 7.12 and decided that it was not part of my review to consider
       taking.the case over in order to prosecute it. The original CPS decision of 1990 that
       there was not a realistic prospect of conviction against any person for any criminal
       offence then considered was forefront in my mind, as were the conclusions of my
       previous review and the subsequent decision.

16.9   Para 7.13 pointed me towards the provisions of para 7.8 and 7.10 in the ' ’
       of a prosecution in order to discontinue it. As the overall evidence on the (five
       charges now before the Magistrates’ Court (a short discussion on th<I
       otherwise of the PCOJ allegation will follow later in the chapter) falls short of the
       evidential sufficiency test set out in the Code for Crown prosecutors, I next
       considered the circumstances for discontinuance:

       i)     There is clearly no case to answer: This is the main question to be
              resolved.

       ii)    The public interest factors tending against prosecution clearly outweigh
              those factors tending in favour; especially a consideration of a malicious
              or vexatious prosecution under section 42 of the Supreme Court Act 1982 as
              amended by section 24 of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985. This
              provision concerns an application by the Attorney General to the High Court
              where it is perceived that a person is instituting a vexatious prosecution. I
              also looked at the delay of 9 years in bringing the criminal prosecution to
              court. While the two defendants may have general health problems, I have
              seen no medical evidence or representations which would affect the decision
              to be made.


                                                                                         51
       iii)   The prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests of justice: I have
              found nothing to support this point.

16.10 The policy guidelines in chapter 7 discuss a duty to take over a private prosecution
      No mention is made about the division of a case into the separate charges, where,
      following the application of para 7.10, only some offences may be suitable for
      taking over and subsequent discontinuance and it would be for the private prosecutor
      to continue with the remainder. However section 23 of the Prosecution of Offences
      Act 1985 describes the power to discontinue where the DPP has the conduct of
      proceedings for an offence. Section 6 of the Act refers only to "criminal
      proceedings" without reference to an offence. As the Director has the power to
      discontinue the proceedings for one offence where she has the conduct of
      proceedings for a number of related matters, it must surely be that the term
      "criminal proceedings" in section 6 should be read as referring to individual charges
      within the total proceedings.    In which case all of the options below may be
      considered:

      i)      Allowing the private prosecution to proceed in its entirety.

      ii)     Taking over the whole of the prosecution in order to discontinueall charges.

      iii)    Taking over only that part of the prosecution where:

              •      there is clearly no case to answer and/or public interest factors apply
                     on a particular charge, for example, on the allegation of the pervert
                     course of justice rather than that of manslaughter/misconduct, or

              •      there is clearly no case to answer and/or public interest factors apply
                     against a particular defendant on all the charges against him.

16.11 Para 7.10 shows that the test to be applied is not the two part test from the Code.
      Rather it is a consideration of all the circumstances both as to evidence and the
      noted public interest criteria. These are reviewed below under the various sub­
      headings.

      Application of CPS Policy

16.12 The test of ‘clearly no case to answer’ can be equated with the Galbraith Test37
      which Archbold accepts as being applicable to the Magistrates’ Court:

              "(1) If there is no evidence that the crime alleged has been committed by the
              defendant there is no difficulty - the judge will stop the case. (2) The
              difficulty arises where there is some evidence but it is of a tenuous nature,
              for example, because of inherent weakness or because it is inconsistent with


              R v Galbraith [1981] 73 Cr App R 124 CA referred to in Archbold 1998 at
              paras 4.294 to 297.

                                                                                          52
               other evidence, (a) Where the judge concludes that the prosecution evidence,
               taken at its highest, is such that a jury properly directed could not properly
               convict on it, it is his duty, on a submission being made, to stop the case,
               (b) Where however the prosecution evidence is such that its strength or
               weakness depends on the view to be taken of a witness’s reliability, or other
               matters which are generally speaking within the province of the jury and
               where on one possible view of the facts there is evidence on which the jury
               could properly come to the conclusion that the defendant is guilty, then the
               judge should allow the matter to be tried by the jury" (per Lord Lane CJ).

         A Crown Court case, R v Shippey38, is often quoted to show that the requirement
         to take the prosecution evidence at its highest did not mean "picking out all the
         plums and leaving the duff behind". The judge said that it was necessary to make
         an assessment of the evidence as a whole.

16.13 However the use of the word "clearly" in our present test implies that we have to
      be satisfied (or perhaps in a stronger sense, ‘to be sure’) that there is no case to
      answer before taking over and discontinuing a private prosecution. It is submitted
      that it is a slightly lower standard than the prima facie test used in Galbraith. This
      can be seen as a parallel to the way in which we apply the evidential test from the
      Code, where we do not look for the same high standard of proof that a jury or bench
      of magistrates needs to find before it can convict. If it is considered that the case
      is finely balanced as to the merits then the scales should fall on the side of the
      private prosecutor.

16.14 The test from R v Adomako sets out the four essential elements of gross negligence.
      For the purpose of this review I accept the findings of previous courts and inquiries
      that the first three elements are sufficiently proved; that there was a duty of care by
      the police generally towards the deceased, that there was a breach of that duty, and
      the deaths of the victims then ensued. Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray were the two
      senior officers available to make decisions that would affect the events resulting in
      the death of the fans in the central pens. They were the representatives of the police
      force who were involved in the making of the decision that led to what was
      described as a "blunder of the first magnitude". The general duty of the police force
      as a whole was therefore visited upon them for their specific acts. There was a
      breach of that duty by them, as on an objective assessment of what happened they
      could have prevented the deaths by taking certain actions rather than omitting to act.

16.15 The private prosecutor and I have recently agreed as to what constitutes the alleged
      acts or omissions said to constitute gross negligence. I doubt that the defendants
      would take issue at the narrowing of the grounds. For the purposes of the main
      charges the prosecution say that while the decision to open gate C was a proper one,
      the omission of the two defendants in properly considering where the resultant
      inrush of fans would go and in not taking the necessary action in preventing
      crushing in pens known to be full, was the act of gross negligence.


    38
                R v Shippey ( 1988) Crim L R 767, Turner J.

                                                                                          53
16.16 The fourth element from R v Adomako is whether the act complained of should be
      characterised as gross negligence and therefore a crime. It was held that this is
      supremely a question for the jury. As previously stated in R v Khan the appropriate
      course would be to leave to the jury the four questions posed based on the above
      principles where the allegation is of manslaughter by omission.

       Evidential Test: Manslaughter

16.17 That there is evidence of negligence by the two officers is incontrovertible. I submit
      that it at least amounts to individual civil liability for the two officers. It does not
      amount to criminal liability following the Code tests. There is evidence which could
      be put before the jury just as there is evidence tending to rebut the allegations.

16.18 The evidence in support of a prosecution of both officers can be seen in the previous
      chapters and may be summarised as follows:

       •      That both officers had a joint responsibility in the circumstances of their
              respective duties in the control box, to take such action as was necessary to
              secure the safety of the fans and others. Further Mr Duckenfield leant
              heavily on Mr Murray’s experience.

       •      There was a lack of monitoring of the terraces by the police and specifically
              by the two senior officers who had a direct eye-view of the central pens as
              well as by the use of the CCTV monitors.

       •      There was a lack of realisation by the two senior officers in the control box
              as tp JM ^ p c fo w d in g or potential overcrowding in the central pens.

                            to consider the foreseeable consequences of allowing a large
                     x of fans- to enter the ground through gate C without supervision and       v/


                            to warn police officers on the concourse or nearby of the gate
                           idUiflL order to relieve the crush outside.

              ThejMaiied to direct police officers under their control to close off the access
                me central tunnel in order to prevent a foreseeable crushing incident.

              They should have realised that the policy of "letting the fans find their own
              level" was not one to apply in the circumstances of this particular match.

16.19 The evidence against a prosecution of one or both officers may be summarised as
      follows-

              It was Mr Duckenfield who had overall responsibility for the conduct of the
              policing at the match as well as an assumed command role within the control
              box itself^/Mr Murray was only acting in, an advisory role when considering £           ^

                                                                                           54
the decision to open gate C. This is as advised by Counsel at para 49 of
their joint opinion of 1990. It was Mr Duckenfield’s responsibility alone. LJs ]JL

Mr Duckenfield was newly promoted and was in a position where he had to            P
depend on the experience of others in advising him on the policing of this
type of match. His general experience was not sufficient to prepare him for
problems that had not been foreseen in the Operational Order for the match.

Mr Duckenfield was dependent on an operational order that he had no part
in preparing. It was a virtual copy of the previous year’s order which was
seen as being satisfactory in the light of the perceived success by senior
officers of their policing of that match. That there had been some foresight
of possible crushing in the central pens by junior officers, resulting in the
tunnel access being blocked, was not known to officers of the rank of
Inspector or above and therefore did not feature in the considerations for the
1989 game.

Mr Duckenfield had emphasised at his pre match briefing that the safety of
the spectators was of paramount importance, although the monitoring of the
pens to that end was not specifically mentioned. He was entitled to depend
on other officers under his command to react appropriately. Unfortunately
some failed to react as they should have done.

It was not surprising that the two senior officers did not notice that the
central pens were "full" prior to the opening of the gate as overcrowding was
not apparent to almost all other observers.

Mr Murray did attempt of his own volition to warn the Club Security Officer
of the crushing outside prior to the opening of gate C but was unable to send

y
a message on the radio due to temporary communication problems. By the
time the communications were restored it was too late to control the tunnel
access.

At the time of the opening of gate C, the attention of both officers was on
the obvious life threatening situation of the crush by the turnstiles. Their
failure to take an all round view of this incident instead of a single minded
concentration on the gate is perhaps understandable and should make them
liable for negligence in civil law only. Their attention was focused on a
known risk of serious injury or death outside the gate, to the prejudice of any
regard of the possible risk inside the ground if the further correct action was
not taken. What is obvious in hindsight was difficult to appreciate as the
emergency was unrolling.

Although the main cause of the disaster is placed at the door of the police
generally, the individual actions of Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray form
only a part of that liability. The congestion outside the turnstiles that led to
gate C being opened had a number of causes that were for the most part
outside the control of the two defendants. Other persons should take a
               greater share in the blame as was recognised by the scrutiny.

               There is no new evidence that might have affected the verdicts of the Inquest
               jury. They were not misled as a result of any alleged suppression of
               evidence by the police. They rejected the option of verdicts of unlawful
               killing based on the criminal standard of proof. Their verdicts were of
               accidental death on the balance of probabilities. Therefore it can be argued
               that the jury found that they had sufficient information before them to reject
               even a prima facie case of unlawful killing. If they had not then it is
               submitted that they would otherwise have brought open verdicts.

         Public Interest Circumstances for Manslaughter

16.20 While some might have a view that the prosecution by the HFSG is being
      undertaken for reasons of revenge, or a perverse desire to obtain ‘justice’ that
      allegedly is being denied them, the HFSG are properly taking the various legal
      channels open to them. That others may disagree is part of the judicial process. I
      recognise the considerable distress that members of the HFSG have suffered since
      the disaster, and do not consider that their private prosecution is either malicious or
      vexatious.

16.21 Delay is said to be a relevant factor. After 9 years the memories of witnesses may
      have faded or been coloured by what has happened since. However the allegations
      are extremely serious and on the basis of the large number of written statements
      taken at the time on each and every aspect of the disaster, I accept that those
      memories can be sufficiently refreshed to alleviate the problem.

16.22 There is no medical evidence which would justify serious consideration as a factor
      against prosecution.

         Misconduct in a Public Office

16.23 The evidential and public interest considerations are as above.

         Evidential Test: Perverting the Course of Justice

16.24 This is a new allegation which has not featured in previous reviews. The ‘lie’ about
      gate C being forced by the fans has been admitted by Mr Duckenfield but with a
      number of explanations (i) that he was not being deceitful but may have referred to
      an earlier time when the gate was briefly forced open, and (ii) he was in shock and
      wanted to collect his thoughts and assess the situation before communicating the
      truth. Lord Taylor may have been close to the truth when he gave his assessment
      that the officer could not face the enormity of the decision to open the gates and
      what happened afterwards: "He froze"39



    39
                See page 24 of this review.
16.25 I consider that in the circumstances the deliberate misdirection of the various
      witnesses, including his own Assistant Chief Constable, was conduct that might have
      had the tendency to pervert the course of public justice. That judicial proceedings
      were going to result from the disaster was not just a possibility it was a certainty40,
      and must have been within Mr Duckenfield’s contemplation. However the ‘lie’ had
      no impact on judicial proceedings except to bring vilification upon the officer.
      Further I have grave concern about the proof required to show that Mr Duckenfield
      intended to pervert the course of justice. There is no good and sufficient evidence
      that the officer was attempting a cover up of his own and other police actions at
      1515 on the day as victims were still dying on the field. Lord Taylor had the
      opportunity to observe Mr Duckenfield and the relevant witnesses on this point
      during his Inquiry. His conclusions were the result of those observations coupled
      with his vast experience. I find nothing in the evidence that would bring me to any
      other conclusion. Mr Duckenfield could not cope with the great stress he was put
      under, his reaction was out of character. He did not have the intent necessary so as
      to have a realistic prospect of conviction on this allegation. For that reason I do not
      go toyconsider the public interest test from the Code. However policy guidelines are
      thatioffence is reserved for the more serious cases of interference with the course1'
      of justice rather than where proceedings are at an early stage (or had not started),
      and there was little impact on them.

16.26 The above argument applies equally to the consideration of the test for taking over
      the case in order to discontinue it, both as regards the quality of the evidence and
      also the stated policy on the public interest.

        The Interests of Justice

16.27 I have found no factors that would affect any of the CPS recommendations as being
      clearly likely to damage the interests of justice. None of the stated examples in para
      7.10 of Volume 1 of the CPS Prosecution Manual apply. Although disclosure may
      involve voluminous material, it should not pose any real difficulty. Documents
      subject to claims of public interest immunity or legal privilege can be dealt with
      under the normal rules applicable to third party disclosure.




   40
               See R v Rafique at page 10 of this review.
    17.            RECOMMENDATIONS

                   Mr Duckenfield

    17.1           On the charges of manslaughter and misconduct in a public office I find that while
                   there is both insufficient evidence for a realistic prospect of conviction and for a
                   prima facie case (on the balance of probabilities), there is some evidence of
                   negligence that can be put before a jury. I am unable to say that there is clearly no
                   case to answer. In coming to this opinion I have taken into account not only the
                   verdicts of the jury but also the Coroner’s summing up and his consideration that
                   there was some evidence to go before the jury on the question of unlawful killings.

                   Recommendation: That the private prosecution be allowed to continue on these
                   three charges.

    17.2           As regards the PCOJ, this charge adds little to the private prosecutor’s case. In my
                   opinion there is clearly no case to answer as well as there being valid public interest
                   factors against this matter proceeding.

                   Recommendation: That this part of the proceedings be taken over and then
                   discontinued.

               Mr Murray

    17.3         I consider that the individual responsibility of this offiper for the omission to act
                 after gate C was o'pemd is less than that of Mr Dupk€nfield. Mr Murray deferred
                 to his superior for the making of the crucial dgetsion, although       nnitp nmnprlv
                 prompted him^when delay set in. While I note Lord Taylor’s cor
                 joint mi§J*ragement by the two officeps^conceming the buildu]
                 tumsjil€s, I am more persuaded by Counsels’ opinion of 1990 w
                 sple blame for the omission to jscdt after the gate was opened a
              -''Duckenfield. The evidence tjjdrefore passes the ‘clearly no case

                   Recommendation: That all three offences against this officer be taken over and
                   discontinued.

                   Disclosure

    17.4       The disclosure of materiaj^iifour possession should falleW'm accordance with our
               stated policy. The^St5uth Yorkshire Police aje^Hkely to follow our lead albeit
               grudgingly. A-eiaim for documents attraetifig public interest immunity and legal
               privilege^should be maintained for ^e^advices of counsel, internal CPS reports and

          /    <

     /
/
                                fo   CJwdju,            C   .   nvut^ f L f . / p l ) pr\Jjp
                    C t U A 6U \       &                        '                                      58
18.    CONCLUSIONS

18.1   My review of all the evidence and representations has caused me some difficulty as
       I find that there is a fine balance between the arguments for and against. It is a
       matter of judgement as to whether or not there is clearly no case to answer (in
       conjunction with the public interest factors) on the issue of gross negligence. I
       accept that another reviewing lawyer could come to a different, although still
       justifiable, decision. It may be that the Director has certain policy views that would
       affect his decision.

18.2   The potential ramifications of the various decision options are:

       (i)     Decision to take over and discontinue the case in its entirety: The HFSG will
               take the matter to judicial review of the CPS decision.

       (ii)    Decision to let the private prosecution proceed in its entirety: The defendants
               are unlikely to proceed by way of judicial review of the CPS decision. They
               have already intimated that they are prepared to put forward abuse of process
               arguments to the Magistrates’ Court. A committal will be strongly contested,
               and if my arguments are correct will fail.

       (iii)   Decision to accept the review recommendations: There would be pressure on
               the HFSG to decide between continuing with the remaining charges or
               accepting delay while they go to the Divisional Court. Those representing
               Mr Duckenfield would have more fuel for their abuse of process arguments
               on a fair trial.

18.3   Whatever our decision may be, if the eventual proceedings are not favourable to the
       HFSG they are most likely to take further action, either by way of their
       representations that all previous judicial proceedings are invalid because of an
       alleged conspiracy by the police to suppress evidence, or by use of the European
       Convention on Human Rights.




George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
CPS Central Casework
York

27 (October 1998 \
  HILLSBOROUGH REPORT




       APPENDIX 1




1990 BRIEFING NOTE FOR THE
     ATTORNEY GENERAL
ATTORNEY GENERAL

               Background Note: Hillsborough Disaster


1.      On the 15th April 1989 at the Hillsborough stadium,
        Sheffield 95 people died and over 400 were injured due to
        gross overcrowding and crushing in the two pens behind
        the goal at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

2.      A public enquiry headed by Lord Justice Taylor produced
        an interim report in August 1989.  The West Midlands
        Police assisted in the preparation of the report and
        later conducted a criminal investigation which was
        requested by the D.P.P.  The criminal investigation was
        extensive producing bulky documentation and a full
        transcript of the evidence given at the enquiry. The
        police investigation was meticulous.

3.      A copy of Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report and a copy
        of Counsel's opinion by Gareth Williams Q.C. and Peter
        Birts Q.C. are attached.  It would be useful to refer to
        the plans at Appendix 1 and Appendix 4 of the report.


Facts

4.      There is little, if any, dispute as to what actually
        happened,Chief Superintendent Duckenfield was the police
        officer responsible for policing the match.

5.      At 2.52 pm (8 minutes before kick-off) Duckenfield
        ordered one of the exit gates, Gate C, at the Leppings
        Lane end to be opened.  This was to relieve massive
        overcrowding and crushing at the turnstiles caused by a
        build up of supporters arriving after 2.30 pm.  In the
        five minutes after the gate was opened 2000 supporters
        entered the ground and went into a tunnel under the west
        stand which gave access only to the central pens 3 and 4.
        Those pens were already full.  There was no controlled
        way in which supporters were allowed in to the pens. The
        additional influx caused intense pressure and resulted in
        the collapse of a crush barrier 124A near the front of
        pen 3. Many died from suffocation and crushing and some
        were trampled on.  Perimeter gates were not opened by the
        police partly because of orders not to do so without
        permission and partly because officers did not appreciate
        the severity of what was occurring initially.  Later when
        the emergency was appreciated the small size and number
        of the gates made evacuation extremely difficult.

6.      The build up of fans outside the ground was due to the
        geography of the turnstiles, their marking and numbers
        and to a loss of police control of supporters outside
        becoming keen to get inside before the kick-off.
7.    The three major causal factors w e r e :-

      i . the layout of the ground
      ii.  the opening of the exit gate (gate C)
      iii. the build up outside the ground

Layout of the Ground

8.    The club were advised by a structural engineer, Dr
      Eastwood.  The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 required
      expert advice to obtain a safety certificate under the
      Act from the local council.  Dr Eastwood advised
      additional crush barriers, these were installed in 1979.
      A certificate was granted.

9.    The safety certificate did not specify maximum numbers
      for the pens.  This, with turnstile monitoring of
      numbers, would have limited entrance to the pens.

10.   It was the policy of the police at semi-finals to allow
      movement of supporters between pens before the kick-off
      after which the radial gates would be closed and locked.
      Hence without a control on the numbers entering the
      tunnel access pens 3 and 4 were liable to become grossly
      overcrowded.  The police had accepted responsibility for
      monitoring the pens and their policy of "letting the fans
      find their own level" was severely criticized by Taylor.

11.   The exit gate C, opened following Duckenfield's
      instruction, is opposite the tunnel.  No steps were taken
      to cordon off the tunnel or divert the fans around the
      sides of the West stand.  The supporters had nowhere to
      go but the already crowded pens 3 and 4.

12.   At 3.04 pm a surge forward in pen 3 caused the crush
      barrier 124A to break.  This appears to have been a major
      factor in the deaths since there were far fewer deaths in
      pen 4 where no barrier collapsed.  Barrier number 144 had
      been removed in 1986, its absence meant there was no
      retarding structure as fans emerged from the tunnel into
      pen 3. There was unbroken diagonal pressure from the
      mouth of the tunnel down to barrier 124A.  the collapse
      of barrier 124A was a major factor in the cause of the
      deaths. Barrier 124A was slightly corroded but it had
      been tested in July 1988 and had passed loading tests
      specified in the Government's Green Guide.  Taylor found
      that corrosion played a part in the collapse but the
      effective cause was the excessive unanticipated pressure
      exerted at the time of the forward surge.

13.   The crushing in pens 3 and 4 was not recognised by police
      either in the control box or on the perimeter of the
      pitch.  Evan supporters nearby, broadcasters and stewards
      were not immediately aware.

14.   Even after the crush, and until 3.06 pm, the main police
      concern was to prevent a pitch invasion.
The build up outside the Ground

15.   The opening of gate C which precipitated the disaster was
      made necessary by the massive build up of supporters at
      the Leppings Lane turnstiles between 2.30 and 2.50 pm.
      As kick-off time approached the crushing increased.    The
      police lost control of the crowd.  The crush became
      unmanageable, many feared for their lives. The kick-off
      was not postponed.  This course was only to be taken if
      there was a major cause of delay eg. a motorway accident
      or fog.  Taylor concluded that the kick-off should have
      been postponed.

16.   There was considerable evidence that people would be
      killed if gate C was not opened and that Duckenfield had
      no alternative but to do so. That being so neither
      Duckenfield nor other officers took any steps to deal
      with the consequences of opening the gate. The tunnel
      was not closed off even though such action had been taken
      by the police in 1988. Duckenfield did order the influx
      at gate A, which had been opened earlier, to be
      monitored.  His omission to do so at gate C was said by
      Taylor to be "a blunder of the first magnitude". This
      was the immediate cause of the crushing in pens 3 and 4.
      It was not the sole cause.

17.   The layout of the turnstiles, inadequate space for the
      formation of orderly queues and the limited extent of the
      waiting area combined with poor designation and marking
      of turnstiles contributed to slow turnstile operation.

18.   There were only 7 turnstiles to admit 10,100 fans at the
      other end of the ground there were 60 turnstiles to admit
      29,800.  Taylor concluded that the police and club should
      have foreseen potential queuing and waiting to admit
      fans.

19.   Many supporters arrived after 2.3 0 pm. Tickets advised
      arriving 15 minutes before kick-off. Some arrived
      without tickets.   The evidence shows many had been
      drinking.   Taylor concluded the majority had not been
      affected by drink.   Unruliness contributed to the pushing
      effect.   This contributed to the loss of control by the
      police.

20.   The main factor in the police loss of control was
      ineffective strategy planning for the large number of
      arrivals.  Taylor concluded that by controlling the fans
      and postponing the kick-off gate C could have remained
      closed.

Responsibilities

21.   The layout of the ground was the responsibility of the
      Club, Eastwood, the Council and the police. No one
      foresaw that up to 2000 fans would ever be allowed to
      enter pens 3 and 4 when they were already overcrowded.
      No one anticipated gate 3 being opened or the crushing
      outside the ground. The police must take the main
      responsibility for letting the fans "find their own
      level", however, the Club must share responsibility for
      the way in which supporters were allowed to fill the pens
      at semi-finals.

22.   The opening of gate C was Duckenfield1s responsibility.
      In the circumstances his decision was correct. His
      failure was to give no order to deal with the sudden
      influx of fans. Had the tunnel been cordoned off the
      disaster would almost certainly have been averted.

23.   The layout of the turnstiles, their numbers and marking
      are primarily matters for the police and the Club, but
      the Council have a partial responsibility to ensure safe
      access to the ground.

Criminal Offences

24.   The two offences would be Manslaughter and Culpable
      Misfeasance.  These potential offences were considered
      against all parties, ie. the club, the Council, the
      police and the structural engineers (Mr Eastwood).

The Club

25.   The Club's responsibility for the layout and alterations
      inside the ground and for the layout of the turnstiles is
      where any potential liability exists. It is clear that
      these were not the sole, or even the major causes and
      that any actions and omissions by the club only partly
      contributed to the crushing and deaths. The Club not
      only relied on its own consultant engineer Dr Eastwood
      but it responded to the suggestions and advice of the
      police in important matters.

26.   There is insufficient evidence to establish the actus
      reus of manslaughter against the Club.  Additionally the
      evidence does not show either the recklessness or gross
      negligence required for the manslaughter offence.
Sastwood and Partners

27.   Eastwood's advice formed only part of the events that
      lead tot he structural condition at the groujid. It could
      not be said that his advice caused the deaths.   In fact
      some of his advice, not acted on for financial reasons,
      may have lead to maximum limits being set for pens 3 and
      4.

28.   Again there is insufficient for the actus reus of
      manslaughter nor can*the required recklessness or
      negligence be established against Eastwood or his firm.

The Council

29.   The Council is responsible for the safety certificate and
      compliance with the Green Guide.  There were minor errors
      on the council's part but these only contributed in part
      to the ground conditions.   These are too remote to
      amount to the actus reus of manslaughter.  Again there is
      no evidence of recklessness or gross negligence.

The Police

30.   It is agreed that the main responsibility for the
      disaster must rest with the police.   They have partial
      responsibility for the ground layout. They were
      responsible for the "find their own level" policy with
      the supporters and also for supervising the Leppings Lane
      turnstiles.  The difficulties of large scale admission to
      the ground should have been foreseen.   However, the
      police failures occurred as part of a complex sequence of
      events, often outside the control of the police.   The
      difficulties at Leppings Lane were partly geographical
      and resulted largely in the arrival of vast numbers of
      supporters after 2.30 pm.  Those matters were beyond
      police control.  Unruly behaviour by a minority created
      problems.

31.   Responsibility for the failure to postpone the kick-off
      and to cordon off the access tunnel is confined to
      Duckenfield. As an organisation the police cannot be
      said to have caused the deaths by their strategy and
      operational shortcomings.  Whilst there were errors of
      judgement and practice there is no evidence that the
      police acted recklessly or in a grossly negligent manner
      as an organisation.

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield

32. . The failure to cordon off the access tunnel and not to
      postpone the kick-off were bad errors of judgement.  They
      were his ultimate responsibility.  He failed to notice
      the overcrowding in pens 3 and 4. He was recently
      promoted and had little experience for this semi-final
      match. His slowness to respond to what was happening was
      a result of is lack of experience.
33.   His failures significantly contributed to the crowd
      pressure which caused the crushing and collapse of
      barrier 124A. Had Duckenfield the requisite intention to
      support a charge of manslaughter? Clearly there was no
      unlawful or dangerous act on his part.  In failing to
      postpone the kick-off or order closure of the tunnel
      after opening gate C did he do an act which created an
      obvious and serious risk of causing personal injury
      either not giving thought to the possibility of such risk
      or having recognised that there was some risk involved
      nevertheless gone ahead and taken it?

34.   There are difficulties in proving that he intended to do
      an act which created an obvious and serious risk of
      causing personal injury.  The Director and Counsel
      concluded that it was not an obvious risk at the time.
      It is easy with hindsight to judge, but there must be a
      grave doubt as to whether the omissions created a risk
      which was obvious to anyone on the ground at the time.

35.   The Director concluded that there was insufficient
      evidence under the recklessness head of manslaughter
      against Duckenfield.  Nor was there evidence that he was
      grossly negligent in his failures to act.

36.   Counsel and the Director concluded that there was no
      evidence that Duckenfield was wilfully neglectful of his
      duty or was culpable so have to committed the offence of
      Culpable Malfeasance by a public official.

Conclusions

37.   The Director's decision not to issue proceedings was
      reached solely on the basis of an insufficiency of
      evidence to prove any criminal offence against any
      individual or body corporate ie. the City Council, the
      Police, the Engineers.   The decision was reached in
      accordance with the Director's code for Crown
      Prosecutors. The Public Interest factor was not one
      which came into play as the evidential sufficiency
      criterium had not been established in respect of any
      potential defendant.   Full consideration was given to the
      possibility of the proseuction of each of the bodies
      involved Respite their corporate status.

38.   The disaster was caused not by one single error or
      failure but by the combined effect of a series of
      mistakes, mis judgments and poor decisions, made by groups
      of people both over a period of time and by individuals
      on the day of the disaster.

Coroner's Inquests

39.   The Inquests began after the disaster and were adjourned
      when the Director requested a criminal investigation.
      The Coroner is obliged to adjourn an inquest when the
      Director makes such a request under the Coroner's Rules.
                                 7.

      Once the Coroner has received notification that the
      Director has decided not to issue criminal proceedings
      (or after such proceedings have concluded) the Coroner
      may resume the Inquest hearing.  The Hillsborough Inquest
      recently recommenced in November 1990. The latest
      estimate is that the Inquests will continue hearing
      evidence and are likely to conclude in March 1991.

40.   The point made by Kenneth Hind MP about the matter being
      forgotten if action is not taken against those
      responsible can be answered by pointing to the detailed
      interim and final report of the Public Inquiry conducted
      by Lord Justice Taylor, the civil proceedings at which
      the police admitted liability and the fact that
      disciplinary action is being considered by the Police
      Complaints Authority against various officers.

41.   The Coroner's jury may be influenced by the publicity
      surrounding the Director's decision.  The criminal
      investigation and any prosecution must take precedence
      over the Coroner's Inquisitorial hearing where no
      individual can be held responsible.  The Public Inquiry
      itself has been widely reported and such publicity can
      also be said to influence the jury's conclusions.
 HILLSBOROUGH REPORT




       APPENDIX 2




 SCHEDULE OF MATERIAL
CONSIDERED IN 1998 REVIEW
                          HILLSBOROUGH REPORT

      SCHEDULE OF MATERIAL CONSIDERED IN THE 1998 REVIEW



Number    Description of Item

1.        Taylor Inquiry Interim Report

2.        Taylor Inquiry Final Report

3.        Inquiry Transcripts:          Evidence of Duckenfield, Murray & others

4.        West Midlands Police Interim Report 2

5.        West Midlands Police Report:        Part I Introduction
                                               Part II    Statements & documents
                                               Part VII   Report conclusions
                                               Appendices Transcripts of interviews

6.        Joint Opinion of Counsel (1990)

7.        Coroner’s Summing Up

8.        Inquest Transcripts:                 Evidence of Duckenfield,     Murray,
                                               Kelly and Jackson

9.        Judgement of the Divisional Court

10.       HFSG Files and Representations (1997)

11.       CPS Review Report (1997)

12.       Report of the Scrutiny

13.       HFSG Files and Representations (1998)

14.       Defence Representations
I
1s t
                                m

                                CPS




Crown Prosecution Service   •   Working in the interests of justice
16.    KEY CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE CPS REVIEW

       An Overview

16.1   The correspondence and formal representations from the private prosecutor and the
       solicitors for the two defendants raise many points. Some of these are relevant to
       this review, others are not. The key issue to be resolved is whether or not there is
       clearly no case to answer and/or the public interest/interests of justice circumstances
       do not require a prosecution for the charges against Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray.
       Once that point is decided then other more minor issues, such as disclosure, will fall
       into place.

16.3   In conducting this review and in the making of my recommendations in chapter 17,
       I have looked at material in the public domain, material provided to me by the
       parties to the prosecution, other non-sensitive material in my possession and also
       confidential papers subject to public interest immunity or legal privilege. A
       schedule of this material as attached at Appendix 2. Some of the material is not in
       a form admissible in the criminal courts, however I have proceeded on the basis
       that, if relevant, it is capable of being adduced by the HFSG in an acceptable
       format. I accept the findings of the Taylor Inquiry, the Coroner’s Inquests, the
       judicial review in the Divisional Court, and the scrutiny. I have no reason not to
       accept those relevant findings of fact made by the police in the course of their
       investigations, however I do not necessarily accept their conclusions on the
       evidence. I find persuasive the conclusions of joint counsel in their advice of 1990
       to the Director.

16.4   While I note the concern expressed as to the validity of the CPS policy on the
       taking over and subsequent discontinuance of a private prosecution, I consider that
       I am bound by what the Director has laid down as guidance and my later
       recommendations will reflect this.

       CPS Policy Guidelines

16.5   I have considered the Code for Crown Prosecutors and the Explanatory
       Memorandum. The Code discusses the two stages in the decision to prosecute. Only
       when the evidential test, ‘the realistic prospect of conviction’, is passed does a
       Crown Prosecutor go on to consider if a prosecution is needed in the public interest.
       If the first test is not passed then there must not be a prosecution.

16.6   The CPS decision of 1990, following Counsels’ advice and based on the evidence
       provided by the West Midlands Police, stated that the evidential test had not been
       passed. Until late 1996 nothing was put before the Director which would have
       affected that decision. Following my review in 1997, our decision was that the so-
       called ‘new evidence’ provided by the HFSG did not provide new grounds for a
       recommendation of a further criminal investigation. There was no suppression of
       medical or video evidence as alleged by Alun Jones QC. The scrutiny report of
       Lord Justice Stuart-Smith fully supported this stance. In the latest representations
       from the HFSG it is being said that all the judicial inquiries and proceedings to date

                                                                                           50
       have been misled. They make a strong inference that this is because of a criminal
       conspiracy between the South Yorkshire and the West Midlands Police. They point
       to the editing of statements taken by the police in 1989 which they say was not put
       before the scrutiny. They consider that all previous hearings are therefore tainted.
       The HFSG ‘evidence’ shows that while there were details of opinion and fact that
       were not put before Lord Taylor (because of the editing that was done by the police
       solicitors in 1989), or were allegedly not considered by the scrutiny, my examination
       of them has not found anything material that would affect the previous CPS
       decisions. Quite simply, there is still no realistic prospect of conviction on the
       allegations of manslaughter and misconduct in a public office. The matter of the
       alleged PCOJ is discussed separately under the evidential test sub-heading.

16.7 The defendants through their legal representatives have asked the CPS to take over
     the proceedings. That should only be done in accordance with the principles set out
     in chapter 7 of Volume 1 of the Prosecution Manual where there is a particular need
     to do so on behalf of the public. Para 7.11 applies and I requested copies of
     relevant papers from the defendants and the prosecutor. These have been supplied,
     although all the parties consider that I or the police have more evidence that would
     be relevant to their case. The South Yorkshire Police have assisted me in the
     obtaining of other material that I wished to consider.

16.8   I have looked at para 7.12 and decided that it was not part of my review to consider
        taking the case over in order to prosecute it. The original CPS decision of 1990 that
        there was not a realistic prospect of conviction against any person for any criminal
        offence then considered was forefront in my mind, as were the conclusions of my
        previous review and the subsequent decision.

16.9   Para 7.13 pointed me towards the provisions of para 7.8 and 7.10 in the taking over
       of a prosecution in order to discontinue it. As the overall evidence on the seven
       charges now before the Magistrates’ Court (a short discussion on the merits or
       otherwise of the PCOJ allegation will follow later in the chapter) falls short of the
       evidential sufficiency test set out in the Code for Crown prosecutors, I next
       considered the circumstances for discontinuance:

       i)     There is clearly no case to answer: This is the main question to be
              resolved.

       ii)    The public interest factors tending against prosecution clearly outweigh
              those factors tending in favour; especially a consideration of a malicious
              or vexatious prosecution under section 42 of the Supreme Court Act 1982 as
              amended by section 24 of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985. This
              provision concerns an application by the Attorney General to the High Court
              where it is perceived that a person is instituting a vexatious prosecution. I
              also looked at the delay of 9 years in bringing the criminal prosecution to
              court. While the two defendants may have general health problems, I have
              seen no medical evidence or representations which would affect the decision
              to be made.


                                                                                          51
       iii)   The prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests of justice: I have
              found nothing to support this point.

16.10 The policy guidelines in chapter 7 discuss a duty to take over a private prosecution
      No mention is made about the division of a case into the separate charges, where,
      following the application of para 7.10, only some offences may be suitable for
      taking over and subsequent discontinuance and it would be for the private prosecutor
      to continue with the remainder. However section 23 of the Prosecution of Offences
      Act 1985 describes the power to discontinue where the DPP has the conduct of
      proceedings for an offence. Section 6 of the Act refers only to "criminal
      proceedings" without reference to an offence. As the Director has the power to
      discontinue the proceedings for one offence where she has the conduct of
      proceedings for a number of related matters, it must surely be that the term
      "criminal proceedings" in section 6 should be read as referring to individual charges
      within the total proceedings.    In which case all of the options below may be
      considered:

      i)      Allowing the private prosecution to proceed in its entirety.

      ii)     Taking over the whole of the prosecution in order to discontinueall charges.

      iii)    Taking over only that part of the prosecution where:

              •     there is clearly no case to answer and/or public interest factors apply
                     on a particular charge, for example, on the allegation of the pervert
                     course of justice rather than that of manslaughter/misconduct, or

              •     there is clearly no case to answer and/or public interest factors apply
                     against a particular defendant on all the charges against him.

16.11 Para 7.10 shows that the test to be applied is not the two part test from the Code.
      Rather it is a consideration of all the circumstances both as to evidence and the
      noted public interest criteria. These are reviewed below under the various sub­
      headings.

      Application of CPS Policy

16.12 The test of ‘clearly no case to answer’ can be equated with the Galbraith Test37
      which Archbold accepts as being applicable to the Magistrates’ Court:

              "(1) If there is no evidence that the crime alleged has been committed by the
              defendant there is no difficulty - the judge will stop the case. (2) The
              difficulty arises where there is some evidence but it is of a tenuous nature,
              for example, because of inherent weakness or because it is inconsistent with


              R v Galbraith [1981] 73 Cr App R 124 CA referred to in Archbold 1998 at
              paras 4.294 to 297.

                                                                                         52
               other evidence, (a) Where the judge concludes that the prosecution evidence,
               taken at its highest, is such that a jury properly directed could not properly
               convict on it, it is his duty, on a submission being made, to stop the case,
               (b) Where however the prosecution evidence is such that its strength or
               weakness depends on the view to be taken of a witness’s reliability, or other
               matters which are generally speaking within the province of the jury and
               where on one possible view of the facts there is evidence on which the jury
               could properly come to the conclusion that the defendant is guilty, then the
               judge should allow the matter to be tried by the jury" (per Lord Lane CJ).

         A Crown Court case, R v Shippey38, is often quoted to show that the requirement
         to take the prosecution evidence at its highest did not mean "picking out all the
         plums and leaving the duff behind". The judge said that it was necessary to make
         an assessment of the evidence as a whole.

16.13 However the use of the word "clearly" in our present test implies that we have to
      be satisfied (or perhaps in a stronger sense, ‘to be sure’) that there is no case to
      answer before taking over and discontinuing a private prosecution. It is submitted
      that it is a slightly lower standard than the prima facie test used in Galbraith. This
      can be seen as a parallel to the way in which we apply the evidential test from the
      Code, where we do not look for the same high standard of proof that a jury or bench
      of magistrates needs to find before it can convict. If it is considered that the case
      is finely balanced as to the merits then the scales should fall on the side of the
      private prosecutor.

16.14 The test from R v Adomako sets out the four essential elements of gross negligence.
      For the purpose of this review I accept the findings of previous courts and inquiries
      that the first three elements are sufficiently proved; that there was a duty of care by
      the police generally towards the deceased, that there was a breach of that duty, and
      the deaths of the victims then ensued. Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray were the two
      senior officers available to make decisions that would affect the events resulting in
      the death of the fans in the central pens. They were the representatives of the police
      force who were involved in the making of the decision that led to what was
      described as a "blunder of the first magnitude". The general duty of the police force
      as a whole was therefore visited upon them for their specific acts. There was a
      breach of that duty by them, as on an objective assessment of what happened they
      could have prevented the deaths by taking certain actions rather than omitting to act.

16.15 The private prosecutor and I have recently agreed as to what constitutes the alleged
      acts or omissions said to constitute gross negligence. I doubt that the defendants
      would take issue at the narrowing of the grounds. For the purposes of the main
      charges the prosecution say that while the decision to open gate C was a proper one,
      the omission of the two defendants in properly considering where the resultant
      inrush of fans would go and in not taking the necessary action in preventing
      crushing in pens known to be full, was the act of gross negligence.


    38
                R v Shippey ( 1988) Crim L R 767, Turner J.

                                                                                          53
16.16 The fourth element from R v Adomako is whether the act complained of should be
      characterised as gross negligence and therefore a crime. It was held that this is
      supremely a question for the jury. As previously stated in R v Khan the appropriate
      course would be to leave to the jury the four questions posed based on the above
      principles where the allegation is of manslaughter by omission.

       Evidential Test: Manslaughter

16.17 That there is evidence of negligence by the two officers is incontrovertible. I submit
      that it at least amounts to individual civil liability for the two officers. It does not
      amount to criminal liability following the Code tests. There is evidence which could
      be put before the jury just as there is evidence tending to rebut the allegations.

16.18 The evidence in support of a prosecution of both officers can be seen in the previous
      chapters and may be summarised as follows:

       •      That both officers had a joint responsibility in the circumstances of their
              respective duties in the control box, to take such action as was necessary to
              secure the safety of the fans and others. Further Mr Duckenfield leant
              heavily on Mr Murray’s experience. Although it must be accepted that it
              was Mr Duckenfield who had overall responsibility for the conduct of the
              policing at the match as well as an assumed command role within the control
              box itself. Lord Justice Taylor at para 282 of the Interim report said that it
              was Mr Duckenfield’s capacity to take decisions and to give orders that
              seemed to collapse; it was this officer who failed to give the necessary
              consequential orders or to exert any control when the disaster occurred.

       •      There was a lack of monitoring of the terraces by the police and specifically
              by the two senior officers who had a direct eye-view of the central pens as
              well as by the use of the CCTV monitors.

       •      There was a lack of realisation by the two senior officers in the control box
              as to the overcrowding or potential overcrowding in the central pens.

       •      They failed to consider the foreseeable consequences of allowing a large
              number of fans to enter the ground through gate C without supervision and
              direction.

       •      They failed to warn police officers on the concourse or nearby of the gate
              being opened in order to relieve the crush outside.

       •      They failed to direct police officers under their control to close off the access
              to the central tunnel in order to prevent a foreseeable crushing incident.

       •      They should have realised that the policy of "letting the fans find their own
              level" was not one to apply in the circumstances of this particular match.


                                                                                             54
16.19 The evidence against a prosecution of one or both officers may be summarised as
      follows:

      Mr Duckenfield

      •      Mr Duckenfield was newly promoted and was in a position where he had to
             depend on the experience of others in advising him on the policing of this
             type of match. His general experience was not sufficient to prepare him for
             problems that had not been foreseen in the Operational Order for the match.

      •      Mr Duckenfield was dependent on an operational order that he had no part
             in preparing. It was a virtual copy of the previous year’s order which was
             seen as being satisfactory in the light of the perceived success by senior
             officers of their policing of that match. That there had been some foresight
             of possible crushing in the central pens by junior officers, resulting in the
             tunnel access being blocked, was not known to officers of the rank of
             Inspector or above and therefore did not feature in the considerations for the
             1989 game.

      •      Mr Duckenfield had emphasised at his pre match briefing that the safety of
             the spectators was of paramount importance, although the monitoring of the
             pens to that end was not specifically mentioned. He was entitled to depend
             on other officers under his command to react appropriately. Unfortunately
             some failed to react as they should have done.

      Mr Murray

      •      Mr Murray was only acting in an advisory role when considering the
             decision to open gate C. This is as advised by Counsel at para 49 of their
             joint opinion of 1990. It was Mr Duckenfield’s responsibility alone for the
             serious error in failing to give any order to accommodate the influx. The
             officer saw his role as monitoring the event as a whole, being responsible for
             the reception and the transmission of all radio communications and as an
             adviser to Mr Duckenfield. Para 282 of the Interim Report appears to
             endorse this point of view.

      •      Mr Murray did attempt of his own volition to warn the Club Security Officer
             of the crushing outside prior to the opening of gate C but was unable to send
             a message on the radio due to temporary communication problems. By the
             time the communications were restored it was too late to control the tunnel
             access.

      •      Mr Murray did attempt to prompt his senior officer into making the decision
             as to the opening of gate C when time was of the essence in alleviating the
             crush outside.




                                                                                        55
       Both Officers

       •      It was not surprising that the two senior officers did not notice that the
              central pens were "full" prior to the opening of the gate as overcrowding was
              not apparent to almost all other observers.

       •      At the time of the opening of gate C, the attention of both officers was on
              the obvious life threatening situation of the crush by the turnstiles. Their
              failure to take an all round view of this incident instead of a single minded
              concentration on the gate is perhaps understandable and should make them
              liable for negligence in civil law only. Their attention was focused on a
              known risk of serious injury or death outside the gate, to the prejudice of any
              regard of the possible risk inside the ground if the further correct action was
              not taken. What is obvious in hindsight was difficult to appreciate as the
              emergency was unrolling.

       •      Although the main cause of the disaster is placed at the door of the police
              generally, the individual actions of Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray form
              only a part of that liability. The congestion outside the turnstiles that led to
              gate C being opened had a number of causes that were for the most part
              outside the control of the two defendants. Other persons should take a
              greater share in the blame as was recognised by the scrutiny.

       •      There is no new evidence that might have affected the verdicts of the Inquest
              jury. They were not misled as a result of any alleged suppression of
              evidence by the police. They rejected the option of verdicts of unlawful
              killing based on the criminal standard of proof. Their verdicts were of
              accidental death on the balance of probabilities. Therefore it can be argued
              that the jury found that they had sufficient information before them to reject
              even a prima facie case of unlawful killing. If they had not then it is
              submitted that they would otherwise have brought open verdicts.

       Public Interest Circumstances for Manslaughter

16.20 While some might have a view that the prosecution by the HFSG is being
      undertaken for reasons of revenge, or a perverse desire to obtain ‘justice’ that
      allegedly is being denied them, the HFSG are properly taking the various legal
      channels open to them. That others may disagree is part of the judicial process. I
      recognise the considerable distress that members of the HFSG have suffered since
      the disaster, and do not consider that their private prosecution is either malicious or
      vexatious.

16.21 Delay is said to be a relevant factor. After 9 years the memories of witnesses may
      have faded or been coloured by what has happened since. However the allegations
      are extremely serious and on the basis of the large number of written statements
      taken at the time on each and every aspect of the disaster, I accept that those
      memories can be sufficiently refreshed to alleviate the problem.


                                                                                           56
16.22 There is no medical evidence which would justify serious consideration as a factor
      against prosecution.

       Misconduct in a Public Office

16.23 The evidential and public interest considerations are as above.

       Evidential Test: Perverting the Course of Justice

16.24 This is a new allegation which has not featured in previous reviews. The ‘lie’ about
      gate C being forced by the fans has been admitted by Mr Duckenfield but with a
      number of explanations (i) that he was not being deceitful but may have referred to
      an earlier time when the gate was briefly forced open, and (ii) he was in shock and
      wanted to collect his thoughts and assess the situation before communicating the
      truth. Lord Taylor may have been close to the truth when he gave his assessment
      that the officer could not face the enormity of the decision to open the gates and
      what happened afterwards: "He froze"39

16.25 I consider that in the circumstances the deliberate misdirection of the various
      witnesses, including his own Assistant Chief Constable, was conduct that might have
      had the tendency to pervert the course of public justice. That judicial proceedings
      were going to result from the disaster was not just a possibility it was a certainty40,
      and must have been within Mr Duckenfield’s contemplation. However the ‘lie’ had
      no impact on judicial proceedings except to bring vilification upon the officer.
      Further I have grave concern about the proof required to show that Mr Duckenfield
      intended to pervert the course of justice. There is no good and sufficient evidence
      that the officer was attempting a cover up of his own and other police actions at
      1515 on the day as victims were still dying on the field. Lord Taylor had the
      opportunity to observe Mr Duckenfield and the relevant witnesses on this point
      during his Inquiry. His conclusions were the result of those observations coupled
      with his vast experience. I find nothing in the evidence that would bring me to any
      other conclusion. Mr Duckenfield could not cope with the great stress he was put
      under, his reaction was out of character. He did not have the intent necessary so as
      to have a realistic prospect of conviction on this allegation. For that reason I do not
      go to consider the public interest test from the Code. However policy guidelines are
      that this offence is reserved for the more serious cases of interference with the
      course of justice rather than where proceedings are at an early stage (or had not
      started), and there was little impact on them.

16.26 The above argument applies equally to the consideration of the test for taking over
      the case in order to discontinue it, both as regards the quality of the evidence and
      also the stated policy on the public interest (where those two matters should be
      applied together).


              See page 24 of this review.

              See R v Rafique at page 10 of this review.

                                                                                          57
       The Interests of Justice

16.27 I have found no factors that would affect any of the CPS recommendations as being
      clearly likely to damage the interests of justice. None of the stated examples in para
      7.10 of Volume 1 of the CPS Prosecution Manual apply. Although disclosure may
      involve voluminous material, it should not pose any real difficulty. Documents
      subject to claims of public interest immunity or legal privilege can be dealt with
      under the normal rules applicable to third party disclosure.




                                                                                         58
17.    RECOMMENDATIONS

       Mr Duckenfield

17.1   On the charges of manslaughter and misconduct in a public office I find that while
       there is both insufficient evidence for a realistic prospect of conviction and for a
       prima facie case (on the balance of probabilities), there is some evidence of
       negligence that can be put before a jury. I am unable to say that there is clearly no
       case to answer. In coming to this opinion I have taken into account not only the
       verdicts of the jury but also the Coroner’s summing up and his consideration that
       there was some evidence to go before the jury on the question of unlawful killings.

       Recommendation: That the private prosecution be allowed to continue on these
       three charges.

17.2   As regards the PCOJ, this charge adds little to the private prosecutor’s case. In my
       opinion there is clearly no case to answer as well as there being valid public interest
       factors against this matter proceeding. There is no evidence of the required intent
       and I do not consider that in the circumstances of the timing of the ‘lie’ being
       within minutes of the deaths in the pens that it can be inferred that the officer had
       then formed such intent. There is no evidence that the subsequent investigation was
       in any way imperilled. The ‘lie’ only brought vilification from the media and the
       public upon the officer and his police force.

       Recommendation: That this part of the proceedings be taken over and then
       discontinued.

       Mr Murray

17.3   I consider that the individual responsibility of this officer for the omission to act
       after gate C was opened is less than that of Mr Duckenfield. Mr Murray deferred
       to his superior for the making of the crucial decision, although he quite properly
       prompted him when delay set in. While I note Lord Taylor’s comments about the
       joint misjudgment by the two officers concerning the buildup of fans at the
       turnstiles, he appears then to place the blame for the failure to give orders
       consequential to the opening of the gate at the feet of Mr Duckenfield. I also
       appreciate that in 1990 our two Counsel were of the opinion that the sole blame for
       the omission to act after the gate was opened lies with Mr Duckenfield. However
       it was Mr Murray who had the most recent and extensive knowledge of the ground
       and he failed to pass on the benefit of his experience because he too was distracted
       by the serious incident outside. Even though the evidence is weaker against this
       officer than against his superior and the balancing act is therefore more difficult, I
       am still unable to say that there is ‘clearly no case to answer’. Where the decision
       is as close as this then it is my submission that the benefit must fall to the
       prosecutor.

       Recommendation: That the private prosecution be allowed to continue on these
       three charges.

                                                                                           59
       Disclosure

17.4   The disclosure of material in our possession should normally follow in accordance
       with our stated policy.    The South Yorkshire Police are likely to require advice
       based on the voluntarydisclosure that we may decide to give. A number of the
       documents in this case that would usually attract public interest immunity or legal
       privilege have already been divulged in whole or part.It will be necessary to
       consider the issues involved and the relevance of the information and opinion
       contained within those documents. The HFSG wish to obtain a copy of the joint
       opinion as well as the various CPS reports in the case. When appropriate our
       material may be inspected at York by prior arrangement.




                                                                                      60
18.    CONCLUSIONS

18.1   My review of all the evidence and representations has caused me some difficulty as
       I find that there is a fine balance between the arguments for and against. It is a
       matter of judgement as to whether or not there is clearly no case to answer (in
       conjunction with the public interest factors) on the issue of gross negligence. I
       accept that another reviewing lawyer could come to a different, although still
       justifiable, decision. It may be that the Director has certain policy views that would
       affect his decision.

18.2   The potential ramifications of the various decision options are:

       (i)     Decision to take over and discontinue the case in its entirety: The HFSG will
               take the matter to judicial review of the CPS decision.

       (ii)    Decision to let the private prosecution proceed in its entirety: The defendants
               are unlikely to proceed by way of judicial review of the CPS decision. They
               have already intimated that they are prepared to put forward abuse of process
               arguments to the Magistrates’ Court. A committal will be strongly contested,
               and if my arguments are correct will fail.

       (iii)   Decision to accept the review recommendations: There would be pressure on
               the HFSG to decide between continuing with the remaining charges or
               accepting delay while they go to the Divisional Court. Those representing
               Mr Duckenfield would have more fuel for their abuse of process arguments
               on a fair trial.

18.3   Whatever our decision may be, if the eventual proceedings are not favourable to the
       HFSG they are most likely to take further action, either by way of their
       representations that all previous judicial proceedings are invalid because of an
       alleged conspiracy by the police to suppress evidence, or by use of the European
       Convention on Human Rights.




George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
CPS Central Casework

27 October 1998




                                                                                           61
24/11   98    11:36     © 0 1 9 0 4 456577            CPS 4th floor                                   ®001




             George Croston


             cc       Mr Newell



             HILLSBOROUGH
             1. Robin Booth is here today and we have both had a chance to look at the
                 amended sections of your report. There are a couple of points which occur to
                 us which we think could usefully be reflected in some further amendment, just
                 in case there is a judicial review.

             2.   Paragraph 16.6. Tn the 4* line, the phrase “Following my review in 1997, our
                  decision../ This might be better as, “Following my review in 1997, the
                  conclusion was that

             3.   Paragraph 16.8. It might be worth emphasising that the current review was a
                  fresh one, in the sense that it considered the case from a different angle to the
                  previous reviews.

             4.   Paragraph 16.12. The use of the word “equated” might cause problems later.
                  Can I suggest we say that the clearly no case to answer test “can be said to be
                  broadly similar in its application to the Galbraith test".

             5.   Paragraph 16.17. It seems unnecessary to use the word ‘incontrovertible\
                  Why not, ‘In my view there is some evidence that these two officers were
                  negligent. There is not, however, sufficient evidence of gross negligence for a
                  realistic prospectjof conviction for a charge,'ofjnanslau^iter. i t "seems
                  unnecessary to ln c lu B ^                       UabifityT^"

             6.   Paragraph 16.18, Both Robin and I are uneasy at the way in which the case
                  against Duckenfield and Murray is placed together. The first bullet point, for
                  example, does not apply with the same force in relation to each man. The
                   same is true also of some of the other bullet points, eg. the fourth one
                   (Murray’s greater experience must tell more against him here). We suggest
                  that this part of the review should be split, True, the same points can be made
                  in exactly the same way for some of the points, eg. point three. It is important
                   to,demonstrate that we have considered each man’s case independently.


             Chris Enzor
             Central Casework York Branch
             DX 65204 York 6
             8 01904 456554
             Fax 01904 456577
             24 November 1998


                                                                                 oO N       G*
16.    KEY CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE CPS REVIEW

       An Overview

16.1   The correspondence and formal representations from the private prosecutor and the
       solicitors for the two defendants raise many points. Some of these are relevant to
       this review, others are not. The key issue to be resolved is whether or not there is
       clearly no case to answer and/or the public interest/interests of justice circumstances
       do not require a prosecution for the charges against Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray.
       Once that point is decided then other more minor issues, such as disclosure, will fall
       into place.

16.3    In conducting this review and in the making of my recommendations in chapter 17,
        I have looked at material in the public domain, material provided to me by the
       parties to the prosecution, other non-sensitive material in my possession and also
       confidential papers subject to public interest immunity or legal privilege. A
        schedule of this material as attached at Appendix 2. Some of the material is not in
       a form admissible in the criminal courts, however I have proceeded on the basis
       that, if relevant, it is capable of being adduced by the HFSG in an acceptable
       format. I accept the findings of the Taylor Inquiry, the Coroner’s Inquests, the
       judicial review in the Divisional Court, and the scrutiny. I have no reason not to
       accept those relevant findings of fact made by the police in the course of their
       investigations, however I do not necessarily accept their conclusions on the
       evidence. I find persuasive the conclusions of joint counsel in their advice of 1990
       to the Director.

16.4   While I note the concern expressed as to the validity of the CPS policy on the
       taking over and subsequent discontinuance of a private prosecution, I consider that
       I am bound by what the Director has laid down as guidance and my later
       recommendations will reflect this.

       CPS Policy Guidelines

16.5   I have considered the Code for Crown Prosecutors and the Explanatory
       Memorandum. The Code discusses the two stages in the decision to prosecute. Only
       when the evidential test, ‘the realistic prospect of conviction’, is passed does a
       Crown Prosecutor go on to consider if a prosecution is needed in the public interest.
       If the first test is not passed then there must not be a prosecution.

16.6   The CPS decision of 1990, following Counsels’ advice and based on the evidence
       provided by the West Midlands Police, stated that the evidential test had not been
       passed. Until late 1996 nothing was put before the JDiregtor ^ j^ s ji^ o u ld have
       affected that decision. Following my review in 1997, onf-deeision wcs that the so-
       called ‘new evidence’ provided by the HFSG did not provide new grounds for a
       recommendation of a further criminal investigation. There was no suppression of
       medical or video evidence as alleged by Alun Jones QC. The scrutiny report of
       Lord Justice Stuart-Smith fully supported this stance. In the latest representations
       from the HFSG it is being said that all the judicial inquiries and proceedings to date

                                                                                           50
             have been misled. They make a strong inference that this is because of a criminal
             conspiracy between the South Yorkshire and the West Midlands Police. They point
             to the editing of statements taken by the police in 1989 which they say was not put
             before the scrutiny. They consider that all previous hearings are therefore tainted.
             The HFSG ‘evidence’ shows that while there were details of opinion and fact that
             were not put before Lord Taylor (because of the editing that was done by the police
             solicitors in 1989), or were allegedly not considered by the scrutiny, my examination
             of them has not found anything material that would affect the previous CPS
             decisions. Quite simply, there is still no realistic prospect of conviction on the
             allegations of manslaughter and misconduct in a public office. The matter of the
             alleged PCOJ is discussed separately under the evidential test sub-heading.

      16.7   The defendants through their legal representatives have asked the CPS to take over
             the proceedings. That should only be done in accordance with the principles set out
             in chapter 7 of Volume 1 of the Prosecution Manual where there is a particular need
             to do so on behalf of the public. Para 7.11 applies and I requested copies of
             relevant papers from the defendants and the prosecutor. These have been supplied,
             although all the parties consider that I or the police have more evidence that would
             be relevant to their case. The South Yorkshire Police have assisted me in the
             obtaining of other material that I wished to consider.       i          >           -m     a
              U                                            rk Vtbpc*                            u fim
             I have looked-ai-pa^a 7.12 and decided that it was not part of my review to considervhJbb ( / -
             taking the case over in order to prosecute it. y^The 9^ginal CP§^ecisionj^fJ59Q -that

\ [   168                       idered      forefro.                  _________________
              revi
                                                                          ffb (O.J, c^cTol Caps!)
      16.9   Para 7.13 pointed me towards the provisions of para 7.8 and 7.10 in the taking over     U -
             of a prosecution in order to discontinue it. As the overall evidence on the seven LA/\C^Ln
             charges now before the Magistrates’ Court (a short discussion on the merits or        "7 ; )
             otherwise of the PCOJ allegation will follow later in the chapter) falls short of the  ■ 1
             evidential sufficiency test set out in the Code for Crown prosecutors, I next
             considered the circumstances for discontinuance:

             i)      There is clearly no case to answer: This is the main question to be
                     resolved.

             ii)     The public interest factors tending against prosecution clearly outweigh
                     those factors tending in favour; especially a consideration of a malicious
                     or vexatious prosecution under section 42 of the Supreme Court Act 1982 as
                      amended by section 24 of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985. This
                     provision concerns an application by the Attorney General to the High Court
                     where it is perceived that a person is instituting a vexatious prosecution. I
                      also looked at the delay of 9 years in bringing the criminal prosecution to
                      court. While the two defendants may have general health problems, I have
                      seen no medical evidence or representations which would affect the decision
                     to be made.


                                                                                               51
       iii)   The prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests of justice: I have
               found nothing to support this point.

16.10 The policy guidelines in chapter 7 discuss a duty to take over a private prosecution
      No mention is made about the division of a case into the separate charges, where,
      following the application of para 7.10, only some offences may be suitable for
      taking over and subsequent discontinuance and it would be for the private prosecutor
      to continue with the remainder. However section 23 of the Prosecution of Offences
      Act 1985 describes the power to discontinue where the DPP has the conduct of
      proceedings for an offence. Section 6 of the Act refers only to "criminal
      proceedings" without reference to an offence. As the Director has the power to
      discontinue the proceedings for one offence where she has the conduct of
      proceedings for a number of related matters, it must surely be that the term
      "criminal proceedings" in section 6 should be read as referring to individual charges
      within the total proceedings.    In which case all of the options below may be
      considered:

      i)      Allowing the private prosecution to proceed in its entirety.

      ii)     Taking over the whole of the prosecution in order to discontinue allcharges.

      iii)    Taking over only that part of the prosecution where:

              •     there is clearly no case to answer and/or public interest factors apply
                     on a particular charge, for example, on the allegation of the pervert
                     course of justice rather than that of manslaughter/misconduct, or

              •     there is clearly no case to answer and/or public interest factors apply
                     against a particular defendant on all the charges against him.

16.11 Para 7.10 shows that the test to be applied is not the two part test from the Code.
      Rather it is a consideration of all the circumstances both as to evidence and the
      noted public interest criteria. These are reviewed below under the various sub­
      headings.

      Application of CPS Policy                             ,                .   , .

16.12 The test of ‘clearly no case to answer’ can be aqnnterf wsA the Galbraith Test37
      which Archbold accepts as being applicable to the Magistrates’ Court:

              "(1) If there is no evidence that the crime alleged has been committed by the
              defendant there is no difficulty - the judge will stop the case. (2) The
              difficulty arises where there is some evidence but it is of a tenuous nature,
              for example, because of inherent weakness or because it is inconsistent with


              R v Galbraith [1981] 73 Cr App R 124 CA referred to in Archbold 1998 at
              paras 4.294 to 297.
               other evidence, (a) Where the judge concludes that the prosecution evidence,
               taken at its highest, is such that a jury properly directed could not properly
               convict on it, it is his duty, on a submission being made, to stop the case,
               (b) Where however the prosecution evidence is such that its strength or
               weakness depends on the view to be taken of a witness’s reliability, or other
               matters which are generally speaking within the province of the jury and
               where on one possible view of the facts there is evidence on which the jury
               could properly come to the conclusion that the defendant is guilty, then the
               judge should allow the matter to be tried by the jury" (per Lord Lane CJ).

         A Crown Court case, R v Shippey38, is often quoted to show that the requirement
         to take the prosecution evidence at its highest did not mean "picking out all the
         plums and leaving the duff behind". The judge said that it was necessary to make
         an assessment of the evidence as a whole.

16.13 However the use of the word "clearly" in our present test implies that we have to
      be satisfied (or perhaps in a stronger sense, ‘to be sure’) that there is no case to
      answer before taking over and discontinuing a private prosecution. It is submitted
      that it is a slightly lower standard than the prima facie test used in Galbraith. This
      can be seen as a parallel to the way in which we apply the evidential test from the
      Code, where we do not look for the same high standard of proof that a jury or bench
      of magistrates needs to find before it can convict. If it is considered that the case
      is finely balanced as to the merits then the scales should fall on the side of the
      private prosecutor.

16.14 The test from R v Adomako sets out the four essential elements of gross negligence.
      For the purpose of this review I accept the findings of previous courts and inquiries
      that the first three elements are sufficiently proved; that there was a duty of care by
      the police generally towards the deceased, that there was a breach of that duty, and
      the deaths of the victims then ensued. Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray were the two
      senior officers available to make decisions that would affect the events resulting in
      the death of the fans in the central pens. They were the representatives of the police
      force who were involved in the making of the decision that led to what was
      described as a "blunder of the first magnitude". The general duty of the police force
      as a whole was therefore visited upon them for their specific acts. There was a
      breach of that duty by them, as on an objective assessment of what happened they
      could have prevented the deaths by taking certain actions rather than omitting to act.

16.15 The private prosecutor and I have recently agreed as to what constitutes the alleged
      acts or omissions said to constitute gross negligence. I doubt that the defendants
      would take issue at the narrowing of the grounds. For the purposes of the main
      charges the prosecution say that while the decision to open gate C was a proper one,
      the omission of the two defendants in properly considering where the resultant
      inrush of fans would go and in not taking the necessary action in preventing
      crushing in pens known to be full, was the act of gross negligence.


    38
               R v Shippey ( 1988) Crim L R 767, Turner J.

                                                                                          53
16.16 The fourth element from R v Adomako is whether the act complained of should be
      characterised as gross negligence and therefore a crime. It was held that this is
      supremely a question for the jury. As previously stated in R v Khan the appropriate
      course would be to leave to the jury the four questions posed based on the above
      principles where the allegation is of manslaughter by omission.

       Evidential Test: Manslaughter/
           W                lACo/cto/U? /Hcct
16.17 That there is,'                                                                        o officers i                                          I submit
                                                                                                                                                Brtfoes-fKrt
       a m o u n L lQ L c r i m i m d . . I i a b i l 4 ^ " l e H m y i T ( g - t h e ' f 3g d ,e 't e s t s . T t e w 4 s - x v i i d t f f l e r ^ H 1 ^ T O T l d

       be^ratiyefbre’tfae-jury-'■jwsHis,^}iererTs,^4dene©~t^^«g»4©~f©b»t»ife®»^l«gati©ns.

16.18 The evidence in support of a prosecution of both officers can be seen in the previous
      chapters and may be summarised as follows:

       •           ThaHjSfETofficers—hari-a jT)TTrt-Fespon si hi 1itv in the ci rcum stannes—ef--their

                   semrei the safety               oiharc Further^Mr DuckenHeI3'~feant
           v---- —iT5avily-»oiLMr MiuxayyexperienS^^AJthough it must be accepted., that it

                    poiiciag-^t-fee-«at6fe-«s^wd4-^s-«H-^s€a«»ed-«^wfflaMd,Tole-wi#M«-jtheTnntrol
                   <be&-itsel£. Lofd-Justica-Taylor at~753nT282M3f4te-1BIeniTryepoFt-^^
                    was_J4i^uckerifi^Vxapracity-4»-4ake^e5iska3s_jiui-40--^ive uiders-that
                    seemed—to-uullapse; it was this ot'ticeT whcrfaned to*"^h^-the aeeessary~^
                   •^^wcqngiIflSlnjniea^^:To~B^rt-aay-^ontrol when tho disaster occttfre ^

                    There was a lack of monitoring of the terraces by the police and specifically
                    by the two senior officers who had a direct eye-view of the central pens as
                    well as by the use of the CCTV monitors.

                    There was a lack of realisation by the two senior officers in the control box
                    as to the overcrowding or potential overcrowding in the central pens.

                    They failed to consider the foreseeable consequences of allowing a large
                    number of fans to enter the ground through gate C without supervision and
                    direction.

                    They failed to warn police officers on the concourse or nearby of the gate
                    being opened in order to relieve the crush outside.

                    They failed to direct police officers under their control to close off the access
                    to the central tunnel in order to prevent a foreseeable crushing incident.

                    They should have realised that the policy of "letting the fans find their own
                    level" was not one to apply in the circumstances of this particular match.


 Onf 16-(fr - 0    (r
             r?      . „ .
                     M


 D b^ 7 rr_. SoJd^ Q ^JajU rAm r
19 The evidence against a prosecution of one or both officers may be summarised as
   follows:

   Mr Duckenfield

   •      Mr Duckenfield was newly promoted and was in a position where he had to
          depend on the experience of others in advising him on the policing of this
          type of match. His general experience was not sufficient to prepare him for
          problems that had not been foreseen in the Operational Order for the match.

   •      Mr Duckenfield was dependent on an operational order that he had no part
          in preparing. It was a virtual copy of the previous year’s order which was
          seen as being satisfactory in the light of the perceived success by senior
          officers of their policing of that match. That there had been some foresight
          of possible crushing in the central pens by junior officers, resulting in the
          tunnel access being blocked, was not known to officers of the rank of
          Inspector or above and therefore did not feature in the considerations for the
          1989 game.

   •      Mr Duckenfield had emphasised at his pre match briefing that the safety of
          the spectators was of paramount importance, although the monitoring of the
          pens to that end was not specifically mentioned. He was entitled to depend
          on other officers under his command to react appropriately. Unfortunately
          some failed to react as they should have done.

   Mr Murray

   •     Mr Murray was only acting in an advisory role when considering the
         decision to open gate C. This is as advised by Counsel at para 49 of their
         joint opinion of 1990. It was Mr Duckenfield’s responsibility alone for the
         serious error in failing to give any order to accommodate the influx. The
         officer saw his role as monitoring the event as a whole, being responsible for
         the reception and the transmission of all radio communications and as an
         adviser to Mr Duckenfield. Para 282 of the Interim Report appears to
         endorse this point of view.

   •      Mr Murray did attempt of his own volition to warn the Club Security Officer
          of the crushing outside prior to the opening of gate C but was unable to send
          a message on the radio due to temporary communication problems. By the
          time the communications were restored it was too late to control the tunnel
          access.

   •      Mr Murray did attempt to prompt his senior officer into making the decision
          as to the opening of gate C when time was of the essence in alleviating the
          crush outside.
       Both Officers

       •      It was not surprising that the two senior officers did not notice that the
               central pens were "full" prior to the opening of the gate as overcrowding was
               not apparent to almost all other observers.

       •      At the time of the opening of gate C, the attention of both officers was on
              the obvious life threatening situation of the crush by the turnstiles. Their
              failure to take an all round view of this incident instead of a single minded
              concentration on the gate is perhaps understandable and should make them
              liable for negligence in civil law only. Their attention was focused on a
              known risk of serious injury or death outside the gate, to the prejudice of any
              regard of the possible risk inside the ground if the further correct action was
              not taken. What is obvious in hindsight was difficult to appreciate as the
              emergency was unrolling.

       •      Although the main cause of the disaster is placed at the door of the police
              generally, the individual actions of Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray form
              only a part of that liability. The congestion outside the turnstiles that led to
              gate C being opened had a number of causes that were for the most part
              outside the control of the two defendants. Other persons should take a
              greater share in the blame as was recognised by the scrutiny.

       •      There is no new evidence that might have affected the verdicts of the Inquest
              jury. They were not misled as a result of any alleged suppression of
              evidence by the police. They rejected the option of verdicts of unlawful
              killing based on the criminal standard of proof. Their verdicts were of
              accidental death on the balance of probabilities. Therefore it can be argued
              that the jury found that they had sufficient information before them to reject
              even a prima facie case of unlawful killing. If they had not then it is
              submitted that they would otherwise have brought open verdicts.

       Public Interest Circumstances for Manslaughter

16.20 While some might have a view that the prosecution by the HFSG is being
      undertaken for reasons of revenge, or a perverse desire to obtain ‘justice’ that
      allegedly is being denied them, the HFSG are properly taking the various legal
      channels open to them. That others may disagree is part of the judicial process. I
      recognise the considerable distress that members of the HFSG have suffered since
      the disaster, and do not consider that their private prosecution is either malicious or
      vexatious.

16.21 Delay is said to be a relevant factor. After 9 years the memories of witnesses may
      have faded or been coloured by what has happened since. However the allegations
      are extremely serious and on the basis of the large number of written statements
      taken at the time on each and every aspect of the disaster, I accept that those
      memories can be sufficiently refreshed to alleviate the problem.


                                                                                           56
16.22 There is no medical evidence which would justify serious consideration as a factor
      against prosecution.

        Misconduct in a Public Office

16.23 The evidential and public interest considerations are as above.

        Evidential Test: Perverting the Course of Justice

16.24 This is a new allegation which has not featured in previous reviews. The ‘lie’ about
      gate C being forced by the fans has been admitted by Mr Duckenfield but with a
      number of explanations (i) that he was not being deceitful but may have referred to
      an earlier time when the gate was briefly forced open, and (ii) he was in shock and
      wanted to collect his thoughts and assess the situation before communicating the
      truth. Lord Taylor may have been close to the truth when he gave his assessment
      that the officer could not face the enormity of the decision to open the gates and
      what happened afterwards: "He froze"39

16.25 I consider that in the circumstances the deliberate misdirection of the various
      witnesses, including his own Assistant Chief Constable, was conduct that might have
      had the tendency to pervert the course of public justice. That judicial proceedings
      were going to result from the disaster was not just a possibility it was a certainty40,
      and must have been within Mr Duckenfield’s contemplation. However the ‘lie’ had
      no impact on judicial proceedings except to bring vilification upon the officer.
      Further I have grave concern about the proof required to show that Mr Duckenfield
      intended to pervert the course of justice. There is no good and sufficient evidence
      that the officer was attempting a cover up of his own and other police actions at
      1515 on the day as victims were still dying on the field. Lord Taylor had the
      opportunity to observe Mr Duckenfield and the relevant witnesses on this point
      during his Inquiry. His conclusions were the result of those observations coupled
      with his vast experience. I find nothing in the evidence that would bring me to any
      other conclusion. Mr Duckenfield could not cope with the great stress he was put
      under, his reaction was out of character. He did not have the intent necessary so as
      to have a realistic prospect of conviction on this allegation. For that reason I do not
      go to consider the public interest test from the Code. However policy guidelines are
      that this offence is reserved for the more serious cases of interference with the
      course of justice rather than where proceedings are at an early stage (or had not
      started), and there was little impact on them.

16.26 The above argument applies equally to the consideration of the test for taking over
      the case in order to discontinue it, both as regards the quality of the evidence and
      also the stated policy on the public interest (where those two matters should be
      applied together).


   39
              See page 24 of this review.
   40
              See R v Rafique at page 10 of this review.

                                                                                          57
       The Interests of Justice

16.27 I have found no factors that would affect any of the CPS recommendations as being
      clearly likely to damage the interests of justice. None of the stated examples in para
      7.10 of Volume 1 of the CPS Prosecution Manual apply. Although disclosure may
      involve voluminous material, it should not pose any real difficulty. Documents
      subject to claims of public interest immunity or legal privilege can be dealt with
      under the normal rules applicable to third party disclosure.




                                                                                        58
17.    RECOMMENDATIONS

       Mr Duckenfield

17.1   On the charges of manslaughter and misconduct in a public office I find that while
       there is both insufficient evidence for a realistic prospect of conviction and for a
       prima facie case (on the balance of probabilities), there is some evidence of
       negligence that can be put before a jury. I am unable to say that there is clearly no
       case to answer. In coming to this opinion I have taken into account not only the
       verdicts of the jury but also the Coroner’s summing up and his consideration that
       there was some evidence to go before the jury on the question of unlawful killings.

       Recommendation: That the private prosecution be allowed to continue on these
       three charges.

17.2   As regards the PCOJ, this charge adds little to the private prosecutor’s case. In my
       opinion there is clearly no case to answer as well as there being valid public interest
       factors against this matter proceeding. There is no evidence of the required intent
       and I do not consider that in the circumstances of the timing of the ‘lie’ being
       within minutes of the deaths in the pens that it can be inferred that the officer had
       then formed such intent. There is no evidence that the subsequent investigation was
       in any way imperilled. The ‘lie’ only brought vilification from the media and the
       public upon the officer and his police force.

       Recommendation: That this part of the proceedings be taken over and then
       discontinued.

       Mr Murray

17.3   I consider that the individual responsibility of this officer for the omission to act
       after gate C was opened is less than that of Mr Duckenfield. Mr Murray deferred
       to his superior for the making of the crucial decision, although he quite properly
       prompted him when delay set in. While I note Lord Taylor’s comments about the
       joint misjudgment by the two officers concerning the buildup of fans at the
       turnstiles, he appears then to place the blame for the failure to give orders
       consequential to the opening of the gate at the feet of Mr Duckenfield. I also
       appreciate that in 1990 our two Counsel were of the opinion that the sole blame for
       the omission to act after the gate was opened lies with Mr Duckenfield. However
       it was Mr Murray who had the most recent and extensive knowledge of the ground
       and he failed to pass on the benefit of his experience because he too was distracted
       by the serious incident outside. Even though the evidence is weaker against this
       officer than against his superior and the balancing act is therefore more difficult, I
       am still unable to say that there is ‘clearly no case to answer’. Where the decision
       is as close as this then it is my submission that the benefit must fall to the
       prosecutor.

       Recommendation: That the private prosecution be allowed to continue on these
       three charges.

                                                                                           59
       Disclosure

17.4   The disclosure of material in our possession should normally follow in accordance
       with our stated policy. The South Yorkshire Police are likely to require advice
       based on the voluntarydisclosure that we may decide to give. A number of the
       documents in this case that would usually attract public interest immunity or legal
       privilege have already been divulged in whole or part. It will be necessary to
       consider the issues involved        and the       relevance of the information and opinion
       contained within those documents. The HFSG wish to obtain a copy of the joint
       opinion as well as the various CPS reports in the case. When appropriate our
       material may be inspected at York by prior arrangement.




                                                                                    60
18.    CONCLUSIONS

18.1   My review of all the evidence and representations has caused me some difficulty as
       I find that there is a fine balance between the arguments for and against. It is a
       matter of judgement as to whether or not there is clearly no case to answer (in
       conjunction with the public interest factors) on the issue of gross negligence. I
       accept that another reviewing lawyer could come to a different, although still
       justifiable, decision. It may be that the Director has certain policy views that would
       affect his decision.

18.2   The potential ramifications of the various decision options are:

       (i)     Decision to take over and discontinue the case in its entirety: The HFSG will
               take the matter to judicial review of the CPS decision.

       (ii)    Decision to let the private prosecution proceed in its entirety: The defendants
               are unlikely to proceed by way of judicial review of the CPS decision. They
               have already intimated that they are prepared to put forward abuse of process
               arguments to the Magistrates’ Court. A committal will be strongly contested,
               and if my arguments are correct will fail.

       (iii)   Decision to accept the review recommendations: There would be pressure on
               the HFSG to decide between continuing with the remaining charges or
               accepting delay while they go to the Divisional Court. Those representing
               Mr Duckenfield would have more fuel for their abuse of process arguments
               on a fair trial.

18.3   Whatever our decision may be, if the eventual proceedings are not favourable to the
       HFSG they are most likely to take further action, either by way of their
       representations that all previous judicial proceedings are invalid because of an
       alleged conspiracy by the police to suppress evidence, or by use of the European
       Convention on Human Rights.




George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
CPS Central Casework

27 October 1998




                                                                                           61
                   Adlington v. Murray: Adlington v. Duckenfield


Representations to the Director of Public Prosecutions on behalf of the Prosecution


                                    Introduction


  These representations are made in opposition to the requests by the defendants to the
  Crown Prosecution Service, asking that the prosecution of the defendants be taken
  over under section 6 (2) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985, for the purpose of
  discontinuing it under section 23 (3). These submissions reflect further reading of
  materials that have become available in the last year, and are still becoming available.
  They should be read in the light of the documents submitted previously, particularly
  the following:


  (i) informations of 10th July 1998, and supporting documents, laid before the Leeds
  Magistrates Court;


  (ii) the letter from the Hillsborough Family Support Group (“HFSG”) to the Crown
  Prosecution Service of 31st July 1998;


  (iii) the letter from the HFSG to Mr Croston of 24th August 1998 and supporting
  documents.


  The HFSG is a non-political organisation, and draws its members from many walks of
  life. The author of these representations had no involvement in the case until he was
  instructed in the case in the Judicial Review proceedings as leading counsel in about
  September 1993 for the six families. After the hearing, he took no part until the end of
  1996, when he was again asked to advise in the light of the new evidence discovered,
  some of which was the subject of the drama-documentary televised in December
  1996. He then represented and advised the Group before, during and after the
  “Scrutiny” in 1997-8.
3   It is regretted that this submission and supporting documents come at a late stage of
    the review. The Home Secretary said in Parliament in February 1998 that he would
    make available all material in the House of Commons library considered by him “save
    where there are overriding reasons for doing otherwise”. (Annex A. page 1988). The
    attached correspondence (Annex B) shows that this process is incomplete, and that
    obvious omissions have not been made good by the South Yorkshire police. Since
    July 1998, the Assistant Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has taken it upon himself
    to stop the provision even of documents that the Home Secretary ordered to be
    disclosed. (See Tab 17, pages 202-7, file of 24th August 1998.)


                                 The right to prosecute


4   The right to prosecute “privately”. This right was preserved specifically by section 6
    of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985. The provision was reviewed in R v. Bow
    Street Magistrates Court, ex parte South Coast Shipping Company (1993) 96 Cr.
    App. R. 405. This is not the occasion for a full review of the right of private subjects
    to prosecute. It is a right of constitutional importance, and may properly be exercised
    where a “public” body, such as the Director of Public Prosecutions, has declined to
    prosecute.


5   The tests that the Crown Prosecution Service adopts under its Code for Crown
    Prosecutors were borne well in mind in the decision to prosecute in this case. On the
    basis of the Taylor findings alone, supported by a proper basis of witness statements,
    there is a realistic prospect of conviction for the offences of manslaughter and
    misfeasance in public office. Further, the prospect of a conviction for manslaughter is
    enhanced by the decision of the House of Lords in R v. Adomako [1995] 1 A.C. 151.
    However, it is submitted that a “private” prosecutor would be entitled to apply a less
    strict test in deciding to prosecute; he need not follow the test imposed upon itself by
    the CPS. The CPS should not approach a review of the present kind on the basis that
    it should apply its own test of evidential sufficiency.

                                             2
6    Public interest and “interests of justice” factors are reviewed below. The matters
     raised by the defendants will probably form the basis of an application that the case be
     stayed, or not committed, because the prosecution, it will be said, is engaged in
     abusing the process of the court. If the defendants do not for tactical reasons present
     such an argument, the prosecution may well decide to raise this matter with the
     magistrates’ court of its own motion, and may invite the court, if it wishes, to hear
     evidence on the subject.


7    It is submitted that, except in the very plainest of cases, it would be a misuse of the
     discretion given to the Crown Prosecution Service to take over a prosecution such as
     this for the purposes of discontinuing it. Arguments about “abuse of process” involve
     questions of fact and evidence. Matters such as the effect of press publicity and
     alleged prejudice caused by delay are evidential and they should be subject to
     empirical tests. Increasingly, witnesses are called before the tribunals which are
     called upon to decide “abuse of process” arguments. Above all, all circumstances
     should be balanced and weighed in determining whether to stay a case, and they
     should be considered “in the round”. See Tan v. Cameron [1992] 2 A.C. 205, 225E
     (PC), per Lord Mustill.


    Previous inquiries; the relevance o f the 1998 Home Office disclosure o f evidence.


8   There have been a number of inquiries: by Lord Justice Taylor; the Director of Public
     Prosecutions; the Coroner; the Police Complaints Authority; and a “Scrutiny” by Lord
     Justice Stuart-Smith. The West Midlands police collected evidence for the first four of
     these, and appear also to have conducted a separate private inquiry for the South
     Yorkshire police, which may be alleged to provide the justification for the exclusive
     control of South Yorkshire police over most of the documentation in this case.


9   The defendants ask why another, criminal, trial of these events should take place, and,
     in the light of those earlier inquiries and their findings, they ask the Director of Public
     Prosecutions to put an end to it. A mass of new evidence has been made available in

                                              3
     the last year at the insistence of the Home Secretary, after the “Scrutiny”, which was
     not previously in the public domain or known to the families of those who died, and
     which has hitherto been concealed in the possession of those who have been held
     liable for negligence, the South Yorkshire police.


10   The significance of the witness statements disclosed in the course of the “Scrutiny”,
     and the hundreds of unsworn police statements, edited and unedited, disclosed by the
     Home Secretary in 1998, is difficult to overstate. They disclose, prima facie, such a
     thorough manipulation of the evidence to the past benefit of the defendants and South
     Yorkshire police in general, that they cause all aspects of the investigation, all known
     statements, indexes to evidence and correspondence, to be examined differently.


11   The documentation referred to below is relevant to the defendants’ reliance on the
     outcome of previous inquiries and investigations. In summary, it indicates the
     following;


     (a) the alleged independence of the West Midlands police throughout these enquiries
     was a sham;


     (b) the South Yorkshire police statements sent to the DPP by West Midlands police
     were known by both forces to include edited statements; the “undertaking” given by
     Mr Mervyn Jones of West Midlands Police (“Scrutiny” report, page 213) that he
     would not release the unedited statements to the Taylor Inquiry discloses a principal-
     agent relationship inconsistent with independence;


     (c) West Midlands police allowed full or at least wide access to the papers in the case
     to South Yorkshire police at the inquest, civil proceedings (and presumably the Taylor
     Inquiry), while denying it to the Liverpool families;


     (d) the statements and documents sent to the DPP in 1990 were the result of a
     calculated selection, from which many statements of central importance were

                                             4
     excluded, and which included edited statements of police officers;


     (e) Hammond Suddards, solicitors to South Yorkshire police, and in particular Peter
     Metcalf, have acted under a serious conflict of interest in the course of previous
     inquiries, and continue to deny access to the Liverpool families to the South Yorkshire
     archive. No protest is made at this by the defendants, whose defence, it is believed, is
     funded by the South Yorkshire Police Authority, and one of whom, Mr Duckenfield,
     is represented by solicitors who acted for the South Yorkshire police in the “Scrutiny”.


                                  Sufficiency o f evidence


12   It has already been pointed out in previous submissions that the Taylor findings in
     themselves amount almost to a prima facie case of manslaughter by gross negligence
     and of misfeasance. The decision to open the gates without taking steps to divert the
     oncoming spectators was a “blunder of the first magnitude” and was an immediate
     (and therefore substantial) cause of death. The decision was taken by Duckenfield,
     with the agreement or acquiescence of Murray.


13   The witness statements already provided to the defence and DPP provide cogent
     evidential support for the manslaughter and misfeasance allegations, combined with
     admissions of fact made by each defendant in his various statements, and evidence to
     the Inquest and the Taylor Inquiry. Exhibits such as videos, photographs, plans etc, in
     support of the Taylor findings are not to hand, because the South Yorkshire police,
     with the encouragement of the Director of Public Prosecutions, refuse to hand them
     over pending the outcome of this review.


14   In an offence in this species of involuntary manslaughter, following Adomako, the
     prosecution must prove: (a) a duty of care; (b) a breach of that duty; (c) that that
     breach was a substantial cause of death; (c) “The essence of the matter which is
     supremely a jury question, is whether having regard to the risk of death involved the
     conduct of the defendant was so bad in all the circumstances as to amount in their

                                             5
       judgment to a criminal act or omission.” per Lord Mackay LC [1995] 1 A.C. 187E.


15     It is submitted that all elements but the last have never been seriously disputed. The
       remaining element is for the jury. Lord Taylor found, and it is inherent in the
       acceptance of liability by South Yorkshire police in the various negligence cases, that
       the police were under a duty, and that there was a breach of the duty of care ,
       causative of death. See also Frost v. Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire Police
       [1997] 1 All.E.R. 540, 544b-c, per Rose LJ;


               “The immediate cause of the disaster was a senior officer’s decision to open
               the outer gate without cutting off access to the pens. Liability for the deaths
               and injuries of those spectators has been admitted by the three defendants, the
               first of whom is the Plaintiffs Chief Constable.”


16     The statements of the 35 spectator witnesses which have been served on the defence
       and DPP prove this negligence, taken together with the transcripts of evidence given
       by the two defendants to the Taylor Inquiry and the inquest. The statements should be
       read in full. It is not intended here to set out the evidence as might be appropriate in
       an opening speech, nor to treat the CPS in this review as an examining magistrate,
       considering whether a case to answer is made out on the papers.


Some features o f the evidence already served.


17     Some conspicuous features of the 35 witnesses are as follows, with a few references.
       In 1988 police officers diverted spectators away from the tunnel leading to those pens,
       (eg Hilton, page 5). The unedited statements of White and Lang, submitted on 24th
       August, prove the same, and suggest that it had been the practice of senior officers to
       ensure that the tunnel was closed when the pens were full, something that could be
       seen easily by White from the steps near the Control Box. This police evidence was
       suppressed until 1998.    In 1989, when the gate was opened, a rush of people carried
       spectators straight into the tunnel, and it was impossible to turn back (Cook).

                                                 6
18   There was no obvious alternative to the tunnel (Harvey, Murray, Fellowes, Southern.)
      There was no diversion away from this tunnel (Odger, Murphy, Langley). Spectators
     had to go with the crowd, for fear of falling underfoot. (Edwards). Spectators were
     carried by the surge of people into the tunnel when Gate C was opened. (Anderson,
     Burns, Campbell.) The central pens in the terraces were packed at 2.50 pm (Blayney,
     Mullee). PC Guest said that at 2.40 it was not going to be possible to accommodate
     the crowd outside the Leppings Lane entrance in those pens. (See file of 24th August
     1998.) P.C. Walpole (see Annex D. produced below) says the overcrowding was
     obvious at 2.55pm. P.C Brooks says the central pens were too full at 2.50pm. (See
     Annex D)


19   Duckenfield and Murray were in the Control Box. They could see the central pens.
     Closed circuit television gave them an even better view of the pens. Five minutes
     after Superintendent Marshall had asked for help to relieve possibly life-threatening
     pressure at the turnstiles in Leppings Lane, Duckenfield, with the acquiescence and
     tacit support of Murray, finally ordered the gate to be opened without closing off
     access to the already crowded pens. Thousands surged in: the deaths of 96 people
     were the immediate and direct consequence. Murray had been on duty at the semi­
     final in 1988 in the Control Box. He culpably failed in 1989 to give the proper and
     obvious advice. Duckenfield, in Lord Taylor’s words, “froze”. Both defendants admit
     their presence in the Control Box, and Duckenfield admits that he lied about matters
     shortly afterwards, saying the Liverpool supporters broke open the gate.


20   The CCTV film, and footage held by the BBC, photographs and other videos of the
     circumstances, disclose full pens before the gate was opened, and a horrifying and
     obvious overcrowding after the gates opened. Most of this evidence is in the hands
     of the South Yorkshire police. The HFSG, and leading counsel, have seen some of the
     video evidence.




                                            7
21   The basis of the charges of misfeasance and attempting to pervert the course of justice
      is clear from the Taylor interim report, and the informations and submissions lodged
      at Leeds. The HFSG cannot obtain the important statement of Graham Kelly of the
      Football Association, because South Yorkshire police refuse to supply it, or even a
      copy. It is intended that Kelly and two witnesses from Liverpool Football Club, Peter
      Robinson, and H.H. Judge Ensor, will be called to say they heard Duckenfield’s lie. It
     was said after deaths had been caused. It will be argued it was an obvious attempt to
      impede inquiries, and to suppress the truth.


22   In leading counsel’s opinion, there is sufficient evidence on which to commit for trial
     already. If, for the sake of argument, committal proceedings were to begin in a
     week’s time, without any further disclosure by South Yorkshire police, the
     prosecution would call the 35 spectator witnesses, the three police witnesses whose
     evidence has been served (except Guest, who is dead), other officers, and a number of
     live witnesses, including Kelly, on the basis of transcripts of the evidence given.


23   The prosecution has already identified further witnesses from the transcripts of
     evidence given at the Taylor Inquiry, and some from the Coroner’s proceedings, who
     it might call at committal, and police officers who were at the ground, who have made
     contact with us. It is not necessary to identify their names at this stage. There is no
     reason to believe that a committing magistrate would take a different view of this
     evidence from Lord Taylor. It has been agreed at the magistrates court that the old
     pre-1997 committal rules govern the case, because a police investigation took place
     before 1st April 1997. The provisions of the Criminal Procedure and Investigations
     Act 1996 do not apply.


24   For the reasons that appear below, however, there can be little doubt that the archive
      of statements and exhibits in the possession of the South Yorkshire police will add
      significantly to the prosecution case at committal, and then at trial. Assuming that the
      South Yorkshire police continue to refuse to co-operate with the prosecution, witness
      summonses will be sought under section 97 of the Magistrates Courts Act (after a

                                              8
       decision not to discontinue the case), requiring the Assistant Chief Constable of South
       Yorkshire police to produce the documentary and technical evidence, and original
       witness statements.


 Public interest and ‘interests o f justice "factors: (a) the origins o f the present prosecutions


25    The following matters are set out as “public interest” factors which it is suggested are
       relevant to the present review and to the arguments of the defendants.


The absence o f detailed information until 1997-8


26    It has been an important part of the prosecution’s approach to the Director’s current
       review, and of our justification for bringing criminal proceedings in 1998, that the
       HFSG has been deprived of critical information, statements and documents about the
       disaster for nine years. At the Taylor Inquiry in 1989, a policy appears to have been
       followed of providing copies of the statement of an individual survivor or spectator to
       the lawyers acting for him. Attached as Annex C is a letter of Miss E.M. Steel, a
       solicitor for the “Hillsborough Steering Committee” (now defunct), which records this
       practice. That practice was abandoned during or after the Taylor Inquiry, and certainly
       by the time the Director of Public Prosecutions became involved formally in August
       1989.


27    It will be noted that Miss Steel did not say that these statements became generally
       available to the families collectively: only, in each case, to a particular solicitor. The
       extent to which these statements were distributed is unclear. Few have remained
       available to the HFSG.


28    It appears from the Stuart-Smith report that police statements (and, perhaps, others)
       were distributed to the press. (See Report, Appendix 8, page 213). (Where edited
       statements had been made, it was of course the policy of South Yorkshire police to
       distribute these, rather than the originals.) However, after the end of the Taylor

                                                9
       Inquiry, when the DPP investigation began, this policy changed permanently.
       Information and statements were guarded closely. The investigations conducted by the
       West Midlands police for the DPP, Coroner and Police Complaints Authority put an
       end to the policy of disclosure, except in isolated instances.


29    The new information the Divisional Court was asked to consider in the 1993 Judicial
       Review had been obtained by dint of the persistence of individual families,
       dissatisfied and at times appalled by the fact that South Yorkshire police appeared to
       have access to information, whilst they themselves had little. The Divisional Court’s
       judgment of 5thNovember 1993 records only a few of those efforts and the statements
       discovered, but the fact that the substance of the various investigations was unknown
       to them is evident from a reading of the transcript as a whole.


30    Over the years, more evidence became available, sometimes accidentally and
       haphazardly, and often after many frustrated efforts. The appointment of the
       “Scrutiny” of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith followed intense national and televised
       publicity about material which had been discovered after the inquests.


31    Only the open approach of the Home Secretary in 1998, in stark contrast to the
       miserly approach of the police forces and the Coroner to the dissemination of
       information, has permitted the HFSG to obtain the information on which to embark
       with confidence on prosecutions. The information now available, it is clear,
       undermines the inquest verdicts of accidental death, and calls into question the
       validity of all previous investigations.


The decision to prosecute


32    Having advised the HFSG in relation to the “Scrutiny”, the author was asked to advise
       on possible further steps. The report of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, published in
       February 1998, was regarded with profound disappointment and frustration, to say the
       least, insofar as it related to the new evidence. It seemed important that a decision as

                                                  10
     to how to proceed, if at all, should be taken after a pause for reflection, and after the
     material examined by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was disclosed as promised by the
     Home Secretary in Parliament. (See remarks of the Home Secretary, Hansard, Annex
     A). However, the first batch of statements of the South Yorkshire police arrived in
     Liverpool only a few days before the author went to Liverpool in April to address the
     members of the HFSG about future action, and it seemed wrong to delay a decision in
     principle further.


33   Leading counsel’s advice, delivered orally to the Group, and beforehand to the
     Committee in writing, was that the findings of Lord Justice Taylor had survived
     intact for 9 years. They had been upheld by the Stuart-Smith report. Prosecutions for
     manslaughter, misfeasance and attempting to pervert the course of justice
     (Duckenfield’s “disgraceful lie”) were justified. Prosecutions for additional offences
     on the basis of the new material were feasible in spite of the “Scrutiny”. However, the
     Group was advised that it might be better to confine any prosecutions to the plain
     original facts, in order to avoid long and expensive technical trials involving expert
     evidence about videotapes and cameras.


34   The other reasons put forward by counsel, relating to the present charges, were similar
     to those that appeared in the written submissions attached to the informations
     presented in July to the Leeds Magistrates Court. There was evidence, in law, to
     justify prosecution. Whether to proceed, it was argued, was a decision for the Group.
     The HFSG decided that afternoon to accept counsel’s advice, to instruct him to
     consider the various statements that had come to light before and in the course of the
     “Scrutiny”, and to formulate charges accordingly on the basis of the Taylor findings.


35   It was only after that decision was taken, and after members of the HFSG and counsel
     had read the police statements disclosed by the Home Secretary, that it appeared that
     there had been, on the face of things, a sustained suppression of the truth in the course
     of the original investigations which went far beyond the matters which had been
     alleged by the HFSG, and which had given rise to the “Scrutiny” in the first place.

                                             11
         Public interest and ‘interests o f justice ’’factors: fb) the concealed material


The edited South Yorkshire police statements


36     On 24th August 1998 statements were sent by the HFSG to the CPS demonstrating the
       practice of editing, by which, it was submitted, the DPP and counsel had been misled
       in 1990. (See pages I to IV of the file submitted on that day.) Further examples (see
       attached new file Annex D) have been selected which show again, strikingly, the
       practice of deleting factual matters, which officers had originally asserted in writing,
       and which were prejudicial to South Yorkshire officers. These examples provide
       further evidence that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, also, was misled on this subject in the
       course of his “Scrutiny”.


37    There are dozens of other instances of editing, of varying degrees of culpability,
      extending, in total and nature, far beyond the cases set out in the report of Lord Justice
       Stuart-Smith. Unfortunately, some of these statements have still not been supplied, as
       is apparent from, for example, the Master Witness List, and the exercise of examining
      them is therefore incomplete. Two conspicuous missing statements are those of Cloke
       and Sykes. The task of comparing these edited and unedited statements
       comprehensively is vast. The time spent on the exercise must have already have
       exceeded substantially the time available to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith or the people on
      whom he relied in 1997.


38    The HFSG has little doubt that the statements provided by South Yorkshire police
       officers, where there were two versions, were the edited ones. It was pointed out in
       the letter of 24th August 1998 that the page numbers on the index in the Master
       Witness List of April 1990, prepared by the West Midlands police for presentation to
       the DPP, indicated this. The statements referred to in that list formed the basis of the
       West Midlands Police Report. An example was shown of an edited statement being
       one page shorter than the pages set out in the index to that list. The extra page was
       probably a Criminal Justice Act statement, attesting to the truth of the attached

                                               12
       unsworn statement. (It would be interesting to know, if this inference is correct,
      whether those formal statements were on West Midlands or South Yorkshire witness
       statement forms, or, perhaps, on paper which bore the printed name of neither force.)


39     The material which the HFSG has now supplied demonstrates by itself that a policy
      was adopted by the South Yorkshire police of withholding information, critical to the
       issue of negligence, from Lord Justice Taylor in 1989 (so far as they were able), the
      Director in 1990, the Coroner between 1989 and 1991, and, presumably, the Police
      Complaints Authority between 1990 and 1992. How much more is there in the
       Sheffield archive?


The Sharpies statement


40    The policy of editing statements is to be contrasted not only with the South Yorkshire
      statements setting out ad nauseam prejudicial comment about Liverpool supporters, but
      also with the statement of James Sharpies, now Chief Constable of the Merseyside
      Police. It is dated 20th March 1990, and it attaches a computer print-out of some earlier
      assertions and other pensees (Annex EJ. The HFSG did not know that Sharpies had even
      been a witness to the disaster until after disclosure of the Master Witness List. A copy
      of his statement was obtained from the Merseyside police. It will be noted that large
      tracts of both statements are expressions of hearsay, impression, commendation and
      comment, none of which has been excised.


41    The author of the statement is a friend of Assistant Chief Constable Jackson. Sharpies
      bestows lavish praise on the senior officers of South Yorkshire. His account provides a
       sharp contrast with the edited statements of junior South Yorkshire police officers, whose
      criticisms of their senior officers were painstakingly excised. In the Master Witness List,
      Part V is composed for the most part of police officers. The first entry is the statement
      of Duckenfield (pages 2457-2469) ; the second is 18 pages of statements by Sharpies
       (2458-2375); the third is by the defendant Murray (2470-2488). No editing of Sharpies
      has taken place. It is to be inferred that a deliberate decision was made to place his

                                               13
       statement between the two principal suspects, in order to influence the reader against
       prosecutions.


42     The Master Witness List also includes a statement of Ronald Hadfield. He was then
       Chief Constable of the Nottinghamshire Police. No doubt he was invited for the same
       reasons of hospitality as led to the invitation to Sharpies. His statement remains
       undisclosed. In contrast to the Sharpies statement, Hadfield’s is listed as last but one of
       the witnesses in Part V.


The significance o f the Phillips “Inquiry and Report ”


43     The HFSG learned of the Phillips “Inquiry and Report” only in the course of
       correspondence during the “Scrutiny”. Attached as Annex F are letters of 8th August 1997
       (which contained the first reference to the report which the HFSG saw), 10th and 19th
       September and 6th October). The first of these letters claims that the report was ordered
       for civil litigation. The report itself is dated “August 1990", the same month in which the
       DPP decided not to prosecute.


44     The origins of this report are not entirely clear. It is suggested that the South Yorkshire
       Police commissioned it, but the report would obviously have been relevant to the various
       investigations of the West Midlands police. Attached as Annex G are extracts from that
       report, namely, the cover sheet, contents page, and pages 1-4, 41, 92-3, 100-105, 148-9,
       163-173, and Appendix C. (The whole report will be supplied to the CPS on request.)
       The conclusion indicated that the report attributed negligence (but weakly) to
       Duckenfield and Murray, suggested that fault was broadly spread, and offered mitigation
       for the negligence shown. It was highly sympathetic to South Yorkshire police.


45     The date of the report is significant. Counsel advised against prosecution on 6th August
       1990, but “contribution hearings” were pending in the High Court, to be heard in October
       1990, at which the division of liability between the police, football club, and engineers
       was to be established, and proportional financial contributions to damages were to be

                                               14
     determined. The reference to the closing of the tunnel in 1988 at pages 92-3 of the Report
     shows the critical significance of the editing in relation to the tunnel, described in the
     HFSG letter to the DPP, and attached file, of 24thAugust 1998. Clearly, Phillips had been
     misled in relation to White, Woodcock and Lang, the importance of whose full evidence
     is set out in detail in that letter. He must also have been misled in relation to Sgt
     Crawford. (See pages 86 to 101 of Annex D.)


46   At page 41, para. 5.29, and page 105, para 8.3, Phillips refers to a “weather eye”. It will
     be recalled that in his statement of 12th July 1990, Chief Inspector Bettison (File of 24th
     August 1998, Tab 3, pages 17-18) had referred to the requests to police witnesses,
     instigated by Peter Metcalf of Hammond Suddards, to “clarify” their evidence. Bettison
     suggested that when officers had talked of “monitoring” the terraces, they surely meant
     “nothing more than keeping a weather eye out.” Phillips’ use of the same expression
     indicates that Metcalfs exercise in clarification became indeed a successful manipulation
     of the evidence.


47   The introductory pages of the Report fail to disclose who had commissioned it in October
      1989, and whether the report had been used for more than one purpose. It is not known
     to the HFSG whether the report, or a version of it, was sent to the Director in 1990. The
     HFSG has been sent a list of documents in the possession of the DPP that were
     considered in 1990, but it is suggested in the letter of Mr Croston to HFSG of 29th July
      1998 that other material may then have been in the DPP’s possession. It may be that the
     Phillips report was incorporated in some way into the West Midlands police report.
     Whether sent to the DPP or not, the document shows the pernicious effect of the editing
     process.


48   The contents of Appendix C to the Phillips Report will be discussed below.




                                              15
The selective supply o f information to the DPP


49    In the HFSG letter of 31st July to the CPS, it was pointed out, not only that the edited
       statements were sent to the DPP, but also (paragraph 13) that, of the 35 statements of
       spectators who had been provisionally selected for committal on the information then
       available, only 7 were in the Master Witness list, 8 were called at the inquest, and 2 were
       called at the Taylor Inquiry.


50    The breakdown of the provisional committal bundle is as follows. Of the 35 “spectator”
       witnesses,


              only Thomas Hilton and Peter Darcy gave oral evidence to the Taylor enquiry;


              only Steven Odger, Norman Langley, Anthony Murray, Andrew Turner, Colin
              Flenley, Shaun Sayer, and David Campbell, are on the Master Witness List;


              only Thomas Hilton, Norman Langley, Anthony Murray, Derek Richards,
              Stephanie Jones, Colin Flenley, Frederick Maddox, and Karl Mullee gave
              evidence to the inquest.


51    There are about 571 statements in the Master Witness List. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
       records that 3, 776 statements were taken by the West Midlands Police. Some hundreds
       were taken by South Yorkshire police officers. The Police Complaints Authority records
       (produced below) tell us that 5341 statements were taken in the “overall investigation”.
       It follows therefore that the Director had access to about 12% of the total statements
       generated in the enquiry. (Very few appear to have been made after August 1990).
       Obviously, many of these would have been irrelevant or of little relevance to the question
       of criminal liability, but not, surely, 88% of them. How were the 571 selected?


52    Of the 36 edited statements that have now been sent to the DPP (24th August file, and
       Annex D). 13 appeared on the Master Witness List sent to the DPP with the West


                                               16
       Midlands Police Report in April 1990. Other very important edited statements have not
       been disclosed yet by the South Yorkshire police, in spite of the Home Secretary’s
       instruction of February 1998.


53     Given the circumstances set out above, it is impossible to argue that there is no relevant
       material to which the Director did not have access in 1990, and every reason to believe
       that the documentation submitted in 1990 was chosen with partiality; and that the archive
       held in Sheffield contains further relevant and important material that has been carefully
       withheld from the Director and the Coroner, and which is adverse to the South Yorkshire
       police and the defendants.


The selective supply o f information to the Coroner


54    The defendants refer, in connection with their arguments in favour of discontinuing the
       prosecutions, to the findings of accidental death by the Coroner’s jury. On Monday 14th
       September 1998, the author of these representations, together with Ann Adlington and
       Philip Hammond of the HFSG, inspected documents in Sheffield given in evidence at the
       inquest, and which were now made available in accordance with Rule 57 of the Coroners’
       Rules 1984. The present Coroner, Christopher Dorries, told us that among the Coroner’s
       archive is a copy of the West Midlands Police Report, sent to the DPP in 1990. The same
       incomplete material, including the edited statements, was sent to Dr Popper in 1990, from
       which he made a further selection, assisted by the West Midlands police, to produce
       about 200 witnesses, of whom, it should be noted, only 56 had given evidence to the
       Taylor Inquiry.


55    This selection produced a wholly different emphasis to that contained in the Taylor
       report. Attached to these representations is an analysis prepared by Ann Adlington,
       contrasting the findings of Lord Taylor with the summing-up of the Coroner. (Annex H).
       The Popper approach no doubt had its origins in the West Midlands police report, as well
       as in the 571 statements tendered to the DPP.



                                               17
The control o f information.


56    The Director knows from recent correspondence of our deep concerns that the South
       Yorkshire police hold all the original papers in the case, and that the Director has given
       “guidance”, apparently under the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985, that the Chief
       Constable might decide against disclosing these, or copies, until she has completed her
       review.


57    The South Yorkshire policy of non-disclosure, formed on the basis of this “guidance” and
       advice from their own lawyers, Hammond Suddards, is obsessively secret and defensive.
       Mr Daines, the Assistant Chief Constable, now refuses to disclose to the HFSG even
       outstanding documents, the disclosure of which was promised by the Home Secretary in
       February of this year, at the end of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s “Scrutiny”. Daines is
       thwarting the Home Secretary’s expressed intentions. He refuses, perversely, even to
       provide the HFSG with the work addresses of a number of South Yorkshire police
       officers who the prosecution wishes to interview. (Tab 17, file of 24th August 1998)


58    Mr Kennedy of the Crown Prosecution Service has said that “voluntary disclosure” is
       inappropriate at this stage, and that he understands that the archive is the “property” of
       the South Yorkshire Police. The Coroner has told the author and a member of the HFSG
       that his understanding also is that South Yorkshire police “owns” the papers, and, that,
       although he has his own store of papers in the case, he cannot supply documents or copies
       (except as provided by Rule 57 of the Coroners’ Rules 1984).


59    In search of the origin of the argument that South Yorkshire police “owned” the archive,
       members of the Group have looked back to previous correspondence and events in the
       early years after the disaster and have examined them in the light of the material now
       available. The true position is that West Midlands police appear to have regarded
       themselves as agents or servants of South Yorkshire police in the dissemination, control
       and protection of information, and in the presentation of facts to the DPP, Coroner and
       PCA, and to a lesser extent Lord Taylor.

                                               18
60     It is now apparent that throughout all the enquiries in this case, the South Yorkshire
       police has had access to all or most information obtained by West Midlands, but that the
       South Yorkshire force has instructed the West Midlands police, in its own interests, and
       in conformity with a distortion of the common law, to withhold that information from the
       bereaved families, except in isolated instances.


The roles o f the West Midlands Police


61    The ostensibly independent West Midlands police force has reported to, and collected
       evidence for, four official bodies:


       a)     Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry of 1989, which reported to the Home Secretary;


       b)     The Director of Public Prosecutions in 1989 and 1990;


       c)     The Coroner’s Inquest between 19th April 1989 and the end of March 1991;


       d)     The Police Complaints Authority’s supervision of investigations made by officers
              from, not only West Midlands, but from a variety of other police forces into
              complaints made against a number of South Yorkshire officers.


62    In these circumstances, it would seem obvious to the layman that the papers in the case
       would belong to one or other of these four bodies, who would each be expected to retain
       them (or copies, if one of the other bodies had the originals.) Alternatively, it might
       possibly be thought normal that the West Midlands police might retain the originals or
       copies. In fact, the South Yorkshire police appear to hold the entire archive, except for
       such copies as are stored by the Coroner.


63    Only if the investigating police force was truly independent of those it investigated, and
       impartial, could any of the four inquiries be regarded as full, independent and complete.
       If it were demonstrated that the West Midlands police inquiry was not independent, but


                                               19
       that that force had in fact regarded itself as acting as the agent of South Yorkshire police,
       no weight could be attached to its reports, and the value of the conclusions of those to
       whom their officers reported is diminished.


The history o f the claim that South Yorkshire “own” the archive: and that they “own”, or are
“p rincipals ” o f the “information ”


April to August 1989: The Coroner, Lord Taylor and the two private police investigations


64     It was reported in the newspapers on 17th April 1989 that the Chief Constable of the
       South Yorkshire Police, Peter Wright, had asked the Chief Constable of the West
       Midlands Police, Geoffrey Dear, on 16th April “to nominate a senior officer to carry out
       an investigation into the policing of the match.” It is not known what power was invoked
       by Mr Wright in making that request. This appears to be the same subject for which Mr
       Phillips was commissioned as an expert witness in 1989, and, if the April press reports
       were accurate, the Phillips report may have been commissioned by West Midlands police
       in the furtherance of this role. Other early press reports, however, make it clear that Mr
       Dear’s officer was to report to the Taylor Inquiry, which had been announced by the
       Government on 16th April.


65     On 16thApril 1989, the Assistant Chief Constable of West Midlands, John Mervyn Jones,
       was nominated by Dear as an investigating officer. According to the evidence of Jones
       to the “mini-inquest” in April 1990 (Annex I), he met the Coroner on Tuesday 18th April
       1989 when Popper first gave instructions to him to gather evidence on Popper’s behalf.
       “At that time my other master was Lord Justice Taylor”. At the time Jones was giving
       evidence in 1990, the West Midlands police were assembling evidence, he said, for the
       DPP.


66     It appears to the HFSG, although they cannot be sure of the point, that West Midlands
       became the force nominated to help Lord Taylor and the other bodies simply because
       Wright had asked Dear to investigate on 16th April 1989. The West Midlands force had

                                                20
     had such poor publicity for the year before April 1989 that it is hard to believe that the
     Home Office would have chosen it.


67   However, it is clear from the reports and statements of the South Yorkshire Police
     (supplied to the HFSG this year at the request of the Home Secretary) that by 17th April
     1989 the South Yorkshire police were carrying out their own investigation into the
     policing of the match. The relationship between this and the separate West Midlands
     police investigation into the policing of the match, requested by South Yorkshire police,
     is unclear.


68   At all events, Mr Jones was reporting to both the Coroner and Lord Justice Taylor. The
     statements that he and his officers took were taken on behalf of, and for the purpose of
     presenting to, one or other of those persons, or to both of those in succession. It cannot,
     plainly, be said that those statements were taken as agent for, or on behalf of, the South
     Yorkshire police office or its Chief Constable, although the fact that Wright first called
     in Dear allows a spurious claim to be made for such agency.


69   On 26thApril 1989, a meeting occurred in which Chief Superintendent Wain of the South
     Yorkshire police said “our job is merely to collate what evidence South Yorkshire police
     officers can provide to their Chief Constable in order that we can present a suitable case,
     on behalf of the force, to subsequent enquiries.” The accompanying memorandum,
     distributed to all officers present at the ground when the disaster occurred, said “This
     exercise has no connection with the investigation into the policing of the F.A Cup semi­
     final which is being conducted by the Chief Constable of the West Midlands.” (See
     Stuart-Smith report, pages 78-9; and questionnaires contained at the beginning of the file
     submitted on 24th August 1998.) This latter investigation must plainly refer to the
     investigation commissioned by Mr Wright on 16th April 1989.


70   It appears therefore that there were four separate investigations at this stage. The Coroner
     had opened the inquests formally. A second was conducted by West Midlands into the
     policing of the match, and commissioned by South Yorkshire.                A third was an

                                              21
       investigation by West Midlands for Lord Taylor. A fourth was an internal South
       Yorkshire police investigation into their own policing, for the benefit of presenting
       evidence to, among others, Lord Taylor (confirmed by Appendix 8 to the Report of Lord
       Justice Stuart-Smith, page 211).


71    This fourth investigation, conducted by the South Yorkshire police, appears to have had
       full and unimpeded access to all the papers, unrestrained by any restrictions imposed by
       West Midlands police. See the two-page memorandum of Peter Carr, R1A for example,
       dated 25th April, in which he spoke of the briefing which the Chief Constable (of South
       Yorkshire) had with “Operational Staff’ on 16th, 17th and 19th April. He also referred to
       various documents in his longer twenty- page report of the same day, of video tapes and
       photographs, which were obviously in the possession of the South Yorkshire, not West
       Midlands, investigators. These Carr documents are Annex J. Why had the West Midlands
       police not taken these exhibits for their own inquiries?


72    It is clear from the report of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith that the South Yorkshire officers
       drafted their own statements, and that the editing was done not by West Midlands officers
       but by South Yorkshire officers or Hammond Suddards. (See Report, page 78-79), but
       apparently for the purpose of presenting evidence to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, and to any
       other official investigation.


August 1989 to August 1990; the investigation for the DPP


73    After the Taylor interim report was published, it appears that in August 1989, the Chief
       Constable of South Yorkshire wrote to the Director of Public Prosecutions, requesting
       a decision in relation to criminal liability. The Director of Public Prosecutions
       commenced an investigation by writing to Mr Wright on 15th August 1989, saying that
       the matter should be the subject of a full investigation. “The West Midlands Police had
       already done considerable work in gathering evidence for Lord Justice Taylor’s Enquiry.
       It seemed sensible therefore to invite Mr Geoffrey Dear QPM DL LLB, Chief Constable
       of the West Midlands Police Force, to undertake this investigation.” (See Report of Chief

                                              22
       Constable to South Yorkshire Police Authority of 17th November 1989, Annex K. para
       53) The report went on to assert that the West Midlands police were also acting for the
       Coroner and the Police Complaints Authority.


74     On 5th January 1990 the Chief Constable reported that the West Midlands police
       investigation into the disaster was being conducted “independently”.


75    The Director received the Master Witness List, the West Midlands Police Report, and
       attached statements, exhibits, and transcripts of evidence, in this period, probably in
       April. On 6th August 1990, leading counsel advised against prosecution, and the decision
       that there would be no prosecutions was announced by the DPP on 30th August 1990.


April 1989 to March 1991; the inquests; the roles o f West Midlands police and Hammond
Suddards.


76    It is necessary to consider not just the role of the West Midlands police, but the position
       of Hammond Suddards in the case. They were the solicitors who have acted for the South
       Yorkshire police throughout most of the civil proceedings, including two House of Lords
       cases, and on behalf of the force at the various inquiries. (Weightman Rutherfords acted
       in some civil proceedings for South Yorkshire police in about 1992, and perhaps later.
       Winkworth and Pemberton acted for them in the “Scrutiny”.) Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s
       report shows the prominent part played by Mr Metcalf of that firm in the early stages of
       the Taylor Inquiry (see pages 78-81 and 211). Mr Metcalf or an assistant attended the
       “Business Meetings”, to which interested lawyers and others were invited by the Coroner,
       before the main and interim inquests were held, for the purpose of managing the inquest.
       Mr Metcalf spoke of both the coronal and civil law aspects of the case, and was clearly
       concerned in each. Copies of notes of these Business Meetings are attached as Annex L


77     At page 9 of the minutes of the meeting of 26th February 1990, Mr Metcalf made the
       following observation;



                                              23
               “In general terms, an inquest takes place before a civil action and it’s always
               legitimate expense to go and be represented at the Inquest because something
               might come out that will be relevant to the civil action.”


78   In April and May 1990, the Coroner held “mini-inquests” at which contentious cross-
     examination was not allowed, so as not to “prejudice” the investigation of the DPP and
     any possible criminal proceedings. The evidence adduced asserted that in all cases, death
     had followed rapidly from unconsciousness, which had followed rapidly from the crush.
     A consequence of this, of course, is that damages for pre-death suffering would be lower
     than if suffering had been greater.


79   In June 1990, Mr Justice Hidden heard civil cases in which the evidence of sudden death,
     given at the mini-inquests, was adduced. That evidence defeated the families’ claims for
     damages for pre-death suffering. The apportionment of liability between the police and
     other parties, such as Sheffield Wednesday Football Club, was not determined until
     October 1990.


80   In September 1990, the Coroner, Dr Popper, announced that the full inquest would be
     resumed in November. At this time, South Yorkshire police was defending itself in a
     number of civil actions, including the issues whether claims could be made by those who
     had watched events on television, and appeals by the victims’ families in the pre-death
     suffering cases. Further litigation was outstanding in relation to a number of spectators
     or relatives of victims who were present at the match and had suffered injury or mental
     trauma.


81   The three-year limitation period had not expired. A verdict of unlawful killing at the
     inquest might lead to prosecutions, in spite of the Director’s earlier decision. At the time,
     it was known, and topical in the news, that prosecutions by the Director in the Zeebrugge
     case had been commenced only after a verdict of unlawful killing at the inquest, and the
     DPP had declined to prosecute at an earlier stage.



                                              24
82   On 30th October 1990, Hammond Suddards were represented at a Business Meeting by
     Belinda Norcliffe of Hammond Suddards. (She had announced at page 1 of the minutes
     of 6th March 1990 that she was from that firm). The Coroner announced at that meeting
     (pages 9-11 of the minutes for that day) that he would not be distributing copies of
     statements at the inquest (p 10-11) and also that he would not be circulating a list of
     witnesses he intended to call (middle of page 10). He also announced that he was
     proposing to impose a “cut-off’ time in respect of the disaster, after which time no events
     would be the subject of inquiry.


83   The claim of “agency”. Attached is correspondence of November 1990 in the cases of
     Sarah and Victoria Hicks (Annex M ) . On 15thNovember 1990, Mervyn Jones, Assistant
     Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police, wrote to the solicitor for Trevor Hicks,
     Chairman of the HFSG, in response to a letter which Mr Hicks’s solicitor wrote for the
     specific purpose of arguing that the Coroner should not impose a “cut-off’ time of 3.15
     pm.


84   The letter made it clear that a statement of Paul Taylor could not be released without the
     permission of South Yorkshire police. The utterly extraordinary assertion is made that
     the West Midlands police were “constitutionally” the agent of South Yorkshire police.
     Taylor’s statement was taken by the West Midlands police (see Stuart-Smith report, page
     72, paragraph 15) on 8th May 1989. West Midlands police were the “agents” of Lord
     Taylor and the Coroner in taking it. It would of course have been impossible for the
     lawyers acting for South Yorkshire police to advise on the propriety of disclosing it
     unless the South Yorkshire police had the body of evidence of which it formed part, or
     at least had access to it.


85   After legal argument on 19th November 1990, when the inquest reconvened, the Coroner
     formally imposed this “cut-off’, a ruling which has been the cause of great controversy
     and resentment among the Liverpool families. It shielded the South Yorkshire police
     from much embarrassing inquiry. Mr Hicks had not been given Taylor’s statement.
     South Yorkshire police, not the Coroner, had refused to give it to him. The subject


                                             25
     formed one of the grounds on which judicial review was applied for in 1993, and is
     discussed in Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report.


86   In this connection, therefore, Mr Mervyn Jones gave the advice that the South Yorkshire
     police was responsible for advising on the question of disclosing matters relevant to the
     jury’s decision: the South Yorkshire police had the “ownership” of the information. The
     actions of the South Yorkshire police were of course at the centre of the inquest. They
     were under attack. The proposition that the Coroner had had responsibility for the release
     of information at some earlier period, but did not have it as the main inquest was about
     to begin, is ridiculous and legally indefensible. The conflict of interest in South
     Yorkshire police and their lawyers was severe.


87   The role of Chief Superintendent Beechev.      The letters to and from Sandra Stringer
     throw further light on this (Annex N). On 28th March 1991 Chief Superintendent
     Beechey of the West Midlands Police, on behalf of Mervyn Jones, wrote to Mrs Stringer
     in terms adapted from the letter to Mr Hicks of November 1990. Mr Beechey’s name
     will be familiar to the CPS. He was fortunately able to find the time to prepare himself
     for the task of acting as Coroner’s officer, which he eventually performed on a daily
     basis, because, as a former Head of the West Midlands Serious Crime Squad, he had been
     removed in August 1989 from operational duties after that squad had been disbanded, so
     low had its reputation sunk.


88   These facts are set out in “Unsafe and Unsatisfactory”, an independent report by Tim
     Kaye in 1991. Appendixes A and C to that report are attached (Annex O). Appendix A
     supplies the interesting information that in 1989-90, West Midlands investigated South
     Yorkshire; (page 85); South Yorkshire investigated West Yorkshire; and West Yorkshire
     in turn investigated West Midlands. No doubt no serious faults in police officers were
     detected by any of these enquiries. Appendix C shows that Beechey was removed from
     operational duties in August 1989, but was restored in time to act as Coroner’s officer for
     the bulk of the inquest from 30th November 1990, and to deal with the question of
     disclosure of information.

                                             26
89   The penultimate paragraph of Beechey’s letter to Sandra Stringer of 28th March 1991
      indicates that the South Yorkshire police had “directed” him not to disclose material, after
     advice had been taken: South Yorkshire were the “principals” of the information.
     Information could only be released on the order of a court which could include that of the
     coroner. In the course of the inquest, Mr Hicks had not been told of the advice that had
     been given, presumably by Hammond Suddards. The transcripts of the inquest
     proceedings show no reference to the disclosure of statements. The notification of this
     new policy came too late. The 28th March was the last day of the inquest.


90   While the inquest was continuing, therefore, and South Yorkshire police had the power
     to determine disclosure, they, the “principals”, did not disclose. Only when the inquest
     was over was it alleged that the legal advice was to the effect that the Coroner could have
     taken this decision. The Coroner’s approach to this question, and the severe difficulties
     facing the families before, during, and after the inquest, are evident from the letters in
     Annex N.


91   It may be expected that, if South Yorkshire police had access to all the material in 1990-1
     for the inquest and for civil proceedings, the individual officers who were represented at
     the inquest also had similar access. No conflict of interest appears to have embarrassed
     Hammond Suddards or indeed Winkworth and Pemberton, the lawyers who advised the
     South Yorkshire police in the course of the “Scrutiny”. Winkworth and Pemberton
     reminded the CPS of this when they wrote on Mr Duckenfield’s behalf in July 1998. The
     HFSG believes that South Yorkshire Police Authority are funding the defence of both
     defendants, and the close relationship between that force and the defendants is further
     proved by the fact that Duckenfield instructed lawyers who had worked closely with the
     South Yorkshire police, and who, it is to be presumed, have knowledge of the history of
     the control of documents in this case.




                                              27
The further significance o f the Phillips “Inquiry and Report"


92     Reference has been made already to the Phillips “Inquiry and Report”. The Coroner had
       said at the “Business Meeting” on 30th October 1990 that he would not distribute copy
       statements. However, it now appears that the West Midlands police, acting among other
       capacities as Coroners’ officers, had been supplying copies of statements of Liverpool
       supporters to the South Yorkshire police before that date. This is apparent from
       Appendix C to the Phillips Report. Phillips had been asked in October 1989, allegedly
       by the South Yorkshire police, to prepare an “Inquiry and Report” into the policing of the
       match by South Yorkshire police, and had also been asked at some point to inquire into
       the behaviour of Liverpool supporters on the occasion of the disaster.


93    It will be seen from the Appendix to the report that, although most of those witnesses
       gave evidence at the Taylor inquiry, many did not, and it is reasonable to conclude that
       their statements came to Mr Phillips from South Yorkshire police, who in turn obtained
       them from the West Midlands police.


94    If the inference is correct that South Yorkshire police had access to papers from the West
       Midlands police for the purpose of the Phillips report, it is obvious that the West
       Midlands police considered it proper and normal to provide the South Yorkshire police,
       but not the families, with any information gained in the course of that inquiry


95    The Jones letter of November 1990, cited above, suggests that Hammond Suddards
       were advising South Yorkshire police on their obligations as to whether to disclose
       documents wanted for use at the inquest. If Jones was telling the truth, South
       Yorkshire was able to deprive the families of materials at the inquest, but to have full
       or extensive access, as the Phillips report shows, to the statements and evidence
       collected by the West Midlands police. In this way, the inquest, ostensibly objective
       and dispassionate, is now shown to have been manipulated by South Yorkshire police
       for their own ends, and by West Midlands police. For this reason, the defendants are
       not entitled to rely upon the inquest verdicts to put an end to this prosecution.

                                               28
The continuing role o f Hammond Suddards


96    Peter Metcalf of Hammond Suddards continued to advise South Yorkshire police on
       the subject of disclosure after the inquest. See, for example, the letter from Miss Steel
       to Mr Teare of 16th July 1991 contained in Annex N. Metcalf is, of course, the
       lawyer who is currently advising the South Yorkshire police not to disclose any of the
       documents in their possession to anyone at all. He has written to the HFSG that “That
       policy will continue to be applied impartially to prosecutor, defendants and to any
       other party” (letter of 17th August, page 202 of file submitted on 24th August) and “In
       the interests of fairness and justice this policy will apply to all requests received.”
       (letter 7th August, same file, page 206).


97    Mr Metcalf did not reveal, as we have recently been informed by a confidential
       source, that South Yorkshire Police Authority are funding the defence of the present
       defendants; a fact which he might have thought it proper to disclose when he claimed
       a principled impartiality in the handling of confidential materials, and when he
       asserted that neither he nor the Chief Constable was aware of any conflict of interest.


1990-1991; The role o f the Police Complaints Authority


98    On the retirement of Geoffrey Dear at the beginning of April 1990, the investigation
       supervised by the PCA was taken over by the Chief Constable of the Cumbria police.
       Attached as Annex P are a number of PCA formal reports of August 1990, which
       suggest that officers from the Cumbria police force performed a central investigative
       role after April 1990.


99     On 11th July 1991 the Police Complaints Authority directed the South Yorkshire
       Police to bring disciplinary charges for neglect of duty against Duckenfield and
       Murray. On 26th July 1991, Mr Duckenfield, who had been suspended from duty in
       August 1989 after the interim report of Lord Taylor, went on “sick leave”, though still

                                               29
       suspended.


100    On 10th November 1991, the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire retired Mr
       Duckenfield on health grounds, after a report had been submitted by a local police
       surgeon. Thereafter, South Yorkshire police asked permission to abandon the charge
       against Mr Murray, and were allowed to by the PCA, on the ground that it would be
       “unfair” to proceed against Mr Murray for what was in effect a joint charge. A public
       announcement to this effect was made on 13th January 1992. Subsequently, Mr
       Murray also retired on “health grounds”.


101    It is submitted that no proper legal basis can exist for claiming that documents,
       collected for the Police Complaints Authority by the Cumbria police, can be said to be
       the property of South Yorkshire. Those reports must contain confidential material
       about the conduct of South Yorkshire police officers. Can it possibly be said that
       Cumbria police or the PCA were the “agents” of South Yorkshire police?


The law relating to access to police documents


102    There is no reason to impute bad faith to the Coroner for his decision of 30th October
       1990 not to disclose statements, though the decision was depressingly unhelpful: no
       doubt he was ignorant of the fact that South Yorkshire had had copies of the West
       Midlands material. If the Coroner had known that, it is impossible to imagine that he
       would have withheld access to those statements by the bereaved families.


103    There have been a number of cases in the last twenty years in which the courts have
       considered the confidentiality of papers acquired by police in the course of
       investigations. In a letter to Sandra Stringer at Annex N above, the Coroner, Mr
       Dorries wrote on a date in 1993 that he was constrained by the case of R v.
       Hammersmith Coroner, ex parte Peach [1980] Q.B. 211 to withhold information that
       had not been produced in the inquest, except where Rule 57 required him to supply
       copies of documents put in evidence at the inquest.

                                              30
104   It is submitted that this approach by Mr Dorries, advanced in good faith, is wrong.
      The Peach case decides only that where documents have been compiled or created by
      a police force in the course of a disciplinary enquiry into its own officers, those
      papers remain the property of the police force. In this case, Jones was appointed by
      the Coroner from the outset to act as his, the Coroner’s, agent.


105   A series of decision after 1981 dealt with the question of access to documentation for
      civil proceedings which was in the possession of the police. The principal cases are
      Neilsen v. Laugharne [1981] Q.B. 736, Campbell v. Tameside [1982] 1 Q.B. 1065,
      Hehir v. Chief Constable of Police for the Metropolis [1982] 1 W.L.R. 715, Peach v.
      Commissioner of Police for the Metropolis [1986] 1 Q.B. 1064, Evans v.. Cjief
      Constable of Surev [1988] 1 Q,B. 588, Makanjuola v. Commisioner of Police for the
      Metropolis [1982] O.B. 455. Marcel v. Commissioner of Police for the Metropolis
      [1992] 2 W.L.R. 50, and R v. Chief Constable of West Midlands Police . ex parte
      Wilev [1995] A.C. 274.


106   This is not the occasion for a consideration as to whether the Chief Constable of South
      Yorkshire Police can claim public interest immunity for the archive he holds.
      However, until the Wilev case, it seemed clear that if documents had been collected or
      obtained for the purpose, principally, of a disciplinary investigation into complaints
      against police officers, public interest immunity attached to those documents on a
      “class” basis. Hence, if it could be claimed that a police force was taking statements
      for the primary purpose of investigating complaints, it was very hard for members of
      the public or interested parties to obtain copies.


107    However, the existence of this line of cases suggests that the South Yorkshire police
      believed that they could claim possession of the entire archive on the ground that they
      had appointed West Midlands police to investigate matters of a disciplinary character;
      that West Midlands police had therefore been its “agents”; and that, as a further
      advantage, public interest immunity attached to the contents of the archive.



                                              31
108   It is submitted that such a claim would be wholly wrong, even absurd, and that the
      prosecution is being wrongly frustrated in its legitimate desire to obtain sight of
      probative statements to give further support to its case. The documents are not the
      property of South Yorkshire: they surely “belong to” one or more of the various
      official bodies that have inquired into the case.


109   However, the very claim of ownership by South Yorkshire, and the alleged
      relationship of principal and agent, demolish by themselves the contradictory claim
      that the previous inquiries have been served by an independent force. South Yorkshire
      police can be said to “own” the archive only if West Midlands police were working,
      not independently, but in reality as agents for South Yorkshire police from 16th April
      1989, whatever their other responsibilities.


               Public interest and “interests o f justice "factors: (c) publicity


110   The solicitors for Mr Duckenfield advance the adverse publicity of the 1996
      McGovern drama-documentary as a factor in this review. It is submitted that the effect
      of publicity over the years must be a matter for the judge or magistrate considering an
      abuse of process application to consider “in the round”, together with all other relevant
      factors. Any prejudicial publicity in this case towards the defendants is minor
      compared to that against defendants in the cases of Rosemary West, Kevin and Ian
      Maxwell, the James Bulger defendants, the Kray brothers, the Guinness trial, the
      proposed Lockerbie defendants, the Moors murderers, and many others. In fact, as
      Lord Taylor found, there was widespread, false and defamatory propaganda put about
      in 1989 by South Yorkshire police officers to the prejudice of Liverpool supporters.
      This prejudice has never been completely dispelled.




                                              32
                         The limitations o f the Stuart-Smith report


111   The defendants invite the CPS to heed the conclusions of the “Scrutiny”. It is
      submitted that the conclusions of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in relation to “new
      evidence” are not significant in this review. That report upheld the general approach of
      Lord Taylor, on which the prosecution relies, but its review of “new evidence” was
      confined to the evidence tendered as new in 1996. However, that exercise was
      necessarily a limited one, because the Liverpool families had been starved of evidence
      for years. The existence of the edited statements was unknown. One example only,
      P.C. Frost, was offered to the “Scrutiny” by a third party. The scale of the editing, now
      revealed, exceeds anything shown to Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.


112   Further, it is submitted that caution has to be employed in accepting facts set out in
      the report. It has been pointed out that the conclusions about the edited statements are
      seriously wrong. The dates on page 1, in paragraphs 4 and 5, should read 11th July
      1991 and 19th November 1991. Duckenfield did not retire at the beginning of the
      main inquest. He gave evidence to it in full uniform. The “autumn of 1990" in
      paragraph 6 should read “30th August 1990”. In paragraph 15, page 87, it is wrongly
      asserted that the main inquest began in March 1991: in fact it began on 19th November
      1990.


113   The South Yorkshire policy of making statements available to relatives, described at
      pages 89-90, is inconsistent with the history of difficulty experienced by, for example,
      Sandra Stringer (See Annex N. above). The discussion of the decision not to
      prosecute for manslaughter (page 10, paragraphs 53, 56 and 57) uses the word
      “recklessness”. There is no recognition of the significance of the decision in
      Adomako. which replaces the complicated “recklessness” test apparently applied in
      1990, and reinstated the gross negligence test.


114   The Stuart-Smith report is itself economical with information. For example, only
      small parts of the advice of counsel in 1990 are set out. The provision of the whole

                                             33
      advice is required, so that the whole reasoning is apparent, rather than a few snippets.
      Clearly, privilege has been waived by the provision of that report to the “Scrutiny”.
      Why do South Yorkshire police have the advice and the West Midlands police report?
      If the CPS advises that a driver should not be prosecuted for manslaughter, a copy of
      that advice is not sent to him or his employer. Why does the Coroner have the West
      Midlands police report in addition to the statements? Does he have the advice of
      counsel? Why in these circumstances is the prosecutor in this case not given access to
      these documents?


115   The terms of reference of the “Scrutiny” are set out at pages v and vi. They called
      upon Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to examine whether any evidence existed which was
      not available to, among others, the DPP. The knowledge available to the HFSG now,
      from the 35 statements, the Master Witness List, and the edited statements, proves that
      material was not available, and information of a critical kind had been withheld.


116   There is no evidence that Lord Justice Stuart-Smith saw the Master Witness List, or
      knew what material the DPP had considered. There is no ground to believe that he
      sought to compare the evidence available to the Director with the total evidence
      available. He looked only at the comparatively small pieces of new evidence then
      known to the families. A “Scrutiny” is an unusual legal animal. Absolutely no
      opportunity was given to the HFSG, before it was published, to see the edited and
      unedited unsworn statements. The Group was even denied access to the statement of
      P.C. Bichard, whose account was at the centre of the matters under investigation.
      Control over the archive was maintained.


117   If the HFSG had known then what the Home Secretary has allowed it to discover
      since, it is submitted that the result of the “Scrutiny” would have been very different,
      and that the flaws and partiality of previous investigations would have been exposed.
      A “Scrutiny” is an inquiry, it seems, with little opportunity for those whose concerns
      have prompted its establishment to ask questions, only to be questioned. The account
      given by Roger Houldsworth is set out in full, and his evidence criticised. The report

                                              34
      does not even mention the conversations Lord Justice Stuart-Smith had with the
      defendants in the present case, which the HFSG know took place, because Lord
      Justice Stuart-Smith referred to them casually in discussion with one of the families.


               The frustration o f the Home Secretary’s order for disclosure


118   The HFSG does not have copies of the West Midlands police report nor the advice of
      counsel. It is submitted that justice requires that they should be disclosed to the
      Group. In R v. Saunders [1996] 1 Cr. App. R. 463, Lord Taylor CJ pointed out at page
      479B-C and 485C that the Serious Fraud Office and Department of Trade and
      Industry had disclosed in that appeal quantities of documents that would normally be
      expected to attract claims of public interest immunity and legal professional privilege.
      Public bodies are usually prepared to disclose matters when they have nothing to hide,
      considerations of confidentiality notwithstanding. When the documents they possess
      are embarrassing, they seek to withhold them by invoking the “public interest” and
      “privilege”.


119   The recent secrecy of the South Yorkshire police, acting under the advice of
      Hammond Suddards, merely intensifies the justified belief of the Liverpool families
      that they have been manipulated and cheated over the years, that the DPP was misled
      in 1990 when he took his decision on the basis of carefully selected material, and that
      the course of justice has been perverted.


120   Copies of these submissions and supporting documents will be sent to the Home
      Secretary and Attorney-General, who was included in the terms of reference set out in
      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report, and to those Liverpool Members of Parliament
      who have supported the HFSG this year in attempting to obtain fuller access to the
      materials considered in the “Scrutiny”, as promised by the Home Secretary.




                                              35
      does not even mention the conversations Lord Justice Stuart-Smith had with the
      defendants in the present case, which the HFSG know took place, because Lord
      Justice Stuart-Smith referred to them casually in discussion with one of the families.


               The frustration o f the Home Secretary’s order for disclosure


118   The HFSG does not have copies of the West Midlands police report nor the advice of
      counsel. It is submitted that justice requires that they should be disclosed to the
      Group. In R v. Saunders [1996] 1 Cr. App. R. 463, Lord Taylor CJ pointed out at page
      479B-C and 485C that the Serious Fraud Office and Department of Trade and
      Industry had disclosed in that appeal quantities of documents that would normally be
      expected to attract claims of public interest immunity and legal professional privilege.
      Public bodies are usually prepared to disclose matters when they have nothing to hide,
      considerations of confidentiality notwithstanding. When the documents they possess
      are embarrassing, they seek to withhold them by invoking the “public interest” and
      “privilege”.


119   The recent secrecy of the South Yorkshire police, acting under the advice of
      Hammond Suddards, merely intensifies the justified belief of the Liverpool families
      that they have been manipulated and cheated over the years, that the DPP was misled
      in 1990 when he took his decision on the basis of carefully selected material, and that
      the course of justice has been perverted.


120   Copies of these submissions and supporting documents will be sent to the Home
      Secretary and Attorney-General, who was included in the terms of reference set out in
      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report, and to those Liverpool Members of Parliament
      who have supported the HFSG this year in attempting to obtain fuller access to the
      materials considered in the “Scrutiny”, as promised by the Home Secretary.
121    It would be a most serious injustice to discontinue this prosecution.




Quis custodiet ipsos custodesl




3 Raymond Buildings
Gray’s Inn                                                         U

London WC1




24 September 1998                                                   Alun Jones QC
Mr C Newell


cc     Robin Booth (w/o
       enc)
       Mike Kennedy
                                                                      My Ref:
                                                                      Your Ref:




HILLSBOROUGH

1.   In George’s absence, I attach two copies of the report which George managed
     to revise before being called away from the office as a result of his wife’s
     accident. (He is likely to be away for a few days).

2.   If any amendments are required, please let me know and I will make sure they
     are done immediately (I have access to the disk).

3.   I understand from George that, once you are satisfied with the report, you will
      send a copy to the Law Officers for their information.

4.   In the meantime, I will commission some work on the handling aspects of the
     job as well as preparing draft letters putting the decision into effect.



Chris Enzor
Central Casework York Branch
DX 65204 York 6
S 01904 456554
Fax 01904 456577
26 November 1998
                                                O o . 'U .’U.'aT' '
                                                 W O R K ORDER
    CPS                                                                                                                alpnagrapr
   OATS                      \ o c o j hK]p a J      jC jC iT                             AG JOS Na.       y<3S/
   OaTS RSQ UIRSO 3 Y                l)P rr? .    (n o /     \^ j^ C                      CPS R£.r N a .________ _
   FRO^i                                                                                  costcgcs_

   Ci'/lSlCM/S.-AiMCH               a . c .                                               TcL No.          h (? Y i
   3U!LQiNG _        (J   ^irod           tf ^ u S C                                    ROOM ■'•la./FLOOR      JblZ .           U-k.
   JOS P.SaulncMHNTS

   SLACK i WHITS Q              FULL COLOUR Q j                                                                                        CCS r

  SINGL5 SICS3         Qj       OOUSLSSlOSO [ H              COLLATED INTO SETS
  Na. OF ORIGINALS                               Na. OF COPIES-                    U-
  PAPSR

  SIZE: Aa                  A3       (j       SAM£ SIZE                  £j

  PAPSR      Q              WHITS Q           COLOUR Q                                        n

  CARO       [j             WHITS [ j         COLOUR ( H                  (f=<_i-Sc 5?sc ?vi .

  INSSRT3.-Q                                     COLOUR f ]                   cls* s   s»*=s«vi.


 COVERS           PSO NTy^SACK                Q —           Cc9 ^             6^   T t'

 CLEAR (_ |       Ca r o    [ j     WHITS [ j               COLOURSO [ j                  <p-a*ss s?s=wi


 FINISHING         GRILLED Q        Na. OF HOLS3            1        2        3                    STAPLED Q
 MSTAL CUP i I              i ncASURY TAG £ j              COM3 SOUNO                              LAMINATING Q

  SPECIAL INSTRUCTIONS/REQUIREMENTS




  A LP H A G R A P H ICS O N L Y




AG U SE ONLY                                                                                                          su3 rar-ii.

CAT= PECSi'/SO                                                                                    I,'!!'
                                                           T iM R 3       / ^
  -"   ccw pl - s :        2,      (2 -                    Tli'/iS                                                    v -r 3 1r.sv,
OATS P ci UR I'Iso     UTzT^r                              TfM£           <7
QUALITY CONTROL CHECK L j T ^ "                                                                                       rar^u c
  HILLSBOROUGH REPORT




       APPENDIX 1




1990 BRIEFING NOTE FOR THE
     ATTORNEY GENERAL
 HILLSBOROUGH REPORT




       APPENDIX 2




 SCHEDULE OF MATERIAL
CONSIDERED IN 1998 REVIEW
  HILLSBOROUGH REPORT




       APPENDIX 1




1990 BRIEFING NOTE FOR THE
     ATTORNEY GENERAL
 HILLSBOROUGH REPORT




       APPENDIX 2




 SCHEDULE OF MATERIAL
CONSIDERED IN 1998 REVIEW
  HILLSBOROUGH REPORT




       APPENDIX 1




1990 BRIEFING NOTE FOR THE
     ATTORNEY GENERAL
 HILLSBOROUGH REPORT




       APPENDIX 2




 SCHEDULE OF MATERIAL
CONSIDERED IN 1998 REVIEW
  HILLSBOROUGH REPORT




       APPENDIX 1




1990 BRIEFING NOTE FOR THE
     ATTORNEY GENERAL
 HILLSBOROUGH REPORT




       APPENDIX 2




 SCHEDULE OF MATERIAL
CONSIDERED IN 1998 REVIEW
  HILLSBOROUGH REPORT




       APPENDIX 1




1990 BRIEFING NOTE FOR THE
     ATTORNEY GENERAL
 HILLSBOROUGH REPORT




       APPENDIX 2




 SCHEDULE OF MATERIAL
CONSIDERED IN 1998 REVIEW
                            m

                            CPS




Crown Prosecution Service • Working in the interests of justice
                          THE
                    HILLSBOROUGH
                        REPORT

                                  1998




Prepared at CPS Central Casework, York
                        HILLSBOROUGH REPORT

LIST OF CONTENTS                                                   Page


Chapter 1     The Background                                        2-3

Chapter 2     The Private Prosecution                               4-5

Chapter 3     Charges                                               6-7

Chapter 4     The Law                                              8-10

Chapter 5     CPS Policy                                          11-13

Chapter 6     The Taylor Inquiry & initial police investigation   14-24

Chapter 7     The Criminal Investigation                          25-27

Chapter 8     CPS Review of 1990                                  28-31

Chapter 9     The Inquests                                        32-35

Chapter 10    The Attorney General & Judicial Review                 36

Chapter 11    The New Evidence                                       37

Chapter 12    CPS Review of 1997                                     38

Chapter 13    The Scrutiny                                        39-42

Chapter 14    The HFSG Representations                            43-47

Chapter 15    The Defence Representations                         48-49

Chapter 16    Key Considerations for the CPS Review               50-57

Chapter 17    Recommendations                                        58

Chapter 18    Conclusions                                            59



Appendix 1    1990 Briefing Note for the Attorney General

Appendix 2    Schedule of material considered in 1998 Review



                                                                      1
1.    THE BACKGROUND

1.1   While the main facts of the Hillsborough Disaster in 1989 may be familiar to the
      reader, the more detailed background note which was prepared for the Attorney
      General in 1990 is attached at Appendix 1.

1.2   The relevant history of the various judicial inquiries and hearings will be dealt .with
      comprehensively in later chapters. However in brief, following the Taylor Inquiry
      the South Yorkshire Police accepted that they (with others) had civil liability for the
      negligence of some of their police officers involved in the events of 15 April 1989.
      The Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police had assisted the Taylor Inquiry
      in the initial enquiries and in the taking of statements from the many witnesses.

1.3   The then Director of Public Prosecutions considered the recommendations contained
      within Lord Justice Taylor’s Interim Report and asked the South Yorkshire Police
      to conduct a full criminal enquiry. As the West Midlands Police had been appointed
      to conduct the initial investigation, the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police
      requested that they also conduct the criminal investigation as being an independent
      investigating force. This was agreed and in 1990 a report was supplied by the West
      Midlands Police to the Director who then asked two leading counsel for a joint
      advice as to the merits of a criminal prosecution against any organisations or
      individuals. Counsels’ view was that there was no sufficient evidence to support
      criminal proceedings of any kind against either the police or civilians whether as
      individuals or as an organisation. The Director was in agreement with this advice
      and a Press Release released on his behalf stated that there was "insufficient
      evidence to justify the institution of proceedings against any officer in the South
      Yorkshire Police Force or any other person for any offence".

1.4   The Coroner’s Inquests, which had been adjourned pending the CPS decision, were
      resumed. In early 1991 verdicts of accidental death were returned. In 1992 an
      application for judicial review of the Inquests was refused and the Divisional Court
      held that the inquisition was correctly completed and that the Coroner’s direction to
      the jury was "impeccable".

1.5   There the matter rested until in December 1996 when a drama documentary of the
      disaster was shown on national television. It specifically mentioned allegations of
      a cover-up by the police re their knowledge of crowd density in the two central
      Leppings Lane terrace pens where 96 people died. The Home Secretary became
      involved by way of an Adjournment Debate in the House and requested the
      assistance of the South Yorkshire Police in answering ten questions concerning the
      disaster. In January 1997 the CPS asked for a preliminary briefing from the police
      on the impact of any new material facts.

1.6   In March 1997 the Hillsborough Family Support Group (HFSG) sent to the Director
       a large volume of papers concerning what was said to be fresh evidence. In their
       supporting letter the HFSG said that the pre-production research for the television
       programme and its subsequent airing had brought to light this fresh evidence and/or
       new witnesses proving that suppression of evidence, perjury and conspiracy to

                                                                                           2
       pervert the course of justice featured in the legal process that followed the disaster.
       A number of letters had also been received from families of some of the deceased
       requesting a re-examination of the circumstances of the tragic events.

1.7    Following consultation between the CPS, the LSLO and the Home Office it was
        decided that while each of the various Government Departments should form their
        own judgement in relation to the discharge of their own duties, there would be a
        co-ordinated response to the HFSG representations.

1.8    The report of the CPS Review was submitted to the Director via the Chief Crown
       Prosecutor for Central Casework in early May 1997. It concluded that there was no
       sufficient evidence on allegations of suppression of either video or medical evidence.
       Accordingly there were no grounds for the CPS to recommend to the Home Office
       that there should be further investigation of criminal allegations against the police
       or other persons. In June 1997, in a statement to the House, the Home Secretary
       said that his department, the Attorney General and the CPS had carefully considered
       the evidence recently put forward and had been unable to find anything which would
       have materially affected the outcome of any of the investigations into the disaster.

1.9    He then appointed Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to conduct a scrutiny into whether there
       was any fresh evidence which might have a bearing on the various legal procedures
       and decisions that had been taken. The resulting scrutiny report is a very detailed
       review of both old and new evidence and concludes that nothing the judge was
       asked to consider added anything significant to the evidence available to Lord
       Taylor’s Inquiry or to the Inquests. In particular there was no material which should
       be put before the Director which might cause her to reconsider the decision already
       taken.

1.10   Previously there had been an intimation that if the HFSG did not receive the
        ‘justice’ to which they felt they were entitled, then they would be taking out a
       private prosecution. The next chapter describes how this occurred.




                                                                                             3
2.    THE PRIVATE PROSECUTION

2.1   On 26 June 1998 Ann Adlington, a solicitor acting on behalf of the HFSG, laid
      informations before South Sefton Magistrates’ Court on Merseyside. They alleged
      that ex Chief Superintendent Duckenfield, who had been in overall control of the
      policing at the football match had:

              1.     Unlawfully killed John Alfred Anderson
              2.     Unlawfully killed James Gary Aspinall
              3.     Wilfully neglected to perform a public duty
              4.     Perverted the course of justice by lying about the circumstances in
                     which Gate C at the Football Stadium became open.

2.2   It was also alleged that ex Superintendent Murray, who was the senior officer in
      charge of the policing of the ground itself, had committed the first three offences
      above. The HFSG have not been specific in their correspondence to date as to the
      evidence upon which they rely for the first three allegations, except to say that the
      third matter (Misconduct in a Public Office) is based on the same circumstances as
      the two manslaughter charges. However they have confirmed the foundation of their
      charges during a telephone conversation.

2.3   The HFSG then requested disclosure of all the material in CPS possession including
      police reports and counsels’ advices. Solicitors for the two defendants were prompt
      in asking us to take over the prosecution in order to discontinue it. I was appointed
      to review the evidence in order to make appropriate recommendations to the Chief
      Crown Prosecutor of Central Casework and to the Director as to what action, if any,
      should be taken by the CPS.

2.4   There was then animated and at times heated discussions between the legal
       representatives for the prosecutor and the two defendants as to the legality of laying
       informations in a commission area that was not where either the offences allegedly
       took place or the defendants resided. Subsequently the informations were laid at
       Leeds Magistrates’ Court (within which commission area Mr Murray now resides)
       and were returnable to 20 August 1998.

2.5   During July the CPS policy on voluntary disclosure and review of private
      prosecutions where we have been asked to take over in order to discontinue, was
      promulgated to all the parties. They were informed that the issue of voluntary
       disclosure would not be considered by the CPS until the review decision had been
       made. The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police requested advice on
       disclosure under the provisions of section 3(2) of the Prosecution of Offences Act
       1985. He was concerned about the vast amount of potential disclosure. He was
       advised of our present policy and it was suggested that he might wish to follow that.
       He considered that he should do so.

2.6   Leeds Magistrates’ Court were informed of the CPS review and that the defendants’
      solicitors would likely require an adjournment of the case so that this review could
      be completed and either the case be discontinued or for voluntary disclosure to be

                                                                                           4
      given to all parties. On 20 August the case was adjourned to 30 October with a
      provisional date for an old style committal set for 7 to 17 December 1998.

2.7   The HFSG are saying that the new information now available to them undermines
       the inquest verdicts of accidental death, and calls into question the validity of all the
       previous investigations. In particular they point out that:

              The alleged independence of the West Midlands Police was a sham ;.

      •       the significance of the statements disclosed in the course of the scrutiny
              discloses manipulation of the evidence to the past benefit of the defendants
              and the South Yorkshire Police in general;

      •       the DPP was not given full and proper disclosure for the purposes of the
              CPS review in 1990;

      •       the scrutiny report has conclusions that are seriously wrong about the edited
              statements and therefore caution should be employed in accepting facts set
              out in that report.

2.8   The submissions made in this latest opinion from the HFSG counsel are far more
      wide reaching than the charges before the Magistrates’ Court and indeed go to the
       very heart of the validity of all previous judicial and criminal investigations.




                                                                                               5
3.     CHARGES

3.1    In his opinion of 24 September 1998, Alun Jones QC, who acts for the HFSG, has
       said that "...the Taylor findings in themselves amount almost to a prima facie case
       of manslaughter by gross negligence and of misfeasance. The decision to open the
       gates without taking steps to divert the oncoming spectators was a ‘blunder of the
       first magnitude’ and was an immediate (and therefore substantial) cause of death.
       The decision was taken by Duckenfield with the agreement or acquiescence of
       Murray." He also says that the basis of the charges of misfeasance and attempting
       to pervert the course of justice (PCOJ) is clear from the Taylor Interim Report and
       the information and submissions made at Leeds. The PCOJ allegation is based on
       the argument that the "disgraceful lie" was an obvious attempt to impede inquiries
       and to suppress the truth.

3.2.   The charges of manslaughter and misconduct are not specific as to the circumstances
       giving rise to these allegations. I have now been informed by Ann Adlington, a
       solicitor acting for the HFSG that the basis for them is contained within their
       counsel’s opinion of 24.9.98. In which case the gross negligence alleged must be
       the failure to divert the fans after the opening of gate C. What the Taylor Report
       described as a "blunder of the first magnitude". The CPS review should therefore
       be based on this specific ground rather than the other innumerable allegations of
       negligence, many of which can be laid at the foot of the other parties criticised in
       the Taylor Report and were subject to successful civil claims for damages. In a
       recent telephone conversation, Ms Adlington has confirmed that the relevant
       circumstances concern the failure by the defendants to close off the access tunnel
       to the central pens once gate C was opened by the police.

3.3    However, the HFSG in their letter of 13 August enclose what is a provisional
       committal bundle containing the submissions made by Alun Jones QC in the laying
       of the informations at Leeds Magistrates’ Court. Here it is said that the facts set out
       in chapters 1 to 5, 9 to 11, and 16 of the Taylor Report form the basis of the
       allegations. Chapter 9 covers the lack of effective monitoring on the terraces,
       chapter 10 is about the build up at the turnstiles, chapter 11 is on the "blunder on
       opening the gates" and chapter 16 gives a brief summary of the causes. The causes
       of the gross overcrowding and hence the disaster were said to be fourfold.

       •      The immediate cause was the failure to cut off the access to the already
              overfull centre pens when gate C was opened.

       •      The pens were overfull because, as regards the police, no attempt was made
              to control the entry of fans into the individual pens numerically and there
              was no effective visual monitoring of crowd density.

       •      It was not the police responsibility that no safe maximum capacities had been
               laid down for the pens. Neither was it their responsibility that the layout of
               the barriers within the pens afforded less protection than it should or that the
               eventual rescue efforts were retarded by the type of exit gates leading from
               the pens onto the pitch. However there was a lack of leadership involved in

                                                                                             6
             the early stages of the rescue effort.

      •      The need to open gate C was due to the dangerous congestion at the
             turnstiles. This was the fault of both the Club and the police in not
             foreseeing, as they should have done, that large numbers of fans might arrive
             at once. Both the police Operational Order and their tactics failed to provide
             for this.

3.4   Notwithstanding the HFSG letter noted in the above paragraph this review will
      therefore consider the level of negligence to be attributed to the police based on the
      latest information from the HFSG.




                                                                                           7
4.    THE LAW

      Involuntary Manslaughter by Gross Negligence

4.1   Before 1982 the ‘Bateman Test’1 was used to define the degree of negligence
      required to be a sufficient basis of liability for manslaughter:

             "... the facts must be such that, in the opinion of the jury, the negligence of
             the accused went beyond a mere matter of compensation between subjects
             and showed such disregard for the life and safety of others as to amount to
             a crime against the State and conduct deserving punishment."

      In 1937 an element of ‘recklessness’ was imported into the test2 when it was said
      that in order to summarise the very high degree of negligence required, the word
      ‘reckless’ most nearly covered the case. Two authoritative House of Lords decisions
      in 1982 on the meaning of recklessness3 appeared to confirm that the test was of
      recklessness rather than gross negligence. However in 1989 there was still some
      uncertainty as to whether or not gross negligence continued to exist as a head of
      liability.

4.2   The decision in R. v. Adomako [1995] 1 AC 171 has clarified the law considerably.
      The House of Lords held that the Bateman/Andrews test was of general application
      and there was therefore an immediate reversion from Lawrence recklessness to gross
      negligence. Lord Mackay LC set out the essentials of gross negligence:

      •     A duty of care towards a victim based on theordinary principles of the law
            of negligence; and

      •     a breach of that duty;

      •     which caused the death of the victim; and

      •     if so should the act be characterised as gross negligenceand therefore        a
             crime4.




             Laid down by Lord Hewart CJ in Bateman [1925] 19 Cr App R at p. 11-12.

             Judgement of Lord Atkin in Andrews v DPP [1937] AC 576 at p. 583.

             MPC v Caldwell [1982] AC 341 and Lawrence [1982] AC 510

             At page 187 Lord Mackay says "...the jury must go on to consider whether
             that breach of duty should be characterised as gross negligence and therefore
             as a crime. This will depend on the seriousness of the breach of duty
             committed by the defendant in all the circumstances in which the defendant
             was placed when it occurred."

                                                                                          8
      He said th a t"... essence of the matter which is supremely a jury question is whether,
      having regard to the risk of death involved, the conduct of the defendant was so bad
      in all the circumstances as to amount in their judgement to a criminal act or
      omission." The Court of Appeal in R v Khan and another [1998]5 confirmed that
      the appropriate course would be to leave to the jury the four questions posed based
      on the above principles where the allegation is of manslaughter by omission.

      Misconduct in a Public Office

4.3   This previously little used common law offence is now being prosecuted more often.
      Until the case of R v Dytham [1979]6 it was considered that the offence required
      either malfeasance or misfeasance and was restricted to corruption or dishonesty.
      That case, which concerned a police officer, established that there was an offence
      of a public officer wilfully neglecting to perform a duty that he was bound to
      perform by common law or statute. The neglect had to be wilful and not merely
      inadvertent and had to be culpable in the sense of being without reasonable excuse
      or justification. The element of culpability had to be of such a degree that the
      misconduct impugned was calculated to injure the public interest so as to call for
      condemnation and punishment and it was for the jury to decide whether the evidence
      revealed the necessary culpability.

      Perverting the Course of Public Justice

4.4   This common law offence is committed when a person or persons acts or embarks
      upon a course of conduct, which has a tendency to, and is intended to pervert the
      course of public justice7. A positive act is required. Inaction is insufficient to
      constitute the offence8. Archbold gives a number of examples of that conduct
      which is capable of amounting to the offence and in particular where a person
      conceals the commission of an offence, even though no proceedings in respect of
      it are pending or have commenced.

4.5   To establish a tendency or a possibility to pervert the prosecution does not have to
      prove that the tendency or possibility in fact materialised; there must be a possibility
      that what the accused has done, without more, might lead to injustice. Proof of the
      accused’ intent is also required.




             R v Khan and another [1998] Independent Law Report, 25 March 1998

             R v Dytham [1979] 69 Cr App R 387, the judgement of the Courtof Appeal
             being given by Lord Widgery CJ.

             R v Vreones [1891] 1 QB 360.

             R v Headley [1995] Crim L R 757 CA.

                                                                                             9
4.6        The Court of Appeal has held9 that in order to lay the charge a course of justice
            must have been embarked upon in the sense that proceedings of some kind are in
            being or imminent, or investigations      which could or might bring proceedingsabout
            are in progress. In particular the Court of Appeal had well in mind that:

                   "... conduct which relates to judicial proceedings, civil or criminal, whether
                   or not they have yet been instituted but which are within the contemplation
                   of the wrong-doer whose conduct was designed to affect the outcome of
                   them. That conduct includes giving false information to the policewith the
                   object of among other things putting the police on a false trail..."

4.7        In R v Rafique [1993]10 the Court of Appeal said that if an intention to pervert the
            course of justice in relation to the matter was proved, the conduct had the same
            quality whether performed before the matter was investigated, or even discovered,
            as it would have had at a later stage. In the particular case they said that it had been
            open to the jury to conclude that the possibility of judicial proceedings must have
            been within the contemplation of the appellants; an act had occurred which was
            likely to lead to a charge in judicial proceedings and at the very least there was
            bound to be a an inquest.




      9
                   R v Selvage and Morgan [1982] 73 Cr App R 333.
      10
                   R v Rafique [1993] 97 Cr App R 395.

                                                                                                 10
5.    CPS POLICY

      Gross Negligence Manslaughter

5.1   The CPS Prosecution Manual Volume 3 at para 2.23 and 2A.9 contains guidance on
      charging practice which accepts the law as noted above.

      Misconduct in a Public Office

5.2   There is no guidance available in the Prosecution Manual or Central Casework
      Manual. However as the culpability required for this offence must be such as to call
      for condemnation and punishment, it involves misconduct that goes beyond that of
      pure civil liability or mere negligence. It is submitted that as the misconduct
      impugned is said to be so serious as to merit a criminal prosecution then a similar
      test to that used in manslaughter by gross negligence should be used. There is no
      intermediate grade of culpability between that required for civil liability and that of
      the manslaughter charge. In the instant case the ‘actus reus’ of the two offences is
      said to be the same. While the elements of culpability and ‘mens rea’ may be
      described in different terms I see little point in attempting to differentiate between
      them for the purposes of a prosecution. Both offences, as here, may involve
      omissions to act in circumstances where necessary action is called for. They stand
      or fall on the same evidence and should stand or fall together.

      Perverting the Course of Justice

5.3   The Manual in chapter 20 of Volume 3 states that the offence should be reserved
       for a serious case of interference with the course of justice (which must be shown
      to have commenced). In the particular circumstances of this case which we are
       asked to take over, I shall not consider possible alternative charges. The general
      public interest considerations concern the nature of the proceedings to be interfered
       with and the consequences/likely consequences of that interference. It is said that
       a prosecution might not be in the public interest if the principal proceedings are at
       an early stage and the action taken by the defendant had only a minor impact on
       those proceedings.

      Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 Section 6(2)

5.4   The 1990 CPS review supported by the joint opinion of two eminent leading counsel
      decided that the evidential sufficiency test from the Code for Crown Prosecutors was
      not satisfied in that there was not a realistic prospect of conviction on any of the
      charges considered11. During the CPS review of 1997 we came to the conclusion
      that, following the consideration of the ‘new’ evidence provided by the HFSG,
      there was no new material that might have affected the previous decision. There
      were no grounds for the CPS to recommend to the Home Office that there should
      be a further investigation of criminal allegations against the police or other persons.


              See chapter 8 for a more detailed discussion of this issue.

                                                                                          11
      The scrutiny that followed confirmed that there was no material to put before the
      Director which might cause her to reconsider decisions already taken. The HFSG
      have now put more ‘new’ material before the CPS which is claimed calls into
      question the validity of all previous investigations. For reasons which will be
      explained in chapter 16 I do not accept this claim and this review will therefore
      proceed on its original basis which is that of considering the joint defendants’
      request to take over the private prosecution in order to discontinue it.

5.5   Our policy is found in the Prosecution Manual Volume 1 at chapter 7. This policy
      builds on the criteria for prosecution contained within the Code for Crown
      Prosecutors. As the right to bring a private prosecution is preserved by section 6(1)
      of the Act, subject to the power under section 6(2), the CPS will only exercise that
      power to take over the private prosecution where there is a particular need for it to
      do so on behalf of the public. If there is no need for the CPS to be involved then
      the private prosecutor should be allowed to carry on with the case. Paras 7.13 and
      7.10 apply in this case, and the circumstances in which the power to take over (and
      then discontinue) the prosecution are:

      •     There is clearly no case to answer12. A prosecution commenced in these
            circumstances would be unfounded, and would therefore be a an abuse of the
            right to bring a prosecution.

      •     The public interest factors tending against prosecution clearly outweigh
            those factors tending in favour. A relevant factor might be that of a
            prosecution that can be seen as malicious or vexatious. The other suggested
            examples are not likely to apply, neither should delay be a factor in the
            present case where there has been a history of active judicial hearings.

      •     The prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests of justice. For
            example, the disclosure of sensitive material.

      Disclosure of Material

5.6   In order for all relevant material to be considered in the course of this CPS review,
      the private prosecutor and both defendants were asked to voluntarily provide the
      CPS with firstly schedules of such papers in their possession, and then copies of
      fresh evidence not previously seen by the CPS. The HFSG have now provided both
      the CPS and defence solicitors with detailed bundles of evidence and
      representations. The defendants have done the same. These papers as well as a


             However see R v Bow Street Stipendiary Magistrate and another, ex parte
             South Coast Shipping Company Ltd and others [1993] 96 Cr App R 405
             where it was said, per curiam, that "The Director may take over proceedings
             instituted by a private prosecutor which he might otherwise institute himself
             and if he does so, he may then discontinue them under section 23 of the
             1985 Act if the evidence is insufficient.


                                                                                        12
      provisional committal bundle have been taken into consideration during the review.

5.7   All the parties to the private prosecution have requested the CPS to provide
      voluntary disclosure of material in our possession. Chapter 7 of Volume 1 of the
      Manual gives guidance on disclosure to a third party. Any disclosure by us prior
      to a successful committal is on a voluntary basis. After committal the Crown Court
      may grant witness orders for the production of relevant material from third parties.
      The general rule is that we should give disclosure whenever it is in the interests of
      justice to do so, and that it should be even-handed as between the parties.
      Following discussion within Central Casework it was agreed that the decision to
      give voluntary disclosure would be deferred until after the section 6(2) decision was
      made. If the decision was to exercise the power in order to discontinue then
      disclosure was no longer an issue. This was advised to the parties and has
      grudgingly been accepted. The Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police requested
      legal advice from the CPS on the point of their voluntary disclosure to the HFSG
      (he is in control of an extremely large archive of material generated during the
      various investigations), and was advised that he might wish to consider exercising
      his discretion in a manner similar to ours. While his decision to do so generated
      lengthy argument from the HFSG, that is still the present position.




                                                                                        13
6.    THE TAYLOR INQUIRY & INITIAL POLICE INVESTIGATION

6.1   Two days after the disaster the then Lord Justice Taylor was appointed to carry out
       a Public Inquiry with the West Midlands Police assisting in the gathering of
       evidence both for the Inquiry and the Coroner. This consisted of almost 5000 CJA
       and non CJA statements, approximately 8000 completed questionnaires, 1740
       documents and 71 hours of film. The hearing lasted 31 days. There was no power
       to administer the oath to witnesses but Lord Justice Taylor was satisfied that there
       was no instance of witnesses giving evidence that would have otherwise been
       different. While he accepted that the witnesses called were only a small fraction of
       those available, he was satisfied that they were sufficient in number and reliability
       to enable him to reach the necessary conclusions. Also he took into account many
       written statements in addition to the oral testimony13. Submissions had been made
       to him that it would be unsafe for findings of fact to be made while evidence was
       still being gathered, but he was assured by the police that it was most unlikely that
       significant further evidence would later emerge. He paid tribute to the West
       Midlands Police for their speed and dedication in the gathering of evidence, as did
      the Secretary of the Football Supporters Association who said that their initial
       anxiety that the investigation would not be fair and objective was wholly dispelled
      when the evidence that they had obtained privately entirely accorded with that of the
      police.

6.2   I have read all the transcripts of the Inquiry that were sent to York. They are not
      complete however they do cover the evidence of the two defendants as well as many
      of the other senior officers who were present on the day. I find, not surprisingly,
      that this evidence accords with the views expressed in the Interim Report. I
      therefore propose to adopt what Lord Justice Taylor has said in his conclusions
      contained within that report.

6.3   In his sermon at the Hillsborough Memorial Service the Archbishop of York said
      that "...Disasters happen because a whole series of mistakes, misjudgments and
      mischances happen to come together in a deadly combination." This was the finding
      of Taylor LJ14.

6.4   The overcrowding up until 1452 hours was due to:

      •      The layout of the Leppings Lane end;

      •      Lack of fixed capacities for the pens;

      •      Lack of effective monitoring of the terraces.

      The crushing and fatalities after 1452 were due to:


              Interim Report at para 14.

              Interim Report at paras 116 & 117.

                                                                                         14
             The build-up at the turnstiles;

      •      The blunder on opening the gates;

      •      The barriers in pen 3;

      •      The crushing not recognised;

      •      The response of the police;

      •      The perimeter gates were too small.

      The factors emphasised above are those that may be attributed either wholly or part
      to the police and are the only ones I shall consider.

      Monitoring of the Terraces

6.5   In 1985 there was considerable controversy in the course of a public inquiry held
      by Mr Justice Popplewell as to the respective responsibilities of the club and the
      police in controlling crowd behaviour. He said in his Final Report that "It cannot
      be too strongly emphasised that it is upon the club, or the occupier of the ground
      who is putting on the function, that the primary and continuing obligation rests".
      However what Lord Justice Taylor found was that de facto the police at
      Hillsborough had accepted responsibility for the control of the pens at the Leppings
      Lane end. At League matches their practice where only modest crowds were
      anticipated was to sequentially fill the pens as required. It was impractical and
      unsafe for police officers and stewards to go into the terraces with away supporters.
      This meant that the monitoring of the numbers of fans in any pen had to be done
      from vantage points outside it. There was said to be a good view from the control
      box and on the television screens there. Police in the West Stand, just above the
      terraces, and on the perimeter track were able to provide a good appreciation of the
      state of the terraces. Action to cut off access to the pens could be taken when
      necessary.

6.6   At Cup semi-finals a different approach was adopted. All the pens were opened and
      the police practice was "to let the fans find their own level". No specific direction
      was given to fans entering through the turnstiles. If they became uncomfortable or
      wished to move for any reason then they could theoretically move elsewhere. They
      would level themselves out and distribution would be achieved without police
      intervention. Lord Justice Taylor found this argument to be wrong in both theory
      and practice. The effect of the policy was that at semi-finals where overcrowding
      was more likely the police would only intervene when there was some overt sign
      that an area was "full". The Green Guide (Guide on Safety at Sports Grounds)
      sought to improve safety and comfort by laying down criteria for maximum
      capacity, ie defining what is "full". The figures considered appropriate in the centre
      pens at Hillsborough were too high. An experiment was conducted at the ground
      and in a Health and Safety Executive laboratory where it was found that the
      maximum density set out in the Green Guide left considerably more room than

                                                                                         15
       monitoring the terraces would have left before declaring an area "full".

6.7    There had been occasions at the ground when packing on the terraces had caused
       discomfort and sometimes fear to the fans. At a 1981 semi-final at the ground
       crushing occurred on the Leppings Lane terraces that necessitated the opening of the
       perimeter gates. 38 persons were treated for injuries including broken limbs. The
       capacity figure for the terraces had been exceeded. As a result of this the terrace
       was divided into three pens. At the 1987 Cup semi-final there was evidence that the
       central pens were uncomfortably overcrowded. This occurred again at the 1988 Cup
       semi-final although here the entry to the tunnel into pens 3 and 4 was blocked off
       by the police shortly before kick-off because the pens were deemed to be "full".

6.8    The conclusion was that by 1452 when gate C was opened, pens 3 and 4 were over­
       full even by the test of leaving the fans to "find their own level". Many of the fans
       there were uncomfortable. To allow any more into those pens was likely to cause
       injuries, to allow in a large stream was courting disaster15.

       The Build-up at the Turnstiles

6.9    The decision to open gate C, and subsequently gates A and B too, was forced on the
       police by the crowd conditions which developed outside the turnstiles. The crush
       was so severe that injuries were being suffered and deaths were feared unless the
       pressure could be swiftly relieved. There were a number of causes why the crowd
       pressure had built to such an intensity16:

              The layout of the turnstiles and the number of fans they were required to
              serve left no margin of safety against an uneven flow of fans.

       •      Police strategy did not cater for the arrival of a large number of
              supporters between 1430 and 1440 that created an unmanageable crush
              of over 5,000 fans.

       •      The presence of a substantial minority of fans who had drunk too much
              aggravated that problem.

6.10   The police Operational Order for the day closely followed that laid down for 1988.
       In the light of known previous experience it was not thought necessary to change
       it for the 1989 game.

6.11   Lord Justice Taylor found that having lost control outside the Leppings Lane
       turnstiles and having rejected the option of postponing the kick-off, the police were
       left with no alternative but to open the gates. Superintendent Marshall, who was in
       control outside the ground was right to ask for it and Mr Duckenfield was right to


              Interim Report at para 184.

              Interim Report at para 228.

                                                                                          16
       agree. But the possible effects of so dramatic a step required other action.

       The Blunder on Opening the Gates

6.12   As this issue would appear to be the most crucial part of the HFSG allegation I have
       reproduced in full the findings of Lord Justice Taylor:

       "229. The decision to order the opening of the gates was not accompanied or
       followed by any other order to deal with the consequences. When gate C was
       opened, a steady stream of about 2,000 fans poured through it over some five
       minutes. Clearly they were going into the ground somewhere and unless they were
       diverted their likeliest route was through the tunnel for the reasons given. No
       warning was issued from the control room that the gate was to be opened. Serials
       on the concourse were not alerted. Neither the Club control room nor the Chief
       Steward at the Leppings Lane end was warned. Not even Mr Greenwood, the
       Ground Commander, was informed. From 2.47 pm when Mr Marshall made his
       first request until 2.52 pm when Mr Duckenfield acceded to it , there were five
       minutes in which orders could have been given as to how the influx was to be
       absorbed. It was not done. In evidence, Mr Duckenfield began by saying that no
       officer made any wrong decision but he later conceded he had erred in this regard.
       He said he did not consider where the people would go when the gate was opened.
       Even after it opened, when he could see the influx on the television screens, no
       order was given to steer the fans to the wing pens. Mr Duckenfield said it did not
       cross his mind to detail officers on the concourse to shut off the tunnel. Those
       officers could not have known from their position how full pens 3 and 4 were. That
       was a matter for the control room to monitor from its own observations and using
       intelligence from around the ground.

         230. Since pens 3 and 4 were full by 2.50 pm the tunnel should have been closed
       off whether gate C was to be opened or not. The exercise was a simple one and had
       been carried out in 1988. All that was necessary was for a few officers to act as a
       cordon at the entrance to the tunnel and divert fans elsewhere. Unfortunately, the
       1988 closure seems to have been unknown to the senior officers on duty at the time.
       It did not figure in the debriefing notes. It therefore had no influence on the
       planning for 1989.

         231. Planning apart, however, it should have been clear in the control room where
       there was a view of the pens and of the crowd at the turnstiles that the tunnel had
       to be closed. If orders had been given to that effect when gate C was opened, the
       fans could have been directed to empty areas of the wings and this disaster could
       still have been avoided. Failure to give the order was a blunder of the first
       magnitude.

         232. Significantly, when permission was given to open gate A, Mr Duckenfield
       did order serials to go to that part of the concourse to monitor the influx towards the
       north stand. He did this because he feared that if fans went to the north stand
       without tickets, they would not get seats and, there being no perimeter fences at the
       north side they might invade the pitch. This illustrates again the preoccupation with

                                                                                           17
       avoiding pitch invasion as against safety and the risks of overcrowding. Because
       those entering through gate C could not get onto the pitch, it was not thought
       necessary to alert officers to monitor them. The possibility of overcrowding simply
       was not considered."

       The Crushing not Recognised

6.13   The Report considers that as the stream from gate C flowed through the tunnel, the
       officers in the control room could be expected to keep a close watch on pens 3 and
       4. They had a direct view of them from an elevated position and by using the zoom
       facility on the TV camera. Attempts could have been made using the now
       functioning radio to alert officers on the perimeter track to watch for overcrowding
       and to report their observations. As the pens became more and more crowded, fans
       were showing and signalling their distress. None of this was seen or recognised in
       the control room. The written instructions to the perimeter track officers made no
       reference to the avoidance or detection of overcrowding. The 1988 Operational
       Order instructed officers to forbid fans access to the pitch without a senior officer’s
       consent. This prohibition was further emphasised in the 1989 Order. The
       combination of no instructions as to overcrowding and the strong prohibition on
       opening the perimeter gates was likely to make police recognition of crushing slow
       and their response reluctant. Even after the recognition of a problem it still required
       consent to open the gates. However, action was taken to alleviate the situation once
       officers recognised the distress, although there was a period during which the failure
       to recognise the problem and the inhibition against tackling it caused vital time to
       be lost.

       The Response of the Police

6.14   Even when the realisation of the problem came to the officers on the track, it was
       some minutes before it reached the control room where the immediate assumption
       was that there was a pitch invasion. John Motson, the BBC commentator,
       considered that the trouble appeared to be overcrowding and not misbehaviour17.
       Until Mr Murray rang for ambulances at about 1506 the assumption in the control
       room persisted. Only then was the Major Disaster Plan started. Initially there was
       no effective leadership either from control or on the pitch to harness and organise
       rescue efforts. Despite this many officers did all they humanly could to rescue and
       revive the victims.




              Although in his statement of 4 May 1989 he says that at about 1445 hours
              "...I suddenly spotted that two end sections of the Leppings Lane terrace
              were only just over half full....I must also stress that the two central sections
              were fully occupied and gave the usual impression of a solid heaving mass
              of fans who were chanting, singing and clapping." He was not aware of
              anything untoward, of any panic or if anyone was experiencing discomfort.

                                                                                            18
       The Evidence of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield

6.15   The relevant points from his statement made on 5.5.89 were :

       •     At 1430 there was space at the front and sides of the Leppings Lane terraces.

       •     At that time he was told by Superintendent Murray that all the fans wpuld
             be in by kick-off. He then took the view that there was no reason to. delay
             the match.

             At 1440 he was aware from the CCTV of the increasing crowd situation at
             the Leppings Lane end.

             Shortly after 1445, being aware of the increasing pressure on the turnstiles,
             he looked at the Leppings Lane terraces and saw there was room for
             supporters. He then considered delaying the kick-off but as one of the teams
             ran out onto the pitch (which actually occurred at 1454 hours) he discarded
             that option.

       •     On receiving the demand from Superintendent Marshall to open the gates
             before someone was killed, thoughts about monitoring and control of
             supporters entering the ground crossed his mind but there was still space on
             the terrace and the concourse to ease the situation.

       •     If the gates were opened there might be crushing and injury on the inside as
             compared to the serious situation outside the gates where people could be
             seriously injured or killed.

              On being asked by Superintendent Murray if he was going to open the gates
              he said "If there’s likely to be serious injury or death I’ve no option but to
              open the gates - open the gates."

       •     He watched the Leppings Lane terraces for any development as a result of
             the gate opening. He noted that the centre pens were almost full but that
             there was room in the two side pens.

       •     He saw officers opening perimeter gates to let fans onto the pitch but was
             unable to assess the situation and the need to open these gates. He then saw
             an increasing number of people spilling onto the perimeter track by way of
             the gates or over the fence. He was still unaware of what the exact problem
             was.

6.16   The relevant points from his evidence given to the Inquiry18 are:

       •     While he had walked around looking at the ground, he had not appreciated


              Inquiry transcript of 24 to 26 May 1989.

                                                                                          19
that the lack of signs at the Leppings Lane turnstiles would cause problems.

His understanding was that the filling and monitoring of the pens was a Club
responsibility. He was aware of the importance of ensuring there was no
overcrowding in the pens.

If at 1430 Superintendent Murray had said there was a problem in getting the
fans into the ground in time, he would have seriously considered delaying the
kick-off.

At 1440 while he considered that he could still get 5 to 6,000 people through
the turnstiles by kick-off he was concerned, but this was overtaken by events
(disruption by loss of radio communications).

At 1445 he considered that there was still plenty of room in the centre pens,
but it was becoming clear that not all the fans would be in by 1500 with the
situation outside the turnstiles. He did not make a decision to delay the kick-
off because his mind was taken up with these difficulties.

At 1447 when the first request was made for gate C to be opened, he was
reluctant to agree. On receiving Superintendent Marshall’s demand at 1448
that the gates be opened he accepted that he took until 1452 to make a
decision.

He appreciated that if people came through gate C they would have to go
somewhere though not necessarily through the tunnel. He had no option but
to order the gates to be opened because of the risk of serious injury or death
outside. His thoughts at this time were concentrated on the gate and not on
the tunnel. It did not cross his mind to issue an instruction for officers to
direct the flow of fans.

He was concerned about the effects of opening the gates and allowing people
to enter the ground, He anticipated that there would be pushing. He watched
the Leppings Lane terraces intently for developments. He did not see
anything untoward on the terraces until the perimeter gates there were
opened.

He considered that it was the responsibility of the Club stewards to be
present at the tunnel entrance in order to prevent overcrowding in the pens.

While he made a mistake in not following up the consequences of opening
gate C, he would have hoped that officers in the area should have remedied
the mistake by using their initiative.

He considered that it was a matter for the fans to level themselves out on the
terraces.

At about 1515 he saw Mr Kelly, the Chairman of the FA, and others in the

                                                                            20
              police control room. On being asked by them what had happened he accepted
              that he had told them a lie about a gate being forced by fans when in fact it
              was opened on his instruction. He was not being deceitful, he believed he
              may have referred to the first time the gate was opened (at 1447 when some
              fans pushed through after one was ejected). He was in a state of shock, and
              wanted to collect his thoughts and assess the situation. At that stage he did
              not want to communicate fully the situation until he had seen a senior
              officer.

       •     He was concerned about the crowd situation and did not want the public to
             become aware of what had happened as he feared there would be massive
             disorder. He agreed that there was nothing to stop him telling his Assistant
             Chief Constable the truth or the full picture when he saw him, but he did not
             do so.

       •     When asked why he told a lie about the supporters he apologised and said
             that "In the crisis of the moment, sir, with all those pressures that are so
             evident, I can’t give an honest answer other than the stress of the situation."

       The Evidence of Superintendent Murray

6.17   The relevant points from his statement made on 2.5.89 are:

              As the previous year’s fixture had passed without serious incident it was
              decided by Chief Superintendent Mole, himself and others to base the 1989
              operational order on that of 1988. There was concern in preventing a pitch
              invasion. The order and planning was discussed with Chief Superintendent
              Duckenfield in the two weeks before the match.

              At 1430 on the day the centre pen was filling but there were large clear
              sections still.

       •     At 1445 there was a compacting crowd outside the turnstiles and then a
             message was received from Superintendent Marshall requesting that gate C
             be opened. He was asked to standby. That officer then asked for the
             Leppings Lane gates to be opened or people would be crushed. At this stage
             he was attempting to contact the Club Security Officer on the radio to inform
             him of the problems at the turnstiles, but was unable to do so (due to poor
             communications).

       •     The officer is somewhat confused as to the exact timing of the various calls
             made about the gates between 1445 and 1452 hours. He does state that there
             were calls to open gates otherwise people would be killed and that gate C
             was opened as a result.

       •     At 1452 he was aware that the centre two pens were almost full.

       •     At 1458 he saw fans from the centre pens going onto the track but was

                                                                                         21
              unaware of the real problem until about 1506 hours.

6.18   The relevant points from his evidence given to the Inquiry19 are:

       •     His role on the day was to be in overall control of the control room and as
             adviser to Mr Duckenfield20.

       •     It was the duty of police to monitor the filling of the pens at league matches.
              At the game on the day of the disaster the fans were given the whole terrace
              to go where they wanted to. No officer was given the specific duty to
              monitor the filling of the centre pens. It was not considered to be a problem.

       •     When the centre pens were filling up he never considered that there might
             come a time there would be a need to divert people from them.

       •     At 1445 he was concerned about the crowd at the turnstiles and tried to
             contact the Club Security Officer on the radio but could not raise him. He
             was then overtaken by the serious events that followed. No attempt was then
             made to instruct the stewards to close off the tunnel.

       •     After gate C was opened he didn’t consider where the fans would go, he
             thought that they would disperse throughout the ground. He did not realise
             that people going through gate C would necessarily go towards the tunnel.
             He had not envisaged that gate as an entry point. However it was obvious
             after the event.

       •     When people were let out of the centre pens onto the perimeter track he did
             not see anything untoward about them or that there was any overcrowding.
             It was only when he went down onto the field at Mr Duckenfield’s request
             that he saw the distress there.

       •     He understood that it was the responsibility of both the police and the
             stewards to monitor and report any concern about the numbers on the
             terraces.

       •      When the last request to open the gates was made, he did not think that Mr
              Duckenfield was dithering in coming to a decision but was weighing the
              considerations.




              Inquiry transcript of 31 May and 1 June 1989.

              The operational order for 1989 has Mr Duckenfield in overall command of
              the event, three superintendents being responsible for their own sectors (the
              inside of the football stadium, and outside the ground designated to either the
              home or away fans, and Mr Murray was noted as being in the control room
              in overall control of overseeing the entire operation.

                                                                                          22
I
I            •       It was only in hindsight that it was obvious that the number of fans still
                     trying to get into the ground at 1447 would cause a problem of overcrowding
I                    unless checked. He had not foreseen problems with the centre pens.

             The Evidence of Mr Kelly
I
      6.19   He was the Chief Executive of the Football Association. When he went tp the
■            police control box at 1520 to find out what was happening he spoke to Mr
              Duckenfield who told him that the gates had been forced and there had been an in-
|            rush of Liverpool Supporters. At that time ACC Jackson was also present

             Inquiry Conclusions re Police and Others

|     6.20   The performance by the City Council of its duties in regard to the Safety certificate
             was inefficient and dilatory. Their failure to revise the certificate over the previous
             three years was a serious breach of duty. As a result there were no fixed capacities
I            for the pens. Breaches of the Green Guide standards were permitted.

      6.21   The Club had in general adopted a responsible and conscientious approach to its
I            responsibilities. However it was aware of the problems involving the shortage of
             turnstiles and the number of fans expected to turn up at the Leppings Lane end.

I            Although the police had assumed responsibility for the monitoring of the pens, the
             Club’s officials ought to have alerted the police to the grossly uneven distribution
             of fans on the terraces. The onus here was on the Club as well as on the police.

I            The poor signposting outside the turnstiles and on the concourse before the tunnel
             tended to produce under-filling of the wing pens and over-filling of pens 3 and 4.

I     6.22 There can be no valid criticism of the emergency services (by which he meant the
®          various ambulance services or the fire brigade).

I     6.23 The 1989 Operational Order left much unsaid. There was no provision for the late
           or congested arrivals, nor for the avoidance of overcrowding on the terraces.
           Satisfaction with the 1988 event led to complacency. That some thought the pens

■          to be overfull in 1988 and that the tunnel was closed off on that occasion did not
              figure in or influence the plan for 1989. While it was understandable that the newly
             promoted Mr Duckenfield should have been expected to take command of events

 ■I           in his Division from the date of that promotion, in view of the lack of his experience
              at the ground it was imperative that he be fully briefed. It might have been wiser
              to have left Mr Mole, who had been in command both in 1987 and 1988, in charge
              of the operation.
      6.24   The policing on 15 April 1989 broke down in the ways already described, and

1I           although there were other causes, the main reason for the disaster was the failure of
             police control. Some senior officers in command were defensive and evasive
             witnesses to the Inquiry, neither their handling of problems on the day nor the
             account of it in evidence showed the qualities of leadership to be expected of their
             rank. Mr Duckenfield leant heavily on Mr Murray’s experience. Between them
|            they misjudged the build-up at the turnstiles and did little about it until they received

                                                                                                   23
I
I
        Mr Marshall’s request to open the gate21. At this stage Mr Duckenfield’s capacity
        to take decisions and to give orders seemed to collapse. Having sanctioned, at last,
        the opening of the gates, he failed to give necessary consequential orders or to exert
        any control when the disaster occurred. He misinterpreted the emergence of fans
        from pens 3 and 4. When he was unsure of the problem, he sent others down to
        assess the situation rather than descend to see for himself. He gave no information
        to the crowd22.

6.25    Lord Justice Taylor said that it was most surprising that Mr Duckenfield gave the
        Chairman of the FA, his Assistant Chief Constable and others to think that there had
        been an inrush due to Liverpool fans forcing the gate. This was not only untruthful,
        it set off a widely reported allegation against the supporters which caused grave
        offence and distress. He could only assume that Mr Duckenfield’s lack of candour
        on this occasion had been out of character. The reason given for not telling the
        truth was that if the crowd had been aware of the real situation there might have
        been a very hostile reaction that might impede rescue work. However the reluctance
        to tell the truth did not require that a falsehood be told.

               "284. The likeliest explanation of the officer’s conduct was that he simply
               could not face the enormity of the decision to open the gates and all that
               flowed therefrom. That would explain what he said to (the FA Chairman),
               what he did not say to (the Assistant Chief Constable), his aversion to
               addressing the crowd and his failure to take effective control of the disaster
               situation. He froze."




   21
               Interim Report at Para 281.
   22
               Interim Report at para 282.

                                                                                           24
7.         THE CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION

           Interim Report II

7.1        Following the publication of the Interim Report the Chief Constable of West
           Midlands Police immediately referred it to the DPP asking for a decision on the
           question of criminal liability of any member of South Yorkshire Police. On 15
           August 1989 the Director advised that the matter should be the subject of a full
           criminal investigation. As the West Midlands Police had done considerable work
           in gathering evidence for the Taylor Inquiry it seemed sensible that they should be
           invited to continue. In October 1989 Assistant Chief Constable Mervyn-Jones, who
           was in charge of the Hillsborough Inquiry Team of the West Midlands Police, sent
           to the Head of the CPS Police Complaints Division a revised copy of the report
           prepared for the Taylor Inquiry (known as Interim Report II). Though it was up to
           date there were still some other statements being taken. The findings worthy of note
           some of which have been covered previously are as follows:

           •      The barrier breaking in pen 3 must be a primary factor for the high
                  proportion of deaths in pen 3 as compared to pen 4;

                  The 1988 blockade of the tunnel by police officers was not documented, and
                  was not a decision made by the senior officers present at the 1988 game.
                  One retired officer recalled what had happened and his recollection is
                  vague23. The probability is that some officers acting on their own initiative
                  turned supporters away having recognised that part of the terrace was full;

           •     The fact that access to the tunnel was not controlled was a significant factor
                 in the deaths;

           •     The visual evidence available shows supporters at the rear of pens 3 and 4
                  to be totally oblivious to the unfolding events as their fellow supporters died.

           The Report

7.2        This was produced by the Chief Constable of West Midlands Police, Geoffrey Dear,
           on 30 March 1990 following the formal commencement of the criminal and
           disciplinary investigation on 27 September 1989. The Police Complaints Authority
           were supervising the conduct of the investigation. The Chief Constable had major
           concerns about the admissibility of much of the evidence adduced before the Inquiry
           and on which his report was based24. A number of his findings are reproduced
           below:

           •     Following the media attention and what was seen as the adverse effects of


      23
                  Statement number R516 of PS Trevor HIGGINS dated 2.6.89.
      24
                  THE REPORT, Part VII at p 181-5.

                                                                                               25
             a public inquiry it was seriously questionable whether Mr Duckenfield would
             receive a fair trial if a prosecution for manslaughter was pursued against him.

      •     At 1451 hours on the day the video evidence shows that the fans in pens 3
             and 4 were enjoying the event, singing, raising arms and acting seemingly
             quite normally.

      •     Criminal interviews should be conducted of those police officers subject to
             formal complaint as well as members of other organisations.

             Whatever the understanding between the Club and the police re the
             monitoring of the terraces, in the event neither police nor Club employee
             recognised the fact that pens 3 and 4 were overcrowding. Nor did any other
             observer recognise that fact including professionals who regularly attend
             matches. A photograph taken at 1454, two minutes after gate C was opened
             still suggests that there was no real crush at the time.

      •     Mr Murray was part of the decision making team at the match. His post in
            the control box placed him in a position of overall responsibility with Mr
            Duckenfield.

7.3   Subject to the analysis of interviews under caution the interim recommendation was
      there was insufficient evidence for a prosecution for Corporate Manslaughter in
      respect of any of the identified organisations. Criminal responsibility of individuals
      could only be assessed following interviews.

      Interview of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield on 3.7.90

7.4   The officer declined to answer any questions.

      Interview of Superintendent Murray on 25.6.90

7.5   Relevant points from the transcript of interview are:

      •      He had no knowledge of any problems of overcrowding in either 1981 or
             1987.

      •      Although he was in the control room in 1988 at the semi-final match it had
             not been brought to his attention that fans had been injured because of
             overcrowding, or that the centre tunnel to pens 3 and 4 had been closed off.

      •      His responsibility on the day was to have overall command of the control
             room.     That would involve overseeing the event, arranging the
             communications and acting on information received. Mr Duckenfield’s role
             was to be in overall command of the event, which he conducted from the
             control room.



                                                                                         26
      •     He considered that any question of opening gates was for Mr Duckenfield
            and not for him to make. If his senior officer had not been in the control
            room at the time he would have had to contact him for a decision to be
            made.

             At about 1430 he did consider that all the fans would be in by 1500.

             As the requests to open the gate were coming in he was trying to contact the
             Club Security Officer for him to take action on the problem at the turnstiles.
             He had no discussion with Mr Duckenfield about the decision to be made
             except to ask his superior if we were going to open the gates.

      •     Prior to the decision to open the gates he saw nothing on the terraces to give
             him cause for concern.

            At about 1508 when the Assistant Chief Constable, Mr Jackson, asked Mr
            Duckenfield what had happened, he was not told that the gate had been
            opened at police request. At that stage Mr Murray did not associate the
            deaths with the opening of the gate.

      Interview of ACC Jackson on 28 June 1990

7.6   He believes that it was Mr Duckenfield who told him that the gates had been
      stormed. It was about 1615 when he first learnt the true situation.

      Police Complaints Authority

7.7   On 11 July 1990 the PCA directed that disciplinary charges of neglect of duty be
      preferred against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray. In
      November 1990 Mr Duckenfield retired on grounds of ill health and subsequently
      the PCA announced that they would not pursue the charge against Mr Murray on
      the ground that it would be unfair to pursue what was in essence a joint charge
      against one officer only.




                                                                                        27
8.    CPS REVIEW OF 1990

8.1   The Director sought the advice of two very experienced Queen’s Counsel, Gareth
      Williams QC and Peter Birts QC. They produced a joint opinion on 6 August 1990.
      They considered the police report and documentation produced for the Taylor
      Inquiry as well as the Police Interim Report II. The terms of their brief was to
      advise whether there existed sufficient evidence to justify bringing criminal
      proceedings against any of the organisations or individuals concerned.

      Joint Opinion

8.2   Counsel commented that a notable feature of the disaster was the absence of conflict
      of fact as to what had happened, and that the criminal investigation, for all its
      thoroughness, had not significantly added to or contradicted the Inquiry findings.
      The layout of the ground was the responsibility of four organisations, the Club, the
      consultant structural engineers, the Council and the police. None of them foresaw
      that the progressive alterations made to the ground from 1977 onwards in the
      interest of safety and good order would come to constitute in effect a death trap for
      supporters entering pens 3 and 425. The circumstances of the crushing at the
      turnstiles and the opening of gate C were also not foreseen. While all four
      organisations must share some responsibility for the lack of safe maximum
      capacities, the lack of controlled entry to the pens, the absence of any proper system
      of monitoring and the inadequacy of the Safety Certificate, it is the police that had
      the main responsibility for the policy of letting the fans find their own level.

8.3   That there had been a crushing incident in 1981 where large numbers of fans were
      admitted to the West terraces via the tunnel access and were crushed against the
      perimeter fence was not such as to have alerted the police and Club to potential
      problems in 1989. That earlier problem was believed to have been properly
      addressed by the installation of radial fences. It had no direct bearing on the
      disaster and did not add to the potential criminal responsibility of the Club or the
      police.

8.4   Mr Duckenfield’s decision to open gate C was correct in the circumstances. That
      was his responsibility alone as was his serious error in failing to give any order to
      accommodate the influx. While the competence of this newly promoted Chief
      Superintendent to take charge of a match of this importance could be questioned,
      there is no evidence that those responsible for his promotion should share the
      responsibility for his errors.

8.5   That the tunnel was cordoned off in 1998 by a handful of junior officers was
      apparently on their own initiative - an action that would have almost certainly
      averted the disaster of 1989. At first sight the operational organisation of the police
      might seem responsible for failing to incorporate that tactic into the match planning.
      However that Mr Duckenfield despatched a serial to deal with the opening of gate


              Joint Opinion at page 18-19.

                                                                                          28
      A demonstrates that it was within his power to accommodate the opening of gate
      C, and the blame for his not doing so cannot in our view be laid elsewhere26.

8.6   The buildup outside the ground was again the responsibility of the four
      organisations. While the layout and slow admission rate of the turnstiles gave rise
      to policing difficulties, the loss of police control and the failure to follow the
      filtering employed in 1988 was solely a police responsibility, but it was a collective
      one that could not be attributed to any individual officer.

8.7   Counsel gave lengthy consideration to the relevant law for involuntary manslaughter
      and culpable misfeasance (misconduct in a public office). On the basis of the law
      as it was in 1989 they correctly covered the required elements of a manslaughter
      involving "recklessness" as defined by Lord Diplock in R v Lawrence. They were
      quite rightly concerned as to the then uncertainty in the law about the application
      of the "gross negligence" test as a separate head of liability, following two recent
      cases at the time where it was held that manslaughter should not be defined in terms
      of negligence and that Lord Diplock’s test should be applied universally27. They
      therefore approached the evidence on the basis that the gross negligence test (in
      addition to that of "recklessness") was sufficient to establish the offence of
      manslaughter. As for culpable misfeasance they were satisfied that the offence
      existed and that it involved the wilful neglect of a police officer to perform a duty
      which he was bound to perform by common law or statute. They applied the
      definition from R v Dytham ante. They were of the opinion that this little known
      offence was a difficult one to prove to the satisfaction of the jury.

8.8   In considering the evidence to support manslaughter charges they dealt with each
      of the four organisations in turn:

      •     The Club: There was no sufficient evidence to support a prima facie case
            that the Club or any of its officials caused the deaths based on either
            recklessness or gross negligence.

      •     The consultant engineers: There was no evidence to support a charge of
            manslaughter.

      •     The Council: There was no evidence of recklessness or gross negligence on
             their part.

      •     The police: They were responsible for the heavily criticised policy whereby
             supporters were left "to find their own level" and not monitored as they
             entered the pens in semi-final matches. There was also a serious failure of
             policing in Leppings Lane. These errors were to be viewed as part of a


             Joint Opinion at page 21.

             Seymour (1983) 76 Cr App Rep 211 and
             Kong Cheuk Kwan v R (1985) 82 Cr App Rep 18.

                                                                                         29
complex series of events, many of which were outside the control of the
police. Once responsibility for the failure to postpone the kick-off and to
cordon off the access tunnel was confined to Mr Duckenfield as it should be,
then the police as an organisation cannot be said to have caused the deaths
by their strategy and operational errors28. In considering the structure of the
police command, the operational orders for 1988 and 1989, police practice
at Hillsborough and the interviews of officers including Mr Murray, .they
were of the opinion that while there were undoubted errors of judgement and
practice, neither the police organisation nor any individual within it acted
recklessly or in a grossly negligent manner. There was no basis on which
to advise a charge of corporate manslaughter against any directing mind
within the police organisation.

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield: That Mr Duckenfield was criticised for
the failure to cordon off the tunnel access and for his decision not to
postpone the kick-off was thought to be entirely justified. However he had
under his command officers who had considerable experience of policing the
ground and who also made operational errors or failed to react as they should
have done.      It seemed likely that the operational orders and police
intelligence were inadequate; this was not the fault of Mr Duckenfield who
inherited a ready made match plan compiled by others and tried to follow it.
Counsels’ opinion was that the slowness of his response to the disaster was
due in part to his lack of experience of this type of match. In their view the
officer’s errors in not cordoning off the tunnel or postponing the match were
a substantial cause of the deaths. They then looked at the sufficiency of
evidence on a charge of manslaughter as against the officer. They concluded
that there was no unlawful and dangerous act for that head of manslaughter,
and then went on to consider the other tests:

       "We consider that there are difficulties in proving that he intended to
       do an act which created an obvious and serious risk of causing
       personal injury. In the first place there was no "act" as such, but an
       omission or omissions to act which contributed to a rapidly
       developing state of affairs ending in serious risk of injury. But was
       it an obvious risk at the time? We think not. The complexity of the
       disaster as now known to those who have analysed it in hindsight
       demonstrates that there must be grave doubt as to whether the
       omissions created a risk which was obvious to anyone at the
       time We conclude, therefore, that there is insufficient evidence on
       which to found a charge of recklessness against Mr Duckenfield. Nor
       is there evidence that he was grossly negligent in failing to act as
       mentioned above It follows, and we have come to the clear
       conclusion that there is no evidence that Mr Duckenfield was wilfully
       neglectful of his duty or was culpable so as to have committed the



Joint Opinion at paras 80.

                                                                            30
                          offence o f culpable misfeasance29."

8.9         The final conclusion of counsel was that there was no sufficient evidence to support
            criminal proceedings of any kind against those persons mentioned in the West
            Midlands Report who counsel did not identify in their opinion.

8.10        In the autumn of 1990 the DPP announced that there would be no prosecutions.




       29
                   Joint Opinion at paras 88-89.

                                                                                              31
9.         THE INQUESTS

9.1        In April 1990 the Coroner for South Yorkshire commenced the 9530 mini inquests
            to decide the statutory questions as to who each of the deceased was and when and
            where he or she died. They were then adjourned to await the DPP’s decision on a
            criminal prosecution. They were resumed in November 1990 to decide the final
            statutory question as to how each of the deceased died. At the end of March 1991
            the jury returned majority verdicts of accidental death in all cases.

           Coroner’s Summing Up

9.2        The coroner described to the jury three possible conclusions that might be returned;
           that is, of an unlawful killing, accident/misadventure or an open verdict. For a
           verdict of unlawful killing the criminal standard of proof was required, and for
           accident/misadventure the standard would be that of the balance of probability. In
           the case of an open verdict there was no standard as such. He went on to describe
           the legal requirements for each of the possible verdicts which should be considered
           in turn.

9.3        For unlawful killing (the criminal equivalent being one of the forms of involuntary
           manslaughter) he paid particular attention to the case of R v West London Coroner
           ex parte Gray [1988] QB 467, which dealt with an alleged unlawful killing by a
           police officer by way of neglect.

9.4        For accident/misadventure he described it as an unforeseen event arising out of a
           situation that was meant to occur. Whether or not there was culpability due to
           negligence would depend on the circumstances.

9.5        If after due deliberation the jury came to the conclusion that there was insufficient
           evidence to reach either of the above two verdicts to the required standard of proof
           then the open verdict was appropriate.

9.6        The relevant points that the Coroner made to the jury concerning the actions of the
           police were:

                  The police practice of letting the fans "find their own level" which had
                  appeared to work without problem until 1989. While criticised this had not
                  been condemned by any witness, although it was accepted that there had to
                  be some monitoring.

           •      The Chief Superintendent who was in command prior to Mr Duckenfield did
                  not know of any diversion of the fans from the tunnel in previous years,
                  however it was fairly conclusive that such diversion happened in 1988,
                  although it was not reported to senior officers.


      30
                   Subsequently the 96th victim, Mr Bland, died.

                                                                                             32
     As there was no means of counting people into the pens the only way to
     monitor the packing density of the fans there was by a visual perception.

     Senior officers had indicated that if they had seen something which caused
     them concern they would have expected to report it. They had a reliance
     upon the initiative and the capability of the people within the ground,
     whether or not that was a wise reliance that was the practice.

     Virtually all the evidence pointed towards the decision to open the gates as
     being a reasonable one in the circumstances.

     A number of witnesses did not think that the centre pens were crowded while
     others saw disaster looming. Mr Motson,the BBC commentator, noticed the
     discrepancy between the centre and outer pens but not that the centre ones
     were overcrowded. Mr Hicks appeared to have the earliest concern about the
     overcrowding based on what he could see from his position close to the
     police control box.

     The Coroner considered that there was at least some evidence to put before
     the jury on the question of an unlawful killing and therefore did not
     withdraw that verdict from them.

     Mr Duckenfield did not have a detailed knowledge of the Green Guide or of
     the ground. He did have a plan and Operational Order that had been used
     in the past without difficulties. He could be justified in taking the view that
     he had staff that were sound and adequate, that the ground itself was safe,
     and that the capacity of the ground was in accordance with the Safety
     Certificate. He probably had no duty to satisfy himself on every item
     relating to the running of the match. It was not surprising that he did not
     know the detail of the signing (on the concourse and by the tunnel access).
     It was not surprising that he did not relate the geographical locations of the
     tunnel access and the exit gate (gate C). There was nothing to alert him that
     an exit gate might be used as an entry point.

     There was a great deal of criticism that the Operational Order adopted by Mr
     Duckenfield did not include specific references to the monitoring of the pens
     or to the distribution of the fans within the pens. Most of the police officers
     took the view that they would act on their own initiative and that the safety
     of the public was one of their primary functions31.

     Mr Duckenfield’s briefing made a strong reference to the safety of the
     spectators; it was of paramount importance. Would it have made any
     difference if he had said "monitor the pens" rather than the word "safety"?
     Did the briefing make it clear that in addition to their public order functions
     safety was a matter of great importance.


31
     Inquiry transcript 25 March 1991 at page 111.

                                                                                 33
Mr Duckenfield’s evidence is that his objective in opening the gates was to
save life.

       "...firstly he took the view that the concourse was larger than the
       turnstile area and therefore people would have room to expand.
       Secondly he knew there were three routes, although he did not know
       their detail and he certainly did not know their signing, on to the
       terraces....He also said that his attention was focused on Lepping
       Lane; firstly upon Gate C and then he was taken up with the issue of
       Gate A. The first time he realised that anything was happening on
       the terraces was when he saw the gate open and people climbing
       over....He certainly did not associate the entry - at least that is my
       understanding of his evidence - the entry through the gates with what
       appeared to him to be a pitch invasion. Mr Duckenfield, of course
       was supported by Mr Murray whose job it was to control the ground.
       He was entitled to assume, I think, that people in Mr Murray’s
       position would take appropriate action in the light of developments.
       Indeed, I think he was right to assume that people further afield
       would keep him informed as to what was happening, with a view to
       enabling him to take decisions."

The Coroner considered that the assessment of the terraces was a very
important factor to be weighed. None of the staff in the control room had
noticed any problems with the pens until people came over the fence or the
perimeter gates were opened. Their attention was focused on the outside.

       "...the evidence...is reasonably clear that...when Gate C was
       opened...the centre pens certainly were not empty but they were not
       necessarily so full and, indeed, they had been playing with beach
       balls and various other things in those pens very shortly before
       that...So you have two problems: one, would a prudent observer have
       noted at the point in time when the gates were opened that those pens
       were so full or so over full that diversion was something which had
       to be taken; and secondly, of course, would the connection, would a
       reasonably prudent, skilled police officer in the shoes if you like, of
       Mr Duckenfield or indeed Mr Murray, have connected the need, the
       opening of the gate, diversion of the tunnel, and conditions on the
       pen?"

The radio problems were said to have caused a considerable amount of
disruption.

Mr Murray saw his role as a communicator and disseminator, a man of rank
who was in a position to take decisions, and an adviser to Mr Duckenfield,




                                                                           34
particularly as the latter was a newcomer32. He says that he had no
knowledge of any diversion from the tunnel in 1988, he believed the ground
to be safe, the system under which he was operating to be safe and that it
had worked satisfactorily in 1987 and 1988. When gate C was opened it did
not cross his mind to close the tunnel. He expected people to disperse from
the concourse- He did not expect they would all go through the tunnel. He
said that his primary concern was to relieve pressure, to avoid injury, and he
went on to say that nothing else was obvious to him. Nothing of
significance was noted on the terraces.

Mr Duckenfield said that he operated on the assumptions that the ground was
safe, the system of policing and the Operational Plan were satisfactory and
had worked in previous years, and he had a team of officers who were
experienced and supportive. He expected to receive reports of overcrowding
if noted by officers on the track. He would expect officers to respond to a
"developing situation". As far as he was concerned, he did not accept that
there was on the day an obvious risk to people when the gates were opened.
He thought that the time interval in which he had to take various decisions
was short.




Inquest transcript at page 22 of 11 March 1991: "I saw my role as being sort
of monitoring the event as a whole, being responsible for the reception and
the transmission of all radio communications and saw myself as adviser to
Mr Duckenfield." Mr Murray accepted that his superior might have to make
decisions requiring his advice based on experience.

                                                                           35
10.    THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND JUDICIAL REVIEW

10.1   In April 1992 solicitors acting for the relatives of some of the deceased sent a
       ‘memorial’ to the Attorney General requesting him to grant them leave to apply to
       the High Court for the inquest verdicts to be quashed and a fresh series of inquests
       held. This was refused in August 1992 on the ground that he had concluded that
       there was nothing which would justify an application to the High Court for a .new
       inquest, as the application would have no reasonable prospect of establishing that
       it was necessary or desirable in the interests of justice for a fresh inquest to be held.

10.2   In May 1992 an application was made to the Divisional Court for judicial review
       in respect of the various decisions made by the Coroner in the course of the inquest.
       Leave was granted in April 1993 and the case came before the Court in November
       1993. The relief sought was for a quashing of the verdicts and an ordering of fresh
       inquests.

10.3   One of the grounds put forward by the applicants was that the Coroner misdirected
       the jury on the law concerning unlawful killing when he defined it in terms of
       recklessness33, because a later and unreported case34 in the Court of Appeal had
       decided that the offence of involuntary manslaughter was established if there was
       proof of a grossly negligent act or omission causing death. It was submitted that if
       such a direction on gross negligence had been given then the jury would have found
       unlawful killing. The Court, however, was of the view that the actual verdict
       brought in by the jury was a perfectly rational one.

10.4   An interesting note is that when the Court asked counsel for the applicants, Alun
       Jones QC, what would be the point of sending the matter back for another inquest,
       he stated that whatever the verdict might prove to be, the function of the jury would
       have been fulfilled. He agreed that no prosecution of any police officer would result
       because the decision had been taken in 1990 that no one should be prosecuted. It
       was a point of legal purity.

10.5   The judgement of the Court was given by Lord Justice McCowan:

              "I would hold that the inquisition was correctly completed and the Coroner’s
              direction to the jury as to the manner in which they should approach its
              completion was impeccable....Accordingly, I have discovered no good reason
              for ordering a new inquest or for merely quashing the existing verdicts."




               Following the judgement of Watkins LJ in R v West London Coroner ex
               parte Gray and others [1987] 2 WLR 1020.

               R v Holloway and others [1994] QB 302.

                                                                                             36
11.    THE NEW EVIDENCE

11.1   In early December 1996, Granada TV screened a drama-documentary programme
       concerning the Hillsborough Stadium disaster. It was later said by the Hillsborough
       Family Support Group (HFSG) that the pre-production research for the programme
       and its subsequent airing brought fresh evidence and new witnesses to light proving
       that suppression of evidence, perjury and conspiracy to pervert the course of justice
       featured in the legal process that followed the disaster.

11.2   In March 1997 the HFSG made representations (supported by the opinion of their
       counsel, Alun Jones QC, and a large bundle of ‘new evidence’) to the DPP, the
       Home Secretary and the Attorney General. The Legal Secretariat to the Law
       Officers (LSLO) considered it important that while each of the various Government
       Departments formed their own judgement in relation to the discharge of their own
       duties, it was equally important that there was a coherent and co-ordinated response
       to the representations made. It was agreed that each of the three groups would
       report the results of their reviews to the Police Policy Directorate.

11.3   The new evidence was said to be a video tape of footage from the scoreboard
       camera on the Leppings Lane terraces that was alleged to have been suppressed by
       the police, the evidence of the Club engineer responsible for the CCTV systems, and
       a doctor’s statement also alleged to have been suppressed.

11.4   The Chairman of the HFSG, Mr Trevor Hicks, formally requested the CPS to
       examine the evidence and to initiate an urgent criminal investigation into the
       allegations. Their counsel had concluded that the new pieces of evidence called for
       a full police enquiry or public enquiry.




                                                                                         37
12.    THE 1997 CPS REVIEW

12.1   I was nominated to review the evidence and allegations and to prepare a report for
        the Director. This report was completed and sent to the Director on 8 May 1997 via
        the CCP for Central Casework.

12.2   My recommendations were that there were no grounds for the CPS to recommend
       to the Home Office that there should be a further investigation of criminal
       allegations against the police or other persons. In particular I found that:

       •     The police video tapes alleged to have been suppressed were available to the
             Taylor Inquiry and to the Coroner. One was actually shown to the inquest
             jury as part of the evidence.

       •     Tapes alleged to have been stolen from the Club CCTV room ( the inference
             being that the police were involved in suppressing material evidence of their
             complicity in criminal offences) were not relevant. One would have been a
             detailed study of a brick wall and the second of an area covered by other
             cameras.

       •     There was insufficient evidence of police control room officers perjuring
             themselves at the inquest when giving their opinion of the video quality seen
             on a CCTV monitor.

       •     There was no suppression of medical evidence by either the police or other
             persons. The ‘new’ evidence provided by the HFSG had little weight when
             compared to the overall evidence considered by the various judicial hearings.




                                                                                       38
13.    THE SCRUTINY

13.1   In June 1997 the Home Secretary announced to the House that his department, the
        Attorney General and the CPS had carefully considered all the evidence that had
        been put forward but were unable to find anything which would have materially
        affected the outcome of any of the investigations into the disaster. There was no
        evidence from which it could be concluded that a new public inquiry should be
        established, that would justify fresh criminal investigations or that an application for
        a new inquest would have any hope of succeeding. However, in order that no
        matter of significance was overlooked and a conclusion was not made without a full
        and independent examination of the evidence, it had been decided that there should
        be an independent scrutiny. It was to be conducted by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.
        As regards the CPS his terms of reference were:

               "To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
               Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available....to the
               Director of Public Prosecutions....for the purpose of discharging...
               (her)...statutory responsibilities....and to draw to (her) attention any evidence
               not previously considered by (her) which may be relevant to (her) duties...."

13.2   The scrutiny report was submitted to the Home Secretary in January 1998. It was
       made plain that the judge had looked at all the evidence that he was asked to
       consider whether or not it had been previously available to the legal advisers acting
       for the families or was in the public domain.

13.3   The judge was only invited by counsel for the HFSG to make recommendations to
       the DPP re criminal proceedings in the case of Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray. He
       stated that as the DPP had concluded that there was not sufficient evidence to justify
       charges against either of these two officers (having accepted the advice of two very
       experienced Queen’s Counsel), any fresh evidence would have to be of sufficient
        significance that there would be a real possibility that in considering it the DPP
       might change her mind and institute proceedings for manslaughter, or for any other
        offence, against one or both of these officers.

       Key Points from the Scrutiny

13.4 These are as follows:

        •     Chapter 1.22: "Lord Taylor had to decide a number of controversial issues,
              for example, why the police lost control of the crowd outside the Leppings
              Lane turnstiles. The evidence of the witnesses who have not previously
              come forward is unlikely significantly to affect the weight of the evidence
              already given on these controversial issues."

        •     Chapter 1.44: No fresh evidence had been heard about what had happened
              outside the ground before 1500 therefore there was no question of reviewing
              Lord Taylor’s findings on that.


                                                                                             39
Chapter 1.45 to 1.51: Lord Justice Stuart-Smith reiterated Lord Taylor’s
criticism of the police in not closing the access tunnel to the central pens
when gate C was opened, that was said to be "a blunder of the first
magnitude". However there was also criticism of others because of the
inadequate turnstiles, the unsatisfactory monitoring of the pens except by a
visual check, the misleading and inadequate signposting, and the lack of
stewards on the concourse directing people where to go. The result was, that
most standing spectators going through the turnstiles or gate C did not realise
that there was any alternative but to go down the tunnel. He stated "None
of the evidence I have been invited to consider could make Lord Taylor’s
censure of the police more severe, and it does not add any separate or
additional ground of criticism in respect of events leading to the tragedy."

Chapter 1.53: In considering the joint opinion of Counsel the judge said that
they had set out a full, detailed and careful resume of the facts on the basis
of the evidence then available. There was no error or omission in that resume
nor was any particular aspect understated or exaggerated. In their statement
of the law, Counsel considered both the offences of manslaughter and
culpable misfeasance in a public office; they were plainly correct to consider
that the latter offence would be no easier to establish than manslaughter in
the circumstances of the case.

Chapter 1.54 to 1.57: In order to recommend that the DPP reconsider the
decision not to prosecute there would have to be fresh evidence to establish
facts not previously considered, or the significance of which was not fully
appreciated, that would make it more likely that charges of manslaughter
could be established.      He said that "Essentially this relates to Mr
Duckenfield’s and Mr Murray’s knowledge and appreciation of the risk of
injury in doing what they did or omitted to do....Any prosecution of an
individual police officer would have to establish his individual responsibility.
It would not be enough simply to prove the composite failure of the police
operation. The causes of the disaster were many and complex. So far as
these two officers were concerned the prosecution would have to prove to the
high standard required for a criminal conviction that the failure to give the
order to close off the tunnel when Gate C was opened amounted to the
serious degree of recklessness necessary to constitute manslaughter."

Chapter 1.66: The verdict of accidental death at the inquests did not
undermine or reverse Lord Taylor’s findings. In order to justify a further
application to the Divisional Court for judicial review any new evidence
must show that had it been presented to the jury they would have been likely
to reach the only other possible verdict, namely unlawful killing.

Chapter 2.18: The police video tapes that contained footage of the Leppings
Lane terraces were not suppressed as alleged but were available in their
entirety to the Inquiry and to the Coroner.

Chapter 2.22: The loss of the video tapes from the Club control room would

                                                                             40
not have shown anything relevant. There is no evidence for the suggestion
that they were taken by police officers as part of a ‘cover up’.

Chapter 2.61: The submission that the police blamed their failure to
appreciate the overcrowding onto a faulty CCTV camera is quite untenable.

Chapter 2.96 to 2.97: Mr Houldsworth (the Club CCTV engineer) gave
evidence that he realised from looking at coverage from police cameras that
the central pens were overcrowded and that the influx of people through gate
C would create a dangerous situation. This evidence is rejected. His
explanation as to why he did not come forward until 1996 is not convincing;
what he says now is inconsistent with what he said before. Like almost
everyone else observing the situation he thought he was looking at a pitch
invasion.    "The importance of Mr Houldsworth’s evidence has been
exaggerated out of all proportion."

Chapter 2.101: "There is nothing in any of the submissions about the video
evidence that calls for any further inquiry or consideration by the prosecuting
or disciplinary authorities ..."

Chapter 4.101: Here Lord Justice Stuart-Smith refers to Mr Duckenfield’s
"disgraceful lie" about gate C being forced open by fans as part of his
consideration of the allegation that there had been a cover-up by the police.
The other part was of malpractice and irregularities in the taking of witness
statements. The latter were not substantiated.

Chapter 5.26 to 5.34: South Yorkshire Police hold the extensive archive of
material about the Hillsborough disaster. The ‘body files’ are held on behalf
of the Coroner and access to them is at his discretion. Access to the rest of
the material in the archives is at the discretion of the police.

Chapter 6.7 to 6.20: Evidence from the structural engineer who advised the
South Yorkshire police in 1990 re the safety of the ground was not available
for either the Taylor Inquiry or the Coroner. It was available for the civil
contribution proceedings in October 1990. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says
that it is reasonable to assume that the engineer’s opinion was a material
factor in persuading the Club and others to make a substantial contribution
to the overall cost of the claims. Two matters which the engineer pointed
to had not been considered or fully considered by the Taylor Inquiry; the
height of the crush barriers resulted in the failure of one that contributed to
the substantially larger number of deaths in pen 3; and the wrongly
calculated overall capacity of the Leppings Lane terrace that resulted in
excessive number of tickets being sold over the safe capacity. While these
matters do not give any ground for the re-opening of any proceedings, and
would not change the central conclusion that the primary cause of the
disaster was the failure of police control, if the responsibility of the other
parties was somewhat greater than had earlier been appreciated, that might
have a bearing on any reconsideration of criminal proceedings against police

                                                                             41
              officers.

       •      Chapter 6.22 to 6.30: In his summing-up the Coroner dealt fully and fairly
              with all the evidence. The Divisional Court rejected the criticisms made of
              him.

13.5   In conclusion the judge said that none of the evidence that he had been asked to
       consider added anything significant to the evidence which was available to the
       Taylor Inquiry or to the Inquests. Also that the investigation of the disaster by the
       West Midlands Police was not biased in favour of the South Yorkshire force.

       Home Secretary’s Statement

13.6   On 18 February 1998 the Home Secretary announced to the House that he, the
       Attorney-General and the Director of Public Prosecutions had no reasons to doubt
       the conclusions of the scrutiny. Much of the evidence considered was already in the
       public domain but he was arranging for the other material (subject to certain
       overriding reasons) to be placed in the Library of the House.




                                                                                         42
14.    THE HFSG REPRESENTATIONS

14.1   The HFSG have provided us with a copy of a bundle of documents which they say
       is the kernel of their case. It comprises six large folders of their evidence and a
       further folder covering the law. It includes a number of witness statements of police
       officers and others (including details of amendments made to police statements),
       Taylor Inquiry transcripts of oral evidence, and the Inquest transcript of the evidence
       of Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray. I understand that they may not have the consent
       of many of the police witnesses that they would wish to call for the prosecution.

14.2   The folder containing the amended police statements has added notes describing
       what is said to have been deleted or amended. In addition the HFSG solicitor has
       made personal comments on the quality of this mainly opinion evidence as well as
       the failure of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to properly address some of the points
       raised.

14.3   The formal representations were received on 28 September 1998. They are said to
       be in opposition to the defendants’ request for the case to be taken over and
       discontinued. There is a discussion of the right to a private prosecution and the test
       which should be applied. The general points that they make are:

       •      In deciding to prosecute a private prosecutor is entitled to apply a test less
              strict than the CPS test of evidential sufficiency from the Code for Crown
              Prosecutors. The CPS should not approach a review of the present kind on
              the basis that it should apply its own test of evidential sufficiency. The
              Taylor findings alone show there is a realistic prospect of conviction for
              manslaughter and misfeasance.

       •      Except in the plainest of cases it would be a misuse of the discretion given
              to the CPS to take over a prosecution such as this in order to discontinue it.

       •     The significance of the witness statements disclosed in the course of the
              scrutiny and the hundreds of unsworn police statements disclosed by the
              Home Secretary in 1998 is difficult to overstate. They disclose a prima facie
              case of manipulation of evidence to the benefit of the defendants and the
              South Yorkshire Police. The independence of the West Midlands Police was
              a sham.

       •     There was calculated selection of the documents sent to the DPP in 1990.
              Many important statements were excluded, eg, edited statements of police
              officers.

       •     The South Yorkshire Police solicitors have acted under a serious conflict of
              interest in the course of previous inquiries and continue to deny access to the
              families to the South Yorkshire archive.


              In the opinion of leading counsel there is sufficient evidence on which to

                                                                                           43
              commit for trial already. The archive of statements and exhibits in the
              possession of the police will add significantly to the prosecution case at
              committal.

       Sufficiency of Evidence

14.4   The HFSG accept that the law follows Adomako (ante) and submit that all the
       elements of the offence of this specie of involuntary manslaughter are not disputed
       except for the last which is a jury question. The key points made are:

       •      The decision to open the gates without taking steps to divert the oncoming
              spectators was a "blunder of the first magnitude". The decision was taken by
              Duckenfield with the agreement or acquiescence of Murray.

       •     Certain police evidence, which was suppressed until 1998, suggests that it
             was the practice of senior officers to ensure that the tunnel was closed when
             the pens were full.

       •     Duckenfield and Murray were in the Control Box and could see the central
             pens. They had an even better view on the CCTV. Murray, who had been
             on duty in 1988, culpably failed to give the proper and obvious advice;
             Duckenfield "froze" and later admitting lying about how the gate came to be
             opened.

       •      Duckenfield’s lie was an obvious attempt to impede inquiries and to suppress
              the truth.

       Public Interest and Interests of Justice Factors

14.5   The key points made by the HFSG under this heading here are:

       •     The HFSG has been deprived of critical information, statements and
             documents about the disaster for years. When the DPP investigation began
             information and statements were closely guarded. Following the open
             approach of the Home Secretary in 1998, the information now available
             undermines the inquest verdicts of accidental death and calls into question
             the validity of all previous investigations.

       •     The findings of the Taylor Inquiry have survived for 9 years. Prosecutions
             for the present offences are justified. Prosecutions for additional offences on
             the basis of the new material are justified in spite of the "scrutiny".

       •     There has been a sustained suppression of the truth in the course of the
             original investigations. The scrutiny was misled on the practice of editing
             statements for the Taylor Inquiry. Some of those statements are still missing.
             The South Yorkshire Police adopted a policy of withholding information,
             critical to the issue of negligence, from the Taylor Inquiry, the DPP, the
             Coroner and presumably the Police Complaints Authority.

                                                                                         44
              The unedited statement of the Chief Constable of Merseyside, who was
              present at the match, contained hearsay, impression, commendation and
              comment. It bestows lavish praise on the senior officers at the match in
              sharp contrast to the edited statements of junior officers whose criticisms
              were painstakingly excused. In the Master Witness List for the Taylor
              Inquiry it was placed between the statements of Duckenfield and Murray.
              It has to be inferred that this was done in order to influence the reader
              against prosecutions.

       •      The HFSG argue that only if the West Midlands Police as the investigating
              force was truly independent of those it investigated, and impartial, could any
              of the four inquiries ( Taylor, DPP, Coroner and PCA) be regarded as full,
              independent and complete. If it was not then no weight could be attached
              to its report and the value of the conclusions of those to whom their officers
              reported is diminished.

       •      The inquest, ostensibly objective and dispassionate, is now shown to have
              been manipulated by South Yorkshire Police for their own ends, and by West
              Midlands Police. For this reason the defendants are not entitled to rely upon
              the inquest verdicts to put an end to this prosecution.

       The Limitations of the Stuart-Smith Report

14.6   The HFSG consider that caution has to be employed in accepting facts set out in the
       report. They cite the conclusions about the edited statements being seriously wrong.
       The scale of the editing now revealed exceeds anything shown to the scrutiny. The
       report is economical with information. Only small parts of advice of counsel in
       1990 are set out. The provision of the whole advice is required so that the whole
       reasoning is apparent. They say it is clear that privilege has been waived by the
       provision of the report to the scrutiny. Justice requires that the West Midlands
       Police report and the advice of counsel be disclosed to the HFSG.

14.7   They state that there is no evidence that the judge saw the Master Witness List or
       knew what the DPP had considered, and that there was no ground to believe that he
       sought to compare the evidence available to the Director with the total evidence
       available.

14.8   Their final word is that it would be a most serious injustice to discontinue the
       prosecution.

       Supplementary Representations

14.9   These were received on 2 October 1998. As to the allegation of PCOJ the HFSG
       say that previous inquiries were seriously misled by Mr Duckenfield and both the
       police forces. At the Taylor Inquiry the officer made a half hearted admission
       followed by a denial of an intent to deceive and a claim to have been in a ‘state of
       shock’. Earlier in his evidence when asked if he could help as the genesis of the
       lie, he replied "No". This was a lie as his later admissions demonstrated. The ‘lie’

                                                                                         45
       was transmitted to the Fire Service, the Ambulance Service and the BBC. The
       management of the Club were misled. The officer admitted that he withheld the
       correct information but said it was for "good motives". There was an attempt to
       limit the number and effect of his lies by the omission of this detail from police
       witness statements. At the inquest he said that he could not remember what he had
       said on the topic. He lied to the Coroner’s jury about this.

14.10 It is said that the scrutiny report suggests that the DPP may not have considered in
      1990 the question of the attempt to pervert the course of justice. The true position
      is that the ‘lie’ was repeated to a number of persons, carefully and deliberately, by
      Duckenfield or by others with his encouragement. The HFSG is actively studying
      the significance of these matters in relation to the integrity of the investigations by
      the two police forces.

14.11 The HFSG argue that Duckenfield’s admissions "...show gross negligence causative
      of death, and that they disclose a wanton and perhaps angry disregard for the safety
      of people in the pens, when other people, whom Duckenfield regarded as of the
      same ilk, were causing him a serious problem outside the ground."

14.12 They submit that the responsibility of Murray for the offences is greater than that
      of his superior as can be seen from the admissions made during his evidence to the
      Inquiry and the inquest.

14.13 Much of the rest of the representations are a recital of the evidence at the various
      inquiries, allegations of evidence suppression by witnesses in the making of their
      statements and a final submission. This latter concludes that the PCA rightly
      recognised that the charge of neglect was joint and that the reckless or grossly
      negligent decision to open the gates without closing off the pens was the
      responsibility of both defendants.

       Further Supplementary Representations

14.14 These were received on 12 October 1998. They concerned the obtaining of
      documents, including the West Midlands Police report, from the Public Record
      Office. There is a complaint about the denial of access to the report by the CPS.

14.15 An example of the quality of representation being put forward is based on a
      comparison between a paragraph from the report on how the tunnel to the central
      pens came to be cordoned off, and the statement of an officer who closed off the
      tunnel access in 1988:

              West Midlands Report: "Enquiries have found just one retired officer who
              recalls this happening. He, it must be said, is vague in his recollection but
              the probability is that some officers acting on their own initiative....(turned
              spectators away)".

              HFSG: They say that the retired officer, Higgins, is not vague. He said this
              in his statement of 2 June 1989: "I received instructions to close the gates to

                                                                                          46
              the entrance and thereafter direct fans to the outer pens of the stand. I
              cannot recall where the instruction came from. Under normal circumstances
              instruction came from a Serial Inspector or via radio from control. I cannot
              say from which the instruction came. Bearing in mind the time lapse and
              having attended several matches at Hillsborough, it is difficult to relate detail
              regarding this particular match."

              HFSG: "The significance of this evidence is that ‘control’ used as a matter
              of habit to give this instruction, as did an Inspector, no doubt in liaison with
              each other. This instruction was given in 1988 when Murray was in the
              Control Box. It is to be assumed that the DPP was given the same account
              in 1990 about the opening of the gates in 1988, as appears in the Interim
              Report of October 1989. If so, he was demonstrably misled."

14.16 The alleged ‘forcing’ of the perimeter gate was often raised by South Yorkshire
      officers at the Taylor Inquiry. The purpose of the suggestion was to imply that the
      lying assertion made repeatedly by Duckenfield that the fans had broken down the
      gates might have had some basis in fact, and been the result of some confusion.

14.17 The appendices to the Police Interim Report appear to demonstrate that much time
      was devoted by police officers (probably both West Midlands and South Yorkshire)
      to collecting statements from officers of other forces to bolster what Lord Taylor
      derided as the ‘conspiracy theory’ that there was a plot by ticketless, late arriving
      and intoxicated supporters to force an admission into the ground.

14.18 As the Police Interim Report is now in the public domain, there can be no
      justification of any kind for withholding the final report, or the advice of counsel
      that was made on the basis of that report. The CPS is asked to produce them.




                                                                                            47
15.    THE DEFENCE REPRESENTATIONS

15.1   The initial request for the CPS to take over the case in order to discontinue was
       received from the defence solicitors on 2 July 1998 and was on the basis that
       continuation would be contrary to the public interest. The points raised to support
       this were:

       •     The conclusions of the joint opinion of counsel in 1990;

       •     The accidental death verdicts of the inquest jury;

       •     The conclusion of the scrutiny that there was no ‘new evidence’ which
              would influence the decision not to prosecute;

       •     The intensity of the media coverage and the effect on public opinion;

       •     The emotional stress that the two officers have been under since the disaster;

       •     Witness recollection of events after the passage of time;

       •     Nothing would be served by the expenditure of resources on a trial that
             would achieve nothing in addressing the causes of the disaster.

15.2   Further new representations were received from Mr Murray’s solicitors in early July:

       •     That Mr Murray had suffered a complete breakdown in his health;

       •     That following the clear conclusions of the scrutiny report there is under
              section 23 of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 insufficient evidence;

       •     The view of the Home Secretary and Lord Justice Stuart-Smith that re­
              opening the inquiries would serve no useful purpose whatsoever.

15.3   The final batch of defence representations were sent to the CPS on 9 October 1998.
       The solicitors for Mr Murray make comments on the quality of the HFSG
       submissions on the law and the reasoning put forward. Solicitors for Mr
       Duckenfield say that the HFSG have concentrated on the evidential basis for the
       summons issued. They submit that the Director is well placed to consider the public
       interest as well. They disagree with the HFSG assertion that a clear prima facie
       case exists. They counter the HFSG allegations of the suppression of evidence by
       the police and support the scrutiny findings that there was no improper interference
       with witnesses or manipulation of evidence. They cite examples where the
       representations made by the HFSG are clearly wrong in their criticisms, for example,
       that Mr Duckenfield met Lord Justice Stuart-Smith who then failed to refer to this
       in his report. No such meeting took place and that criticism is therefore unfounded.




                                                                                         48
15.4        They submit that the HFSG concedes that the findings of the Taylor Inquiry fall
            short of those needed to establish a prima facie case when it was said that "The
            Taylor findings in themselves amount almost to a prima facie case."35

15.5        There is no evidence that Mr Duckenfield was ever told about the police action in
            1988 (closing off the tunnel access) or should have been aware of it. The analysis
            of the ‘new evidence’ from the HFSG adds no strength to the their case.

15.6        The solicitors take issue with the stated CPS Policy of taking over a private
            prosecution in order to discontinue it only where there is ‘clearly no case to answer’.
            They request clarification for the justification of the policy and cite the observation
            made by the Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure (Phillips Commission)
            (1981):

                   "The test applied to the Director’s cases (ie, whether or not there is a realistic
                   prospect of conviction) should be applied by all who make the decisions that
                   bring a case to court".36

15.7        They consider that pursuant to the Code for Crown Prosecutors, if there is
            insufficient evidence for a realistic prospect of conviction, the Director will be
            bound to take over the conduct of the proceedings and discontinue. However on the
            basis that the Director applies a lesser standard they ask the CPS to consider the
            admissibility and reliability of the evidence. They emphasise that from the material
            so far submitted by the prosecution there is a clear paucity of evidence relating to
            vital issues. They argue that admissions of liability by the South Yorkshire Police
            in negligence proceedings have no force in relation to the specific actions of
            individual officers.

15.8        As regards the allegation of perverting the course of justice, they say that it has
            never been suggested that Mr Duckenfield ever uttered the words complained of to
            anyone charged with investigating the disaster. There is no evidence that he played
            any role in the transmission of the comment to those who were not present at the
            time, or that he engaged in what is said to be a damage limitation exercise where
            witness statements are taken without any mention of the ‘lie’.

15.9        They put forward a number of representations as to the public interest factors that
            should be considered if that test becomes relevant . Their concerns are especially
            addressed to the matter of the 9 year delay, that the offence was committed as a
            result of a genuine mistake or misunderstanding (as balanced against the seriousness
            of the offence) rather than any pre-meditation, and of the ill health of the defendant.

15.10 Finally, they are of .the view that the Director is bound to give full and detailed
      reasons for the decision taken addressing the issues raised by all the parties.


       35
                   HFSG submission of 24 September 1998 at para 12.
       36
                   Phillips Commission at para 8.9

                                                                                                  49
16.    KEY CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE CPS REVIEW

       An Overview

16.1   The correspondence and formal representations from the private prosecutor and the
       solicitors for the two defendants raise many points. Some of these are relevant to
       this review, others are not. The key issue to be resolved is whether or not theje is
       clearly no case to answer and/or the public interest/interests of justice circumstances
       do not require a prosecution for the charges against Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray.
       Once that point is decided then other more minor issues, such as disclosure, will fall
       into place.

16.2 In conducting this review and in the making of my recommendations in chapter 17,
      I have looked at material in the public domain, material provided to me by the
      parties to the prosecution, other non-sensitive material in my possession and also
      confidential papers subject to public interest immunity or legal privilege. A
      schedule of this material as attached at Appendix 2. Some of the material is not in
      a form admissible in the criminal courts, however I have proceeded on the basis
      that, if relevant, it is capable of being adduced by the HFSG in an acceptable
      format. I accept the findings of the Taylor Inquiry, the Coroner’s Inquests, the
      judicial review in the Divisional Court, and the scrutiny. I have no reason not to
      accept those relevant findings of fact made by the police in the course of their
      investigations, however I do not necessarily accept their conclusions on the
      evidence. I find persuasive the conclusions of joint counsel in their advice of 1990
      to the Director.

16.3   While I note the concern expressed as to the validity of the CPS policy on the
       taking over and subsequent discontinuance of a private prosecution, I consider that
       I am bound by what the Director has laid down as guidance and my later
       recommendations will reflect this.

       CPS Policy Guidelines

16.4 I have considered the Code for Crown Prosecutors and the Explanatory
      Memorandum. The Code discusses the two stages in the decision to prosecute. Only
      when the evidential test, ‘the realistic prospect of conviction’, is passed does a
      Crown Prosecutor go on to consider if a prosecution is needed in the public interest.
      If the first test is not passed then there must not be a prosecution.

16.5 The CPS decision of 1990, following Counsels’ advice and based on the evidence
      provided by the West Midlands Police, stated that the evidential test had not been
      passed. Until late 1996 nothing was put before the Director which would have
      affected that decision. Following my review in 1997, it was decided that the so-
      called ‘new evidence’ provided by the HFSG did not provide new grounds for a
      recommendation of a further criminal investigation. There was no suppression of
      medical or video evidence as alleged by Alun Jones QC. The scrutiny report of
      Lord Justice Stuart-Smith fully supported this stance. In the latest representations
      from the HFSG it is being said that all the judicial inquiries and proceedings to date

                                                                                           50
       have been misled. They make a strong inference that this is because of a criminal
       conspiracy between the South Yorkshire and the West Midlands Police. They point
       to the editing of statements taken by the police in 1989 which they say was not put
       before the scrutiny. They consider that all previous hearings are therefore tainted.
       The HFSG ‘evidence’ shows that while there were details of opinion and fact that
       were not put before Lord Taylor (because of the editing that was done by the police
       solicitors in 1989), or were allegedly not considered by the scrutiny, my examination
       of them has not found anything material that would affect the previous CPS
       decisions. Quite simply, there is still no realistic prospect of conviction on the
       allegations of manslaughter and misconduct in a public office. The matter of the
       alleged PCOJ is discussed separately under the evidential test sub-heading.

16.6 The defendants through their legal representatives have asked the CPS to take over
     the proceedings. That should only be done in accordance with the principles set out
     in chapter 7 of Volume 1 of the Prosecution Manual where there is a particular need
     to do so on behalf of the public. Para 7.11 applies and I requested copies of
     relevant papers from the defendants and the prosecutor. These have been supplied,
     although all the parties consider that I or the police have more evidence that would
     be relevant to their case. The South Yorkshire Police have assisted me in the
     obtaining of other material that I wished to consider.

16.7   In view of my conclusions as to the prospect of conviction it follows that it would
        not be appropriate to take over the case in order to prosecute it under para 7.12.

16.8   Para 7.13 pointed me towards the provisions of para 7.8 and 7.10 in the taking over
       of a prosecution in order to discontinue it. As the overall evidence on the seven
       charges now before the Magistrates’ Court (a short discussion on the merits or
       otherwise of the PCOJ allegation will follow later in the chapter) falls short of the
       evidential sufficiency test set out in the Code for Crown prosecutors, I next
       considered the circumstances for discontinuance:

       i)     There is clearly no case to answer: This is the main question to be
              resolved.

       ii)    The public interest factors tending against prosecution clearly outweigh
              those factors tending in favour; especially a consideration of a malicious
              or vexatious prosecution under section 42 of the Supreme Court Act 1982 as
              amended by section 24 of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985. This
              provision concerns an application by the Attorney General to the High Court
              where it is perceived that a person is instituting a vexatious prosecution. I
              also looked at the delay of 9 years in bringing the criminal prosecution to
              court. While the two defendants may have general health problems, I have
              seen no medical evidence or representations which would affect the decision
              to be made.

       iii)    The prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests of justice: I have
               found nothing to support this point.


                                                                                         51
16.9   The policy guidelines in chapter 7 discuss a duty to take over a private prosecution
       No mention is made about the division of a case into the separate charges, where,
       following the application of para 7.10, only some offences may be suitable for
       taking over and subsequent discontinuance and it would be for the private prosecutor
       to continue with the remainder. However section 23 of the Prosecution of Offences
       Act 1985 describes the power to discontinue where the DPP has the conduct of
       proceedings for an offence. Section 6 of the Act refers only to "criminal
       proceedings" without reference to an offence. As the Director has the power to
       discontinue the proceedings for one offence where she has the conduct of
       proceedings for a number of related matters, it must surely be that the term
       "criminal proceedings" in section 6 should be read as referring to individual charges
       within the total proceedings.    In which case all of the options below may be
       considered:

       i)     Allowing the private prosecution to proceed in its entirety.

       ii)    Taking over the whole of the prosecution in order to discontinue all charges.

       iii)   Taking over only that part of the prosecution where:

              •     there is clearly no case to answer and/or public interest factors apply
                     on a particular charge, for example, on the allegation of the pervert
                     course of justice rather than that of manslaughter/misconduct, or

                     there is clearly no case to answer and/or public interest factors apply
                     against a particular defendant on all the charges against him.

16.10 Para 7.10 shows that the test to be applied is not the two part test from the Code.
      Rather it is a consideration of all the circumstances both as to evidence and the
      noted public interest criteria. These are reviewed below under the various sub­
      headings.

       Application of CPS Policy

16.11 The test of ‘clearly no case to answer’ can be said to be broadly similar in its
      application to the Galbraith Test37 which Archbold accepts as being applicable to
      the Magistrates’ Court:

              "(1) If there is no evidence that the crime alleged has been committed by the
              defendant there is no difficulty - the judge will stop the case. (2) The
              difficulty arises where there is some evidence but it is of a tenuous nature,
              for example, because of inherent weakness or because it is inconsistent with
              other evidence, (a) Where the judge concludes that the prosecution evidence,
              taken at its highest, is such that a jury properly directed could not properly


              R v Galbraith [1981] 73 Cr App R 124 CA referred to in Archbold 1998 at
              paras 4.294 to 297.

                                                                                          52
               convict on it, it is his duty, on a submission being made, to stop the case,
               (b) Where however the prosecution evidence is such that its strength or
               weakness depends on the view to be taken of a witness’s reliability, or other
               matters which are generally speaking within the province of the jury and
               where on one possible view of the facts there is evidence on which the jury
               could properly come to the conclusion that the defendant is guilty, then the
               judge should allow the matter to be tried by the jury" (per Lord Lane CJ).

         A Crown Court case, R v Shippey38, is often quoted to show that the requirement
         to take the prosecution evidence at its highest did not mean "picking out all the
         plums and leaving the duff behind". The judge said that it was necessary to make
         an assessment of the evidence as a whole.

16.12 However the use of the word "clearly" in our present test implies that we have to
      be satisfied (or perhaps in a stronger sense, ‘to be sure’) that there is no case to
      answer before taking over and discontinuing a private prosecution. It is submitted
      that it is a slightly lower standard than the prima facie test used in Galbraith. This
      can be seen as a parallel to the way in which we apply the evidential test from the
      Code, where we do not look for the same high standard of proof that a jury or bench
      of magistrates needs to find before it can convict. If it is considered that the case
      is finely balanced as to the merits then the scales should fall on the side of the
      private prosecutor.

16.13 The test from R v Adomako sets out the four essential elements of gross negligence.
      For the purpose of this review I accept the findings of previous courts and inquiries
      that the first three elements are sufficiently proved; that there was a duty of care by
      the police generally towards the deceased, that there was a breach of that duty, and
      the deaths of the victims then ensued. Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray were the two
      senior officers available to make decisions that would affect the events resulting in
      the death of the fans in the central pens. They were the representatives of the police
      force who were involved in the making of the decision that led to what was
      described as a "blunder of the first magnitude". The general duty of the police force
      as a whole was therefore visited upon them for their specific acts. There was a
      breach of that duty by them, as on an objective assessment of what happened they
      could have prevented the deaths by taking certain actions rather than omitting to act.

16.14 The private prosecutor and I have recently agreed as to what constitutes the alleged
      acts or omissions said to constitute gross negligence. I doubt that the defendants
      would take issue at the narrowing of the grounds. For the purposes of the main
      charges the prosecution say that while the decision to open gate C was a proper one,
      the omission of the two defendants in properly considering where the resultant
      inrush of fans would go and in not taking the necessary action in preventing
      crushing in pens known to be full, was the act of gross negligence.




    38
                R v Shippey ( 1988) Crim L R 767, Turner J.

                                                                                          53
16.15 The fourth element from R v Adomako is whether the act complained of should be
      characterised as gross negligence and therefore a crime. It was held that this is
      supremely a question for the jury. As previously stated in R v Khan the appropriate
      course would be to leave to the jury the four questions posed based on the above
      principles where the allegation is of manslaughter by omission.

       Evidential Test: Manslaughter

16.16 In my view there is clearly evidence that the two officers were negligent. However
      it can at least be argued that their individual culpability differs because of their own
      particular responsibilities for the policing of the match. The evidence for and
      against a prosecution of the officers has been discussed in previous chapters but may
      be summarised in point form below.

       Mr Duckenfield

16.17 For Prosecution:

       •      While it can be said that both officers had a joint responsibility, in the
              circumstances of their respective duties in the control box, to take such
              action as was necessary to secure the safety of the fans and others, it must
              be accepted that it was Mr Duckenfield who had overall responsibility for the
              conduct of the policing at the match as well as an assumed command role
              within the control box itself. Lord Justice Taylor at para 282 of the Interim
              report said that it was Mr Duckenfield’s capacity to take decisions and to
              give orders that seemed to collapse; it was this officer who failed to give the
              necessary consequential orders or to exert any control when the disaster
              occurred.

       •      There was a lack of monitoring of the terraces by the police and in particular
              by this senior officer who had a direct eye-view of the central pens as well
              as by the use of the CCTV monitors.

       •      He failed to realise that there was serious overcrowding or potential
              overcrowding in the central pens prior to gate C being opened.

       •      He failed to consider the foreseeable consequences of allowing a large
              number of fans to enter the ground through gate C without supervision and
              direction.

       •      Hefailed to warn police officers on the concourse of the overcrowding in the
              central pens and of the gate being opened in order to relieve the crush
              outside. If such warning had been given those officers on the concourse
              would have had the opportunity to take the appropriate action as occurred in
               1988.




                                                                                           54
      •      He failed to direct police officers under his overall control to close off the
             access to the central tunnel in order to prevent a foreseeable crushing
             incident.

             He should have realised that the policy of "letting the fans find their own
             level" was not one to apply in the circumstances of this particular match.

16.18 Against Prosecution:

      •     Mr Duckenfield was newly promoted and was in a position where he had to
            depend on the experience of others (especially that of Mr Murray on whom
            he would have leant heavily) in advising him on the policing of this type of
            match. His general experience of policing football matches or of this
            particular stadium was not sufficient to prepare him for problems that had
            not been foreseen in the Operational Order for the match.

      •     Mr Duckenfield was dependent on an operational order that he had no part
            in preparing. It was a virtual copy of the previous year’s order which was
            seen as being satisfactory in the light of the perceived success by senior
            officers of their policing of that match. That there had been some foresight
            of possible crushing in the central pens by junior officers, resulting in the
            tunnel access being blocked, was not known to officers of the rank of
            Inspector or above and therefore did not feature in the considerations for the
            1989 game.

      •     Mr Duckenfield had emphasised at his pre match briefing that the safety of
            the spectators was of paramount importance, although the monitoring of the
            pens to that end was not specifically mentioned. He was entitled to depend
            on other officers under his command to react appropriately. Unfortunately
            some failed to react as they should have done.

      •      In the circumstances of his recent appointment Mr Duckenfield had little
             chance to fully familiarise himself with the detailed layout of the entire
             stadium, and in particular the entrances and exits at the Leppings Lane end.
             He could not be expected to have the knowledge of the ground’s layout that
             would be necessary to make the connection between the opening of gate C
             and the potential serious crushing in the centre pens resulting from the fans’
             use of the tunnel access.

      Mr Murray

16.19 For Prosecution:

      •      Regardless of Mr Duckenfield’s overall command of policing at the match,
             it was Mr Murray that had the experience of the layout of the ground, the
             previous semi-final match in 1988 and also of acting as the officer in charge
             of the Control Room. He had a duty to advise Mr Duckenfield of any
             circumstances within his knowledge that might affect that officer’s decisions.

                                                                                        55
             He failed to discharge that duty.

      •      There was a lack of monitoring of the terraces by the police and specifically
             by Mr Murray who had a direct-eye of the central pens as well as by use of
             the CCTV monitors.

      •      He failed to realise that there was serious overcrowding or potential
             overcrowding in the central pens prior to gate C being opened.

      •      He failed to consider the foreseeable consequences of allowing a large
             number of fans to enter the ground through gate C without supervision and
             direction.

      •      As the officer in charge of communications in the Control Room he failed
             to warn police officers on the concourse of the overcrowding in the central
             pens and of the gate being opened in order to relieve the crush. If such
             warning had been given those officers on the concourse would have had the
             opportunity to take appropriate action as occurred in 1988.

      •      He failed to direct police officers under his control to close off the access to
             the central tunnel in order to prevent a foreseeable crushing incident.

      •      He should have realised that the policy of "letting the fans find their own
             level" was not one to apply in the circumstances of this particular match.

16.20 Against Prosecution:

      •      Mr Murray was only acting in an advisory role when considering the
             decision to open gate C. This is as advised by Counsel at para 49 of their
             joint opinion of 1990. It was Mr Duckenfield’s responsibility alone for the
             serious error in failing to give any order to accommodate the influx. The
             officer saw his role as monitoring the event as a whole, being responsible for
             the reception and the transmission of all radio communications and as an
              adviser to Mr Duckenfield. Para 282 of the Interim Report appears to
              endorse this point of view.

      •      Mr Murray did attempt of his own volition to warn the Club Security Officer
             of the crushing outside prior to the opening of gate C but was unable to send
             a message on the radio due to temporary communication problems. By the
             time the communications were restored it was too late to control the tunnel
             access.

      •      Mr Murray did attempt to prompt his senior officer into making the decision
             as to the opening of gate C when time was of the essence in alleviating the
             crush outside.

16.21 The following factors are of general application and apply equally to both officers
      as mitigating against a prosecution:

                                                                                           56
       •     It was not surprising that the two senior officers did not notice that the
              central pens were "full" prior to the opening of the gate as overcrowding was
              not apparent to almost all other observers.

              At the time of the opening of gate C, the attention of both officers was on
              the obvious life threatening situation of the crush by the turnstiles. Their
              failure to take an all round view of this incident instead of a single minded
              concentration on the gate is perhaps understandable and should make them
              liable for negligence in civil law only. Their attention was focused on a
              known risk of serious injury or death outside the gate, to the prejudice of any
              regard of the possible risk inside the ground if the further correct action was
              not taken. What is obvious in hindsight was difficult to appreciate as the
              emergency was unrolling.

       •     Although the main cause of the disaster is placed at the door of the police
             generally, the individual actions of Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray form
             only a part of that liability. The congestion outside the turnstiles that led to
             gate C being opened had a number of causes that were for the most part
             outside the control of the two defendants. Other persons should take a
             greater share in the blame as was recognised by the scrutiny.

       •     There is no new evidence that might have affected the verdicts of the Inquest
             jury. They were not misled as a result of any alleged suppression of
             evidence by the police. They rejected the option of verdicts of unlawful
             killing based on the criminal standard of proof Their verdicts were of
             accidental death on the balance of probabilities. Therefore it can be argued
             that the jury found that they had sufficient information before them to reject
             even a prima facie case of unlawful killing. If they had not then it is
             submitted that they would otherwise have brought open verdicts.

       Public Interest Circumstances for Manslaughter

16.22 While some might have a view that the prosecution by the HFSG is being
      undertaken for reasons of revenge, or a perverse desire to obtain ‘justice’ that
      allegedly is being denied them, the HFSG are properly taking the various legal
      channels open to them. That others may disagree is part of the judicial process. I
      recognise the considerable distress that members of the HFSG have suffered since
      the disaster, and do not consider that their private prosecution is either malicious or
      vexatious.

16.23 Delay is said to be a relevant factor. After 9 years the memories of witnesses may
      have faded or been coloured by what has happened since. However the allegations
      are extremely serious and on the basis of the large number of written statements
      taken at the time on each and every aspect of the disaster, I accept that those
      memories can be sufficiently refreshed to alleviate the problem.

16.24 There is no medical evidence which would justify serious consideration as a factor
      against prosecution.

                                                                                          57
         Misconduct in a Public Office

16.25 The evidential and public interest considerations are as above.

         Evidential Test: Perverting the Course of Justice

16.26 This is a new allegation which has not featured in previous reviews. The ‘lie’ about
      gate C being forced by the fans has been admitted by Mr Duckenfield but with a
      number of explanations (i) that he was not being deceitful but may have referred to
      an earlier time when the gate was briefly forced open, and (ii) he was in shock and
      wanted to collect his thoughts and assess the situation before communicating the
      truth. Lord Taylor may have been close to the truth when he gave his assessment
      that the officer could not face the enormity of the decision to open the gates and
      what happened afterwards: "He froze"39

16.27 I consider that in the circumstances the deliberate misdirection of the various
      witnesses, including his own Assistant Chief Constable, was conduct that might have
      had the tendency to pervert the course of public justice. That judicial proceedings
      were going to result from the disaster was not just a possibility it was a certainty40,
      and must have been within Mr Duckenfield’s contemplation. However the ‘lie’ had
      no impact on judicial proceedings except to bring vilification upon the officer.
      Further I have grave concern about the proof required to show that Mr Duckenfield
      intended to pervert the course of justice. There is no good and sufficient evidence
      that the officer was attempting a cover up of his own and other police actions at
      1515 on the day as victims were still dying on the field. Lord Taylor had the
      opportunity to observe Mr Duckenfield and the relevant witnesses on this point
      during his Inquiry. His conclusions were the result of those observations coupled
      with his vast experience. I find nothing in the evidence that would bring me to any
      other conclusion. Mr Duckenfield could not cope with the great stress he was put
      under, his reaction was out of character. He did not have the intent necessary so as
      to have a realistic prospect of conviction on this allegation. For that reason I do not
      go to consider the public interest test from the Code. However policy guidelines are
      that this offence is reserved for the more serious cases of interference with the
      course of justice rather than where proceedings are at an early stage (or had not
      started), and there was little impact on them.

16.28 The above argument applies equally to the consideration of the test for taking over
      the case in order to discontinue it, both as regards the quality of the evidence and
      also the stated policy on the public interest (where those two matters should be
      applied together).




    39
               See page 24 of this review.
    40
               See R v Raflque at page 10 of this review.

                                                                                          58
       The Interests of Justice

16.29 I have found no factors that would affect any of the CPS recommendations as being
      clearly likely to damage the interests of justice. None of the stated examples in para
      7.10 of Volume 1 of the CPS Prosecution Manual apply. Although disclosure may
      involve voluminous material, it should not pose any real difficulty. Documents
      subject to claims of public interest immunity or legal privilege can be dealt .with
      under the normal rules applicable to third party disclosure.




                                                                                         59
17.    RECOMMENDATIONS

       Mr Duckenfield

17.1   On the charges of manslaughter and misconduct in a public office I find that while
       there is both insufficient evidence for a realistic prospect of conviction and for a
       prima facie case (on the balance of probabilities), there is some evidence of
       negligence that can be put before a jury. I am unable to say that there is clearly no
       case to answer. In coming to this opinion I have taken into account not only the
       verdicts of the jury but also the Coroner’s summing up and his consideration that
       there was some evidence to go before the jury on the question of unlawful killings.

       Recommendation: That the private prosecution be allowed to continue on these
       three charges.

17.2   As regards the PCOJ, this charge adds little to the private prosecutor’s case. In my
       opinion there is clearly no case to answer as well as there being valid public interest
       factors against this matter proceeding. There is no evidence of the required intent
       and I do not consider that in the circumstances of the timing of the ‘lie’ being
       within minutes of the deaths in the pens that it can be inferred that the officer had
       then formed such intent. There is no evidence that the subsequent investigation was
       in any way imperilled. The ‘lie’ only brought vilification from the media and the
       public upon the officer and his police force.

       Recommendation: That this part of the proceedings be taken over and then
       discontinued.

       Mr Murray

17.3   I consider that the individual responsibility of this officer for the omission to act
       after gate C was opened is less than that of Mr Duckenfield. Mr Murray deferred
       to his superior for the making of the crucial decision, although he quite properly
       prompted him when delay set in. While I note Lord Taylor’s comments about the
       joint misjudgment by the two officers concerning the buildup of fans at the
       turnstiles, he appears then to place the blame for the failure to give orders
       consequential to the opening of the gate at the feet of Mr Duckenfield. I also
        appreciate that in 1990 our two Counsel were of the opinion that the sole blame for
       the omission to act after the gate was opened lies with Mr Duckenfield. However
       it was Mr Murray who had the most recent and extensive knowledge of the ground
        and he failed to pass on the benefit of his experience because he too was distracted
       by the serious incident outside. Even though the evidence is weaker against this
        officer than against his superior and the balancing act is therefore more difficult, I
        am still unable to say that there is ‘clearly no case to answer’. Where the decision
        is as close as this then it is my submission that the benefit must fall to the
        prosecutor.

       Recommendation: That the private prosecution be allowed to continue on these
       three charges.

                                                                                           60
       Disclosure

17.4   The disclosure of material in our possession should normally follow in accordance
       with our stated policy.    TheSouth Yorkshire Police are likely to require advice
       based on the voluntarydisclosure that we may decide to give. A number of the
       documents in this case that would usually attract public interest immunity or legal
       privilege have already beendivulged in whole or part. It will be necessary to
       consider the issues involved and the relevance of the information and opinion
       contained within those documents. The HFSG wish to obtain a copy of the joint
       opinion as well as the various CPS reports in the case. When appropriate our
       material may be inspected at York by prior arrangement.




                                                                                       61
18.    CONCLUSIONS

18.1   My review of all the evidence and representations has caused me some difficulty as
       I find that there is a fine balance between the arguments for and against. It is a
       matter of judgement as to whether or not there is clearly no case to answer (in
       conjunction with the public interest factors) on the issue o f gross negligence. I
       accept that another reviewing lawyer could come to a different, although still
       justifiable, decision. It may be that the Director has certain policy views that would
       affect his decision.

18.2   The potential ramifications of the various decision options are:

       (i)     Decision to take over and discontinue the case in its entirety: The HFSG will
               take the matter to judicial review of the CPS decision.

       (ii)    Decision to let the private prosecution proceed in its entirety: The defendants
               are unlikely to proceed by way of judicial review of the CPS decision. They
               have already intimated that they are prepared to put forward abuse of process
               arguments to the Magistrates’ Court. A committal will be strongly contested,
               and if my arguments are correct will fail.

       (iii)   Decision to accept the review recommendations: There would be pressure on
               the HFSG to decide between continuing with the remaining charges or
               accepting delay while they go to the Divisional Court. Those representing
               Mr Duckenfield would have more fuel for their abuse of process arguments
               on a fair trial.

18.3   Whatever our decision may be, if the eventual proceedings are not favourable to the
       HFSG they are most likely to take further action, either by way of their
       representations that all previous judicial proceedings are invalid because of an
       alleged conspiracy by the police to suppress evidence, or by use of the European
       Convention on Human Rights.




George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
CPS Central Casework

27 October 1998




                                                                                           62
  HILLSBOROUGH REPORT




       APPENDIX 1




1990 BRIEFING NOTE FOR THE
     ATTORNEY GENERAL
ATTORNEY GENERAL

               Background Note: Hillsborough Disaster


1.      On the 15th April 1989 at the Hillsborough stadium,
        Sheffield 95 people died and over 400 were injured due to
        gross overcrowding and crushing in the two pens behind
        the goal at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

2.      A public enquiry headed by Lord Justice Taylor produced
        an interim report in August 1989. The West Midlands
        Police assisted in the preparation of the report and
        later conducted a criminal investigation which was
        requested by the D.P.P.  The criminal investigation was
        extensive producing bulky documentation and a full
        transcript of the evidence given at the enquiry.   The
        police investigation was meticulous.

3.      A copy of Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report and a copy
        of Counsel's opinion by Gareth Williams Q.C. and Peter
        Birts Q.C. are attached.  It would be useful to refer to
        the plans at Appendix 1 and Appendix 4 of the report.


Facts

4.      There is little, if any, dispute as to what actually
        happened.Chief Superintendent Duckenfield was the police
        officer responsible for policing the match.

5.      At 2.52 pm (8 minutes before kick-off) Duckenfield
        ordered one of the exit gates, Gate C, at the Leppings
        Lane end to be opened.  This was to relieve massive
        overcrowding and crushing at the turnstiles caused by a
        build up of supporters arriving after 2.30 pm.  In the
        five minutes after the gate was opened 2000 supporters
        entered the ground and went into a tunnel under the west
        stand which gave access only to the central pens 3 and 4.
        Those pens were already full.  There was no controlled
        way in which supporters were allowed in to the p en s. The
        additional influx caused intense pressure and resulted in
        the collapse of a crush barrier 124A near the front of
        pen 3. Many died from suffocation and crushing and some
        were trampled on. Perimeter gates were not opened by the
        police partly because of orders not to do so without
        permission and partly because officers did not appreciate
        the severity of what was occurring initially.  Later when
        the emergency was appreciated the small size and number
        of the gates made evacuation extremely difficult.

6.      The build up of fans outside the ground was due to the
        geography of the turnstiles, their marking and numbers
        and to a loss of police control of supporters outside
        becoming keen to get inside before the kick-off.
7.    The three major causal factors w e r e :-

      i.   the layout of the ground
      ii. the opening of the exit gate (gate C)
      iii. the build up outside the ground

Layout of the Ground

8.    The club were advised by a structural engineer, Dr
      Eastwood.  The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 required
      expert advice to obtain a safety certificate under the
      Act from the local council.  Dr Eastwood advised
      additional crush barriers, these were installed in 1979.
      A certificate was granted.

9.    The safety certificate did not specify maximum numbers
      for the pens.  This, with turnstile monitoring of
      numbers, would have limited entrance to the pens.

10.   It was the policy of the police at semi-finals to allow
      movement of supporters between pens before the kick-off
      after which the radial gates would be closed and locked.
      Hence without a control on the numbers entering the
      tunnel access pens 3 and 4 were liable to become grossly
      overcrowded.  The police had accepted responsibility for
      monitoring the pens and their policy of "letting the fans
      find their own level" was severely criticized by Taylor.

11.   The exit gate C, opened following Duckenfield's
      instruction, is opposite the tunnel.  No steps were taken
      to cordon off the tunnel or divert the fans around the
      sides of the West stand.  The supporters had nowhere to
      go but the already crowded pens 3 and 4.

12.   At 3.04 pm a surge forward in pen 3 caused the crush
      barrier 124A to break.  This appears to have been a major
      factor in the deaths since there were far fewer deaths in
      pen 4 where no barrier collapsed.  Barrier number 144 had
      been removed in 1986, its absence meant there was no
      retarding structure as fans emerged from the tunnel into
      pen 3. There was unbroken diagonal pressure from the
      mouth of the tunnel down to barrier 124A.  the collapse
      of barrier 124A was a major factor in the cause of the
      deaths. Barrier 124A was slightly corroded but it had
      been tested in July 1988 and had passed loading tests
      specified in the Government's Green Guide.  Taylor found
      that corrosion played a part in the collapse but the
      effective cause was the excessive unanticipated pressure
      exerted at the time of the forward surge.

13.   The crushing in pens 3 and 4 was not recognised by police
      either in the control box or on the perimeter of the
      pitch.  Even supporters nearby, broadcasters and stewards
      were not immediately aware.

14.   Even after the crush, and until 3.06 pm, the main police
      concern was to prevent a pitch invasion.
The build up outside the Ground

15.   The opening of gate C which precipitated the disaster was
      made necessary by the massive build up of supporters at
      the Leppings Lane turnstiles between 2.30 and 2.50 pm.
      As kick-off time approached the crushing increased. The
      police lost control of the crowd.  The crush became
      unmanageable, many feared for their lives.  The kick-Qff
      was not postponed.  This course was only to be taken if
      there was a major cause of delay eg. a motorway accident
      or fog.  Taylor concluded that the kick-off should have
      been postponed.

16.   There was considerable evidence that people would be
      killed if gate C was not opened and that Duckenfield had
      no alternative but to do so. That being so neither
      Duckenfield nor other officers took any steps to deal
      with the consequences of opening the gate.  The tunnel
      was not closed off even though such action had been taken
      by the police in 1988. Duckenfield did order the influx
      at gate A, which had been opened earlier, to be
      monitored.  His omission to do so at gate C was said by
      Taylor to be "a blunder of the first magnitude". This
      was the immediate cause of the crushing in pens 3 and 4.
      It was not the sole cause.

17.   The layout of the turnstiles, inadequate space for the
      formation of orderly queues and the limited extent of the
      waiting area combined with poor designation and marking
      of turnstiles contributed to slow turnstile operation.

18.   There were only 7 turnstiles to admit 10,100 fans at the
      other end of the ground there were 60 turnstiles to admit
      29,800.  Taylor concluded that the police and club should
      have foreseen potential .queuing and waiting to admit
      fans.

19.   Many supporters arrived after 2.30 pm.   Tickets advised
      arriving 15 minutes before kick-off. Some arrived
      without tickets.   The evidence shows many had been
      drinking.   Taylor concluded the majority had not been
      affected by drink.   Unruliness contributed to the pushing
      effect.   This contributed to the loss of control by the
      police.
20.   The main factor in the police loss of control was
      ineffective strategy planning for the large number of
      arrivals. Taylor concluded that by controlling the fans
      and postponing the kick-off gate C could have remained
      closed.

Responsibilities

21.   The layout of the ground was the responsibility of the
      Club, Eastwood, the Council and the police.  No one
      foresaw that up to 2000 fans would ever be allowed to
      enter pens 3 and 4 when they were already overcrowded.
      No one anticipated gate 3 being opened or the crushing
       outside the ground.  The police must take the main
       responsibility for letting the fans "find their own
       level", however, the Club must share responsibility for
       the way in which supporters were allowed to fill the pens
       at semi-finals.

22.    The opening of gate C was Duckenfield's responsibility.
       In the circumstances his decision was correct.  His
       failure was to give no order to deal with the sudden
       influx of fans.  Had the tunnel been cordoned off the'
       disaster would almost certainly have been averted.

23..   The layout of the turnstiles, their numbers and marking
       are primarily matters for the police and the Club, but
       the Council have a partial responsibility to ensure safe
       access to the ground.

Criminal Offences

24.    The two offences would be Manslaughter and Culpable
       Misfeasance.  These potential offences were considered
       against all parties, ie. the club, the Council, the
       police and the structural engineers (Mr Eastwood).

The Club

25.    The Club's responsibility for the layout and alterations
       inside the ground and for the layout of the turnstiles is
       where any potential liability exists.  It is clear that
       these were not the sole, or even the major causes and
       that any actions and omissions by the club only partly
       contributed to the crushing and deaths. The Club not
       only relied on its own consultant engineer Dr Eastwood
       but it responded to the suggestions and advice of the
       police in important matters.

26.    There is insufficient evidence to establish the actus
       reus of manslaughter against the Club.  Additionally the
       evidence does not show either the recklessness or gross
       negligence required for the manslaughter offence.
Eastwood and Partners

27.   Eastwood's advice formed only part of the events that
      lead tot he structural condition at the groujid. It could
      not be said that his advice caused the deaths. In fact
      some of his advice, not acted on for financial reasons,
      may have lead to maximum limits being set for pens 3 and
      4.

28.   Again there is insufficient for the actus reus of
      manslaughter nor can the required recklessness or
      negligence be established against Eastwood or his firm.

The Council

29.   The Council is responsible for the safety certificate and
      compliance with the Green Guide.  There were minor errors
      on the council's part but these only contributed in part
      to the ground conditions.   These are too remote to
      amount to the actus reus of manslaughter. Again there is
      no evidence of recklessness or gross negligence.

The Police

30.   It is agreed that the main responsibility for the
      disaster must rest with the police. They have partial
      responsibility for the ground layout. They were
      responsible for the "find their own level" policy with
      the supporters and also for supervising the Leppings Lane
      turnstiles.  The difficulties of large scale admission to
      the ground should have been foreseen.  However, the
      police failures occurred as part of a complex sequence of
      events, often outside the control of the police.  The
      difficulties at Leppings Lane were partly geographical
      and resulted largely in the arrival of vast numbers of
      supporters after 2.30 pm.  Those matters were beyond
      police control.  Unruly behaviour by a minority created
      problems.

31.   Responsibility for the failure to postpone the kick-off
      and to cordon off the access tunnel is confined to
      Duckenfield. As an organisation the police cannot be
      said to have caused the deaths by their strategy and
      operational shortcomings. Whilst there were errors of
      judgement/ and practice there is no evidence that the
      police acted recklessly or in a grossly negligent manner
      as an organisation.

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield

32.   The failure to cordon off the access tunnel and not to
      postpone the kick-off were bad errors of judgement.  They
      were his ultimate responsibility.  He failed to notice
      the overcrowding in pens 3 and 4. He was recently
      promoted and had little experience for this semi-final
      match. His slowness to respond to what was happening was
      a result of is lack of experience.
33.   His failures significantly contributed to the crowd
      pressure which caused the crushing and collapse of
      barrier 124A. Had-Duckenfield the requisite intention to
      support a charge of manslaughter? Clearly there was no
      unlawful or dangerous act on his part.  In failing to
      postpone the kick-off or order closure of the tunnel
      after opening gate C did he do an act which created an
      obvious and serious risk of causing personal injury
      either not giving thought to the possibility of such risk
      or having recognised that there was some risk involved
      nevertheless gone ahead and taken it?

34.   There are difficulties in proving that he intended to do
      an act which created an obvious and serious risk of
      causing personal injury.  The Director and Counsel
      concluded that it was not an obvious risk at the time.
      It is easy with hindsight to judge, but there must be a
      grave doubt as to whether the omissions created a risk
      which was obvious to anyone on the ground at the t im e.

35.   The Director concluded that there was insufficient
      evidence under the recklessness head of manslaughter
      against Duckenfield.  Nor was there evidence that he was
      grossly negligent in his failures to act.

36.   Counsel and the Director concluded that there was no
      evidence that Duckenfield was wilfully neglectful of his
      duty or was culpable so have to committed the offence of
      Culpable Malfeasance by a public official.

Conclusions

37.   The Director's decision not to issue proceedings was
      reached solely on the basis of an insufficiency of
      evidence to prove any criminal offence against any
      individual or body corporate ie. the City Council, the
      Police, the Engineers.   The decision was reached in
      accordance with the Director's code for Crown
      Prosecutors. The Public Interest factor was not one
      which came into play as the evidential sufficiency
      criterium had not been established in respect of any
      potential defendant.   Full consideration was given to the
      possibility of the proseuction of each of the bodies
      involved despite their corporate status.

38.   The disaster was caused not by one single error or
      failure but by the combined effect of a series of
      mistakes, misjudgments and poor decisions, made by groups
      of people both over a period of time and by individuals
      on the day of the disaster.

Coroner's Inquests

39.   The Inquests began after the disaster and were adjourned
      when the Director requested a criminal investigation.
      The Coroner is obliged to adjourn an inquest when the
      Director makes such a request under the Coroner's Rules.
                                 *7.


      Once the Coroner has received notification that the
      Director has decided not to issue criminal proceedings
      (or after such proceedings have concluded) the Coroner
      may resume the Inquest hearing.  The Hillsborough Inquest
      recently recommenced in November 1990.  The latest
      estimate is that the Inquests will continue hearing
      evidence and are likely to conclude in March 1991.

40.   The point made by Kenneth Hind MP about the matter being
      forgotten if action is not taken against those
      responsible can be answered by pointing to the detailed
      interim and final report of the Public Inquiry conducted
      by Lord Justice Taylor, the civil proceedings at which
      the police admitted liability and the fact that
      disciplinary action is being considered by the Police
      Complaints Authority against various officers.

41.   The Coroner's jury may be influenced by the publicity
      surrounding the Director's decision.  The criminal
      investigation and any prosecution must take precedence
      over the Coroner's Inquisitorial hearing where no
      individual can be held responsible.  The Public Inquiry
      itself has been widely reported and such publicity can
      also be said to influence the jury's conclusions.
 HILLSBOROUGH REPORT




       APPENDIX 2




 SCHEDULE OF MATERIAL
CONSIDERED IN 1998 REVIEW
                          HILLSBOROUGH REPORT

       SCHEDULE OF MATERIAL CONSIDERED IN THE 1998 REVIEW



Number     Description of Item

1.         Taylor Inquiry Interim Report

2.         Taylor Inquiry Final Report

3.         Inquiry Transcripts:          Evidence of Duckenfield, Murray & others

4.         West Midlands PoliceInterim Report 2

5.         West Midlands Police Report:        Part I       Introduction
                                               Part II      Statements & documents
                                               Part VII     Report conclusions
                                               Appendices    Transcripts of interviews

6.         Joint Opinion of Counsel (1990)

7.         Coroner’s Summing Up

8.         Inquest Transcripts:                Evidence of Duckenfield,       Murray,
                                               Kelly and Jackson

9.         Judgement of the Divisional Court

10.        HFSG Files and Representations (1997)

11 .       CPS Review Report (1997)

12,        Report of the Scrutiny

13.        HFSG Files and Representations (1998)

14.        Defence Representations
