                                                   THE LEGAL SECRETARIAT T O THE L A W OFFICERS

                                                                   ATTORNEY GENERAL'S CHAMBERS

                                                                              9 BUCKINGHAM GATE

                                                                                LONDON SW1E 6JP
General enquiries 0171-271 2400
Direct line           0171-                              r\

          C W P Newell Esq
                                                         H v   .
          D irector of Casework Evaluation
           and Chief Inspector
          Crown Prosecution Service
          H eadquarters
          50 Ludgate Hill                                Yxa .        s . vdUcs
          London EC4M 7 EX

          18 Decem ber 1998                                l/~€—-»        |                     ^
                                                                                      ^   o a   _g >


                  _ 0-
                                  }    ^ (2^x71 l/^w (                    ^               *
                                                                                    Ojiu
                                                                                    , , , .            //x .
          AJsBEJ&TON  v    DUCKENFIELD      AND                MURRAY          (PRIVATE
          PROSECUTION): HILLSBOROUGH 1 9 8 9

          I write in response to your letter of 3 Decem ber 1998 w hich }'ou
          discussed w ith the Attorney General in his room a t the House of
          Commons yesterday.

          The Attorney G eneral h a s carefully considered your letter an d its
          enclosures.    He endorses the approach adopted by the Crown
          Prosecution Service an d the conclusion it h as reached. D uring the
          discussion, he specifically confirm ed his view th a t, even if it is lawfully
          open to the CPS to effect a partial intervention, it would not be
          appropriate to do so in the circum stances of this p articu lar case. He has
          noted the em phasis placed by those who seek discontinuance on the p ast
          history of the m atter. He is fortified in the conclusion reached by the
          CPS and him self in th a t the courts have in recent years developed a very
          wide approach to the doctrine of ab u se of process su ch th a t these
          m atters would be susceptible to a judicial remedy. Such consideration
          would be on an in te r-p a rse s basis and after argum ent. The Attorney
          General considers th a t to be an additional reason for n o t intervening.




          S J WOOLER
          S W / 1 8 1 2 /2
17/12 '98     15:34     Q*(                           CPS 4th floor                                1^002




       The Clerk to the Justices
       Leeds Magistrates Court
       P O Box 97
       Weslgate
       LEEDS
       LSI 3JP                                                                  YBF/GC/3341/89



                                                                           18 December 1998


        Dear Sir,


        RE:       ADDLINGTON V DUCKENFIELD and MURRAY
                  LEEDS MAGISTRATES COURT-21 DECEMBER 1998


        In early July 1998, the solicitors for the defendants wrote to the Crown Prosecution
        Service asking that we take over and discontinue the criminal proceedings against
        their clients which have been brought on behalf of the Hillsborough Family Support
        Group.

        We have considered thi s request in detail

            Mr. Duckenfield faces two charges of manslaughter, one of wilful neglect to perform
            a public duty and one charge of attempting to pervert the course of justice. Mr.
            Murray faces two charges of manslaughter and one of wilful neglect to perform a
            public duty.

            We have considered the evidence, the representations made by the parties and all the
            surrounding circumstances of the case. We have concluded that we should not
            intervene to take over any of the charges.

            For your information I enclose a copy of a press release.

            Yours faithfully,




            Christopher H. Enzor
            Branch Crown Prosecutor
/I2    98   15:34     ©C                            CPS 4th floor                                      ® 003




  Ms Ann Adlington
  Hillsborough Family Support                                              ^
  Group
  1st Floor, Central Buildings                                             ]
  41 North John Street
  Liverpool                                                                YBP/3341/89
  L2 6RR


                                                                            18 December 1998




      Dear Madam

      RE:    ADLINGTON v. DUCKENFIELD and MURRAY -
             LEEDS MAGISTRATES’ COURT - 21 DECEMBER 1998

      In early July 1998, the solicitors for the defendants both asked the Crown Prosecution Scrvice
      to take over and discontinue the criminal proceedings against Messrs. Duckenfield and
      Murray brought by you on behalf of the Hillsborough Family Support Group.

      Mr. Duckenfield faces two charges of manslaughter, one of wilful neglect to perform a public
      duty and one charge of attempting to pervert the course o f justice. Mr. Murray iaces two
      charges of manslaughter and one of wilful neglect to perform a public duty.

      That request has been considered in detail by the Crown Prosecution Service. We have
      considered the evidence, the representations made by the parties and all the surrounding
      circumstances of the ease. We have concludcd that we should not intervene to take over any
      of the charges.

      For your information I enclose a copy of a press release.

      Yours faithfully,




      Christopher H. Enzor
      Branch Crown Prosecutor
/12 '98   15:35     ©                             CPS 4th floor                                    ® 004




  Walker Moms
  Kings Court
  12 King Street
  LEEDS
  LSI 2M.L
                                                                        YBF/GC/3341/89




   Dear Sirs,


   RE:    ADDLINGTON V DUCKENFIELD and MURRAY
          LEEDS MAGISTRATES COURT - 12 DECEMBER 1998


   In early July 1998, you wrote to the Crown Prosecution Service asking that we take over, in
   order to discontinue, the criminal proceedings against your client which have been brought on
   behalf of the Hillsborough Family Support Group.

   We have considered this request in detail.

    Mr. Dnckenfield faces two charges of manslaughter, one of wilful neglect to perform a public
    duty and one chargc of attempting to pervert the course of justice. Mr. Murray faces two
    charges of manslaughter and one of wilful neglect to perform a public duty.

    We have considered the evidence, the representations made by the parties and all the
    surrounding circumstances of the case. We have concluded that we should not intervene to
    take over any of the charges.

    For your information 1 enclose a copy of a press release.

    Yours faithfully,




    Christopher H. Enzor
    Branch Crown Prosecutor
/I2 '98   15:35     ©                             CPS 4th floor                                    @ 005




  Winkworth Sherwood
  35 Great Peter Street                                                -----------
  Westminster
  LONDON
  SW1P 3LR
                                                                        YBF/GC/3341/89



                                                                         18 Novb^nber 1998




   Dear Sir,


   RE:    ADDL1NGTON V DUCKENFIELD and MURRAY
          LEEDS MAGISTRATES COURT - 21 DECEMBER 1998


   In early July 1998, you wrote to the Crown Prosecution Service asking that we take over, in
   order to discontinue, the criminal proceedings against your client which have been brought on
   behalf of the Hillsborough Family Support Group.

    We have considered this request in detail.

    Mr. DuckenCeld faces two charges of manslaughter, one of wilful neglect to perform a public
    duty and one charge of attempting to pervert the course of justice. Mr. Murray faces two
    charges of manslaughter and one of wilful neglect to perform a public duty.

    We have considered the evidence, the representations made by the parties and all the
    surrounding circumstances of the case. We have concluded that we should not intervene to
    take over any of the chargcs.

    For your information I enclose a copy of a press release.

    Yours faithfully,




    Christopher H. Enzor
    Branch Crown Prosecutor
