                                                j u   r .   C   ,




                                                      Ik v o        H t C M /S k

                                                ■; TKA i'i :v"->
                                                  G y o J tW i             K       p /V '


                                                                tv#w^ Ua4S^ I’0
                                                       C>(x/v         vi    '■'in{       ,: 1
                                                                                   1
                              THE        [j^i
                                     T ill?
                                     I l l JL
                                         [J^ | ja/Vwo. fei/Jl 64
                       'HILLSBOROUGH?/> r
                            REPORT Jin_ f / ^
                                                      ^ ^V vL                            J

                                     1 9 9 8                                   ^       \ }   ^   ^   f




A

         JX'Tr^A-         fl'cJ^C-
s7 ? \    c J k "i :

         1 - !l        ikce-uJUv.




Prepared at CPS C en tral Casew ork, Y ork
                       HILLSBOROUGH REPORT

LIST OF CONTENTS                                                   R^e


Chapter 1    The Background                                        2-3

Chapter 2    The Private Prosecution                               4-5

Chapter 3    Charges                                               6-7

Chapter 4    The Law                                              8-10

Chapter 5    CPS Policy                                          11-13

Chapter 6    The Taylor Inquiry & Initial Police Investigation   14-24

Chapter 7    The Criminal Investigation                          25-27

Chapter 8    CPS Review o f 1990                                 28-31

Chapter 9    The Inquests                                        32-35

Chapter 10   The Attorney General & JudicialReview                  36

Chapter 11   The New Evidence                                       37

Chapter 12   CPS Review o f 1997                                    38

Chapter 13   The Scrutiny                                        39-42

Chapter 14   The HFSG Representations                            43-47

Chapter 15   The Defence Representations                         48-49

Chapter 16   Key Considerations for the CPS Review               50-57

Chapter 17   Recommendations                                        58

Chapter 18   Conclusions                                            59




Appendix 1   1990 Briefing Note for the Attorney General

Appendix 2   Schedule o f material considered in 1998 Review




                                                                     1
1.    THE BACKGROUND

1.1   While the main facts o f the Hillsborough Disaster in 1989 may be familiar to the
      reader, the more detailed background note which was prepared for the Attorney
      General in 1990 is attached at Appendix 1.

1.2   The relevant history o f the various judicial inquiries and hearings will be dealt with
      comprehensively in later chapters. However in brief, following the Taylor Inquiry
      the South Yorkshire Police accepted that they (with others) had civil liability for the
      negligence o f some o f their police officers involved in the events o f 15 April 1989.
      The Chief Constable o f the West Midlands Police had assisted the Taylor Inquiry
      in the initial enquiries and in the taking o f statements from the many witnesses.

1.3   The then Director o f Public Prosecutions considered the recommendations contained
      within Lord Justice Taylor’s Interim Report and asked the South Yorkshire Police
      to conduct a full criminal enquiry. As the West Midlands Police had been appointed
      to conduct the initial investigation, the Chief Constable o f South Yorkshire Police
      requested that they also conduct the criminal investigation as being an independent
      investigating force. This was agreed and in 1990 a report was supplied by the West
      Midlands Police to the Director who then asked two leading counsel for a joint
      advice as to the merits o f a criminal prosecution against any organisations or
      individuals. Counsels’ view was that there was no sufficient evidence to support
      criminal proceedings o f any kind against either the police or civilians whether as
      individuals or as an organisation. The Director was in agreement with this advice
      and a Press Release released on his behalf stated that there was "insufficient
      evidence to justify the institution o f proceedings against any officer in the South
      Yorkshire Police Force or any other person for any offence".

1.4   The Coroner’s Inquests, which had been adjourned pending the CPS decision, were
      resumed. In early 1991 verdicts o f accidental death were returned. In 1992 an
      application for judicial review o f the Inquests was refused and the Divisional Court
      held that the inquisition was correctly completed and that the Coroner’s direction to
      the jury was "impeccable".

1.5   There the matter rested until in December 1996 when a drama documentary o f the
      disaster was shown on national television. It specifically mentioned allegations o f
      a cover-up by the police re their knowledge o f crowd density in the two central
      Leppings Lane terrace pens where 96 people died. The Home Secretary became
      involved by way o f an Adjournment Debate in the House and requested the
      assistance o f the South Yorkshire Police in answering ten questions concerning the
      disaster. In January 1997 the CPS asked for a preliminary briefing from the police
      on the impact o f any new material facts.

1.6   In March 1997 the Hillsborough Family Support Group (HFSG) sent to the Director
      a large volume o f papers concerning what was said to be fresh evidence. In their
      supporting letter the HFSG said that the pre-production research for the television
      programme and its subsequent airing had brought to light this fresh evidence and/or

                                                                                           2
       new witnesses proving that suppression o f evidence, peijury and conspiracy to
       pervert the course o f justice featured in the legal process that followed the disaster.
       A number o f letters had also been received from families o f some o f the deceased
       requesting a re-examination o f the circumstances o f the tragic events.

1.7    Following consultation between the CPS, the LSLO and the Home Office it was
       decided that while each o f the various Government Departments should form their
       own judgement in relation to the discharge o f their own duties, there would be a
       co-ordinated response to the HFSG representations.

1.8    The report o f the CPS Review was submitted to the Director via the Chief Crown
       Prosecutor for Central Casework in early May 1997. It concluded that there was no
       sufficient evidence on allegations o f suppression o f either video or medical evidence.
       Accordingly there were no grounds for the CPS to recommend to the Home Office
       that there should be further investigation o f criminal allegations against the police
       or other persons. In June 1997, in a statement to the House, the Home Secretary
       said that his department, the Attorney General and the CPS had carefully considered
       the evidence recently put forward and had been unable to find anything which would
       have materially affected the outcome o f any o f the investigations into the disaster.

1.9    He then appointed Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to conduct a scrutiny into whether there
       was any fresh evidence which might have a bearing on the various legal procedures
       and decisions that had been taken. The resulting scrutiny report is a very detailed
       review o f both old and new evidence and concludes that nothing the judge was
       asked to consider added anything significant to the evidence available to Lord
       Taylor’s Inquiry or to the Inquests. In particular there was no material which should
       be put before the Director which might cause her to reconsider the decision already
       taken.

1.10   Previously there had been an intimation that if the HFSG did not receive the
       ‘justice’ to which they felt they were entitled, then they would be taking out a
       private prosecution. The next chapter describes how this occurred.




                                                                                              3
2.    THE PRIVATE PROSECUTION

2.1    On 26 June 1998 Ann Adlington, a solicitor acting on behalf o f the HFSG, laid
       informations before South Sefton Magistrates’ Court on Merseyside. They alleged
       that ex C hief Superintendent Duckenfield, who had been in overall control o f the
       policing at the football match had:

              1.     Unlawfully killed John Alfred Anderson
              2.     Unlawfully killed James Gary Aspinall
              3.     Wilfully neglected to perform a public duty
              4.     Perverted the course o f justice by lying about the circumstances in
                      which Gate C at the Football Stadium became open.

2.2   It was also alleged that ex Superintendent Murray, who was the senior officer in
      charge o f the policing o f the ground itself, had committed the first three offences
      above. A copy o f the informations is attached at Appendix 2. The HFSG have not
      been specific in their correspondence to date as to the evidence upon which they
      rely for the first three allegations, except to say that the third matter (Misconduct in
      a Public Office) is based on the same circumstances as the two manslaughter
      charges.

2.3   The HFSG then requested disclosure o f all the material in CPS possession including
       police reports and counsels’ advices. Solicitors for the two defendants were prompt
       in asking us to take over the prosecution in order to discontinue it. I was appointed
       to review the evidence in order to make appropriate recommendations to the Chief
       Crown Prosecutor o f Central Casework and to the Director as to what action, if any,
       should be taken by the CPS. This point will be amplified in Chapters 3 and 4.

2.4   There was then animated and at times heated discussions between the legal
       representatives for the prosecutor and the two defendants as to the legality o f laying
       informations in a commission area that was not where either the offences allegedly
       took place or the defendants resided. Following this the informations were laid
       again at Leeds Magistrates’ Court (within which commission area M r Murray now
       resides) and were returnable to 20 August 1998.

2.5   During July the CPS policy on voluntary disclosure and review o f private
      prosecutions where we have been asked to take over in order to discontinue, was
      promulgated to all the parties. They were informed that the issue o f voluntary
      disclosure would not be considered by the CPS until the review decision had been
      made. The Chief Constable o f South Yorkshire Police requested advice on
      disclosure under the provisions o f section 3(2) o f the Prosecution o f Offences Act
       1985. He was concerned about the vast amount o f potential disclosure. He was
       advised o f our present policy and it was suggested that he might wish to follow that.
       He considered that he should do so.

2.6   Leeds Magistrates’ Court were informed o f the CPS review and that the defendants’
      solicitors would likely require an adjournment o f the case so that this review could
      be completed and either the case be discontinued or for voluntary disclosure to be

                                                                                            4
      given to all parties. On 20 August the case was adjourned to 30 October with a
      provisional date for an old style committal set for 7 to 17 December 1998.

2.7   The HFSG are saying that the new information now available to them undermines
      the inquest verdicts o f accidental death, and calls into question the validity o f all the
      previous investigations. In particular they point out that:

      •      The alleged independence o f the West Midlands Police was a sham;

             the significance o f the statements disclosed in the course o f the scrutiny
             discloses manipulation o f the evidence to the past benefit o f the defendants
             and the South Yorkshire Police in general;

             the DPP was not given full and proper disclosure for the purposes o f the
             CPS review in 1990;

             the scrutiny report has conclusions that are seriously wrong about the edited
             statements and therefore caution should be employed in accepting facts set
             out in that report.

2.8   The submissions made in this latest opinion from the HFSG counsel are far more
      wide reaching than the charges before the Magistrates’ Court and indeed go to the
      very heart o f the validity o f all previous judicial and criminal investigations.




                                                                                               5
3.     CHARGES

3.1    In his opinion o f 24 September 1998, Alun Jones QC, who acts for the HFSG, has
        said that "...the Taylor findings in themselves amount almost to a prima facie case
       o f manslaughter by gross negligence and o f misfeasance. The decision to open the
       gates without taking steps to divert the oncoming spectators was a ‘blunder o f the
        first magnitude’ and was an immediate (and therefore substantial) cause o f death.
       The decision was taken by Duckenfield with the agreement or acquiescence o f
       Murray." He also says that the basis o f the charges o f misfeasance and attempting
       to pervert the course o f justice (PCOJ) is clear from thfe Taylor Interim Report and
       the information and submissions made at Leeds. The PCOJ allegation is based on
       the argument that the "disgraceful lie" was an obvious attempt to impede inquiries
       and to suppress the truth.

3.2.   The charges o f manslaughter and misconduct are not specific as to the circumstances
       giving rise to these allegations. However, I have been informed by Ann Adlington,
       a solicitor acting for the HFSG that their basis is contained within their counsel’s
       opinion o f 24.9.98. In which case the gross negligence alleged m ust be the failure
       to divert the fans after the opening o f gate C. What the Taylor Report described as
       a "blunder o f the first magnitude". The CPS review should therefore be based on
       this specific ground rather than the other innumerable allegations o f negligence,
       many o f which can be laid at the foot o f the other parties criticised in the Taylor
       Report and were subject to successful civil claims for damages. In a recent
       telephone conversation, Ms Adlington has confirmed that the relevant circumstances
       concern the failure by the defendants to close o ff the access tunnel to the central
       pens once gate C was opened by the police.

3.3    However, the HFSG in their letter o f 13 August enclose what is a provisional
       committal bundle containing the submissions made by Alun Jones QC in the laying
       o f the informations at Leeds Magistrates’ Court. Here it is said that the facts set out
       in chapters 1 to 5, 9 to 11, and 16 o f the Taylor Report form the basis o f the
       allegations. Chapter 9 covers the lack o f effective monitoring on the terraces,
       chapter 10 is about the build up at the turnstiles, chapter 11 is on the "blunder on
       opening the gates" and chapter 16 gives a brief summary o f the causes. The causes
       o f the gross overcrowding and hence the disaster were said to be fourfold.

              The immediate cause was the failure to cut o ff the access to the already
              overfull centre pens when gate C was opened.

              The pens were overfull because, as regards the police, no attempt was made
              to control the entry o f fans into the individual pens numerically and there
              was no effective visual monitoring o f crowd density.

              It was not the police responsibility that no safe maximum capacities had been
              laid down for the pens. Neither was it their responsibility that the layout o f
              the barriers within the pens afforded less protection than it should or that the
              eventual rescue efforts were retarded by the type o f exit gates leading from
              the pens onto the pitch. However there was a lack o f leadership involved in

                                                                                              6
             the early stages o f the rescue effort.

             The need to open gate C was due to the dangerous congestion at the
             turnstiles. This was the fault o f both the Club and the police in not
             foreseeing, as they should have done, that large numbers o f fans might arrive
             at once. Both the police Operational Order and their tactics failed to provide
             for this.

3.4   This review will therefore consider the level o f negligence to be attributed to the
      police based on the causes for the disaster as noted by Lord Taylor in chapter 16 o f
      the Interim Report.




                                                                                         7
4.    THE LAW

      Involuntary Manslaughter by Gross Negligence

4.1   Before 1982 the ‘Bateman Test’ 1 was used to define the degree o f negligence
      required to be a sufficient basis o f liability for manslaughter:

             "... the facts must be such that, in the opinion o f the jury, the negligence o f
             the accused went beyond a mere matter o f compensation between subjects
             and showed such disregard for the life and safety o f others as to amount to
             a crime against the State and conduct deserving punishment."

      In 1937 an element o f ‘recklessness’ was imported into the test2 when it was said
      that in order to summarise the very high degree o f negligence required, the word
      ‘reckless’ most nearly covered the case. Two authoritative House o f Lords decisions
      in 1982 on the meaning o f recklessness3 appeared to confirm that the test was o f
      recklessness rather than gross negligence. However in 1989 there was still some
      uncertainty as to whether or not gross negligence continued to exist as a head o f
      liability.

4.2   The decision in R. v. Adomako [1995] 1 AC 171 has clarified the law considerably.
      The House o f Lords held that the Bateman/Andrews test was o f general application
      and there was therefore an immediate reversion from Lawrence recklessness to gross
      negligence. Lord Mackay LC set out the essentials o f gross negligence:

      •     A duty o f care towards a victim based on the ordinary principles o f the law
            o f negligence; and

             a breach o f that duty;

      •     which caused the death o f the victim; and

             if so should the act be characterised as gross negligence and therefore a
             crime4.




             Laid down by Lord Hewart CJ in Bateman [1925] 19 Cr App R at pp. 11-12.

             Judgement o f Lord Atkin in Andrews v DPP [1937] AC 576 at p. 583.

             MPC v Caldwell [1982] AC 341 and Lawrence [1982] AC 510

             At page 187 Lord Mackay says "...the jury must go on to consider whether
             that breach o f duty should be characterised as gross negligence and therefore
             as a crime. This will depend on the seriousness o f the breach o f duty
             committed by the defendant in all the circumstances in which the defendant
             was placed when it occurred.
      He said that "... essence o f the matter which is supremely a jury question is whether,
      having regard to the risk o f death involved, the conduct o f the defendant was so bad
      in all the circumstances as to amount in their judgement to a criminal act or
      omission." The Court o f Appeal in R v Khan and another [1998]5 confirmed that
      the appropriate course would be to leave to the jury the four questions posed based
      on the above principles where the allegation is o f manslaughter by omission.


      Misconduct in a Public Office

4.3   This previously little used common law offence is now being prosecuted more often.
      Until the case o f R v Dytham [1979]6 it was considered that the offence required
      either malfeasance or misfeasance and was restricted to corruption or dishonesty.
      That case, which concerned a police officer, established that there was an offence
      o f a public officer wilfully neglecting to perform a duty that he was bound to
      perform by common law or statute. The neglect had to be wilful and not merely
      inadvertent and had to be culpable in the sense o f being without reasonable excuse
      or justification. The element o f culpability had to be o f such a degree that the
      misconduct impugned was calculated to injure the public interest so as to call for
      condemnation and punishment and it was for the jury to decide whether the evidence
      revealed the necessary culpability.

      Perverting the Course of Public Justice

4.4   This common law offence is committed when a person or persons acts or embarks
       upon a course o f conduct, Which has a tendency to, and is intended to pervert the
       course o f public justice7. A positive act is required. Inaction is insufficient to
       constitute the offence8. Archbold gives a number o f examples o f that conduct
       which is capable o f amounting to the offence and in particular where a person
       conceals the commission o f an offence, even though no proceedings in respect o f
       it are pending or have commenced.

4.5   To establish a tendency or a possibility to pervert the prosecution does not have to
       prove that the tendency or possibility in fact materialised; there must be a possibility
       that what the accused has done, without more, might lead to injustice. Proof o f the
       accused’ intent is also required.




              R v Khan and another [1998] Independent        Law Report, 25 March 1998

              R v Dytham [1979] 69 Cr App R 387, the judgement o f the Court o f Appeal
              being given by Lord Widgery CJ.

              R v Vreones [1891] 1 QB 360.

              R v Headley [1995] Crim L R 757 CA.
4.6        The Court o f Appeal has held9 that in order to lay the charge a course o f justice
           must have been embarked upon in the sense that proceedings o f some kind are in
           being or imminent, or investigations which could or might bring proceedings about
           are in progress. In particular the Court o f Appeal had well in mind that:

                  "... conduct which relates to judicial proceedings, civil or criminal, whether
                  or not they have yet been instituted but which are within the contemplation
                  o f the wrong-doer whose conduct was designed to affect the outcome of
                  them. That conduct includes giving false information to the police with the
                  object o f among other things putting the police on a false trail..."

4.7        In R v Rafique [1993]10 the Court o f Appeal said that if an intention to pervert the
           course o f justice in relation to the matter was proved, the conduct had the same
           quality whether performed before the matter was investigated, or even discovered,
           as it would have had at a later stage. In the particular case they said that it had been
           open to the jury to conclude that the possibility o f judicial proceedings must have
           been within the contemplation o f the appellants; an act had occurred which was
           likely to lead to a charge in judicial proceedings and at the very least there was
           bound to be a an inquest.




      9
                  R v Selvage and Morgan [1982] 73 Cr App R 333.

      10
                  R v Rafique [1993] 97 Cr App R 395.
5.        CPS POLICY

          Gross Negligence Manslaughter

5.1       The CPS Prosecution Manual Volume 3 at para 2.23 and 2A.9 contains guidance on
           charging practice which accepts the law as noted above.

          Misconduct in a Public Office

5.2       There is no guidance available in the Prosecution Manual or Central Casework
           Manual. However as the culpability required for this offence must be such as to call
           for condemnation and punishment, it involves misconduct that goes beyond that o f
          pure civil liability or mere negligence. It is submitted that as the misconduct
           impugned is said to be so serious as to merit a criminal prosecution then a similar
          test to that used in manslaughter by gross negligence should be used. There is no
           intermediate grade o f culpability between that required for civil liability and that of
          the manslaughter charge. In the instant case the ‘actus reus’ o f the two offences is
           said to be the same. While the elements o f culpability and ‘mens rea’ may be
          described in different terms I see little point in attempting to differentiate between
          them for the purposes o f a prosecution. Both offences, as here, may involve
          omissions to act in circumstances where necessary action is called for. They stand
          or fall on the same evidence and should stand or fall together.

          Perverting the Course of Justice

5.3       The Manual in chapter 20 o f Volume 3 states that the offence should be reserved
           for a serious case o f interference with the course o f justice (which must be shown
          to have commenced). In the particular circumstances o f this case which we are
           asked to take over, I shall not consider possible alternative charges. The general
          public interest considerations concern the nature o f the proceedings to be interfered
          with and the consequences/likely consequences o f that interference. It is said that
           a prosecution might not be in the public interest if the principal proceedings are at
           an early stage and the action taken by the defendant had only a minor impact on
           those proceedings.

          Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 Section 6(2)

5.4       The 1990 CPS review supported by the joint opinion o f two eminent leading counsel
           decided that the evidential sufficiency test from the Code for Crown Prosecutors was
           not satisfied in that there was not a realistic prospect o f conviction on any o f the
           charges considered". During the CPS review o f 1997 we came to the conclusion
           that, following the consideration o f the ‘new ’ evidence provided by the HFSG,
           there was no new material that might have affected the previous decision. There
           were no grounds for the CPS to recommend to the Home Office that there should
           be a further investigation o f criminal allegations against the police or other persons.


      n           See chapter 8 for a more detailed discussion o f this issue.

                                                                                                11
•
          The scrutiny that followed confirmed that there was no material to put before the
          Director which might cause her to reconsider decisions already taken. The HFSG
          have now put more ‘new’ material before the CPS which is claimed calls into
          question the validity o f all previous investigations. For reasons which will be
          explained in chapter 17 I do not accept this claim and this review will therefore
          proceed on its original basis which is that o f considering the joint defendants’
          request to take over the private prosecution in order to discontinue it.

    5.5   Our policy is found in the Prosecution Manual Volume 1 at chapter 7. This policy
          builds on the criteria for prosecution contained within the Code for Crown
          Prosecutors. As the right to bring a private prosecution is preserved by section 6(1)
          o f the Act, subject to the power under section 6(2), the CPS will only exercise that
          power to take over the private prosecution where there is a particular need for it to
          do so on behalf o f the public. If there is no need for the CPS to be involved then
          the private prosecutor should be allowed to carry on with the case. Paras 7.13 and
          7.10 apply in this case, and the circumstances in which the power to take over (and
          then discontinue) the prosecution are:

          •     There is clearly no case to answer12. A prosecution commenced in these
                 circumstances would be unfounded, and would therefore be a an abuse o f the
                right to bring a prosecution.

          •     The public interest factors tending against prosecution clearly outweigh
                those factors tending in favour. A relevant factor might be that o f a
                prosecution that can be seen as malicious or vexatious. The other suggested
                 examples are not likely to apply, neither should delay be a factor in the
                present case where there has been a history o f active judicial hearings.

          •     The prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests of justice. For
                 example, the disclosure o f sensitive material.

          Disclosure of Material

    5.6   In order for all relevant material to be considered in the course o f this CPS review,
          the private prosecutor and both defendants were asked to voluntarily provide the
          CPS with firstly schedules o f such papers in their possession, and then copies of
          fresh evidence not previously seen by the CPS. The HFSG have now provided both
          the CPS and defence solicitors with detailed bundles o f evidence and
          representations. The defendants have done the same. These papers as well as a



                 However see R v Bow Street Stipendiary Magistrate and another, ex parte
                 South Coast Shipping Company Ltd and others [1993] 96 Cr App R 405
                 where it was said, per curiam, that "The Director m ay take over proceedings
                 instituted by a private prosecutor which he might otherwise institute himself
                 and if he does so, he may then discontinue them under section 23 o f the
                 1985 Act if the evidence is insufficient..."


                                                                                             12
provisional committal bundle have been taken into consideration during the review.


All the parties to the private prosecution have requested the CPS to provide
voluntary disclosure o f material in our possession. Chapter 7 o f Volume 1 o f the
Manual gives guidance on disclosure to a third party. Any disclosure by us prior
to a successful committal is on a voluntary basis. After committal the Crown Court
may grant witness orders for the production o f relevant material from third parties.
The general rule is that we should give disclosure whenever it is in the interests of
justice to do so, and that it should be even-handed as between the parties.
Following discussion within Central Casework it was agreed that the decision to
give voluntary disclosure would be deferred until after the section 6(2) decision was
made. If the decision was to exercise the power in order to discontinue then
disclosure was no longer an issue. This was advised to the parties and has
grudgingly been accepted. The Chief Constable o f South Yorkshire Police requested
legal advice from the CPS on the point o f their voluntary disclosure to the HFSG
(he is in control o f an extremely large archive o f material generated during the
various investigations), and was advised that he might wish to consider exercising
his discretion in a manner similar to ours. While his decision to do so generated
lengthy argument from the HFSG, that is still the present position.
6.    THE TAYLOR INQUIRY & INITIAL POLICE INVESTIGATION

6.1   Two days after the disaster the then Lord Justice Taylor was appointed to carry out
      a Public Inquiry with the West Midlands Police assisting in the gathering of
      evidence both for the Inquiry and the Coroner. This consisted o f almost 5000 CJA
      and non CJA statements, approximately 8000 completed questionnaires, 1740
      documents and 71 hours o f film. The hearing lasted 31 days. There was no power
      to administer the oath to witnesses but Lord Justice Taylor was satisfied that there
      was no instance o f witnesses giving evidence that would have otherwise been
      different. While he accepted that the witnesses called were only a small fraction o f
      those available, he was satisfied that they were sufficient in number and reliability
      to enable him to reach the necessary conclusions. Also he took into account many
      written statements in addition to the oral testimony13. Submissions had been made
      to him that it would be unsafe for findings o f fact to be made while evidence was
      still being gathered, but he was assured by the police that it was most unlikely that
      significant further evidence would later emerge. He paid tribute to the West
      Midlands Police for their speed and dedication in the gathering o f evidence, as did
      the Secretary o f the Football Supporters Association who said that their initial
      anxiety that the investigation would not be fair and objective was wholly dispelled
      when the evidence that they had obtained privately entirely accorded with that o f the
      police.

6.2   I have read all the transcripts o f the Inquiry that were sent to York. They are not
      complete however they do cover the evidence o f the two defendants as well as many
      o f the other senior officers who were present on the day. I find, not surprisingly,
      that this evidence accords with the views expressed in the Interim Report. I
      therefore propose to adopt what Lord Justice Taylor has said in his conclusions
      contained within that report.

6.3   In his sermon at the Hillsborough Memorial Service the Archbishop o f York said
      that "...Disasters happen because a whole series o f mistakes, misjudgments and
      mischances happen to come together in a deadly combination." This was the finding
      of Taylor LJ14.

6.4   The overcrowding up until 1452 hours was due to:

             The layout o f the Leppings Lane end;

             Lack o f fixed capacities for the pens;

      •      Lack of effective monitoring of the terraces.

      The crushing and fatalities after 1452 were due to:



             Interim Report at para 14.

             Interim Report at paras 116 & 117.

                                                                                         14
      •      The build-up at the turnstiles;

      •      The blunder on opening the gates;

             The barriers in pen 3;

      •      The crushing not recognised;

      •      The response o f the police;

             The perimeter gates were too small.

      The factors emphasised above are those that may be attributed either wholly or part
      to the police and are the only ones I shall consider.

      Monitoring o f the Terraces

6.5   In 1985 there was considerable controversy in the course o f a public inquiry held
      by Mr Justice Popplewell as to the respective responsibilities o f the club and the
      police in controlling crowd behaviour. He said in his Final Report that "It cannot
      be too strongly emphasised that it is upon the club, or the occupier o f the ground
      who is putting on the function, that the primary and continuing obligation rests".
      However what Lord Justice Taylor found was that de facto the police at
      Hillsborough had accepted responsibility for the control o f the pens at the Leppings
      Lane end. At League matches their practice where only modest crowds were
      anticipated was to sequentially fill the pens as required. It was impractical and
      unsafe for police officers and stewards to go into the terraces with away supporters.
      This meant that the monitoring o f the numbers o f fans in any pen had to be done
      from vantage points outside it. There was said to be a good view from the control
      box and on the television screens there. Police in the West Stand, just above the
      terraces, and on the perimeter track were able to provide a good appreciation o f the
      state o f the terraces. Action to cut off access to the pens could be taken when
      necessary.

6.6   At Cup semi-finals a different approach was adopted. All the pens were opened and
      the police practice was "to let the fans find their own level". No specific direction
      was given to fans entering through the turnstiles. If they became uncomfortable or
      wished to move for any reason then they could theoretically move elsewhere. They
      would level themselves out and distribution would be achieved without police
      intervention. Lord Justice Taylor found this argument to be wrong in both theory
      and practice. The effect o f the policy was that at semi-finals where overcrowding
      was more likely the police would only intervene when there was some overt sign
      that an area was "full". The Green Guide (Guide on Safety at Sports Grounds)
      sought to improve safety and comfort by laying down criteria for maximum
      capacity, ie defining what is "full". The figures considered appropriate in the centre
      pens at Hillsborough were too high. An experiment was conducted at the ground
      and in a Health and Safety Executive laboratory where it was found that the
      maximum density set out in the Green Guide left considerably more room than

                                                                                         15
            monitoring the terraces would have left before declaring an area "full".

6.7         There had been occasions at the ground when packing on the terraces had caused
            discomfort and sometimes fear to the fans. At a 1981 semi-final at the ground
            crushing occurred on the Leppings Lane terraces that necessitated the opening o f the
            perimeter gates. 38 persons were treated for injuries including broken limbs. The
            capacity figure for the terraces had been exceeded. As a result o f this the terrace
            was divided into three pens. At the 1987 Cup semi-final there was evidence that the
            central pens were uncomfortably overcrowded. This occurred again at the 1988 Cup
            semi-final although here the entry to the tunnel into pens 3 and 4 was blocked off
            by the police shortly before kick-off because the pens were deemed to be "full".

6.8         The conclusion was that by 1452 when gate C was opened, pens 3 and 4 were over­
            full even by the test o f leaving the fans to "find their ro wn level". Many o f the fans
            there were uncomfortable. To allow any more into those pens was likely to cause
            injuries, to allow in a large stream was courting disaster15.

            The Build-up at the Turnstiles

6.9         The decision to open gate C, and subsequently gates A and B too, was forced on the
            police by the crowd conditions which developed outside the turnstiles. The crush
            was so severe that injuries were being suffered and deaths were feared unless the
            pressure could be swiftly relieved. There were a number o f causes why the crowd
            pressure had built to such an intensity16:

                   The layout o f the turnstiles and the number o f fans they were required to
                   serve left no margin o f safety against an uneven flow o f fans.

            •      Police strategy did not cater for the arrival of a large number of
                   supporters between 1430 and 1440 that created an unmanageable crush
                   o f over 5,000 fans.

                   The presence o f a substantial minority o f fans who had drunk too much
                   aggravated that problem.

6.10        The police Operational Order for the day closely followed that laid down for 1988.
            In the light o f known previous experience it was not thought necessary to change
            it for the 1989 game.

6.11        Lord Justice Taylor found that having lost control outside the Leppings Lane
            turnstiles and having rejected the option o f postponing the kick-off, the police were
            left with no alternative but to open the gates. Superintendent Marshall, who was in
            control outside the ground was right to ask for it and M r Duckenfield was right to


       15
                   Interim Report at para 184.
       16
                   Interim Report at para 228.
       agree. But the possible effects o f so dramatic a step required other action.

       The Blunder on Opening the Gates

6.12   As this issue would appear to be the most crucial part o f the HFSG allegation I have
       reproduced in full the findings o f Lord Justice Taylor:

       "229. The decision to order the opening o f the gates was not accompanied or
       followed by any other order to deal with the consequences. When gate C was
       opened, a steady stream o f about 2,000 fans poured through it over some five
       minutes. Clearly they were going into the ground somewhere and unless they were
       diverted their likeliest route was through the tunnel for the reasons given. „ No
       warning was issued from the control room that the gate was to be opened. Serials
       on the concourse were not alerted. Neither the Club control room nor the Chief
       Steward at the Leppings Lane end was warned. Not even Mr Greenwood, the
       Ground Commander, was informed. From 2.47 pm when Mr Marshall made his
       first request until 2.52 pm when M r Duckenfield acceded to it , there were five
       minutes in which orders could have been given as to how the influx was to be
       absorbed. It was not done. In evidence, M r Duckenfield began by saying that no
       officer made any wrong decision but he later conceded he had erred in this regard.
       He said he did not consider where the people would go when the gate was opened.
       Even after it opened, when he could see the influx on the television screens, no
       order was given to steer the fans to the wing pens. M r Duckenfield said it did not
       cross his mind to detail officers on the concourse to shut off the tunnel. Those
       officers could not have known from their position how full pens 3 and 4 were. That
       was a matter for the control room to monitor from its own observations and using
       intelligence from around the ground.

         230. Since pens 3 and 4 were full by 2.50 pm the tunnel should have been closed
       off whether gate C was to be opened or not. The exercise was a simple one and had
       been carried out in 1988. All that was necessary was for a few officers to act as a
       cordon at the entrance to the tunnel and divert fans elsewhere. Unfortunately, the
       1988 closure seems to have been unknown to the senior officers on duty at the time.
       It did not figure in the debriefing notes. It therefore had no influence on the
       planning for 1989.

         231. Planning apart, however, it should have been clear in the control room where
       there was a view o f the pens and o f the crowd at the turnstiles that the tunnel had
       to be closed. If orders had been given to that effect when gate C was opened, the
       fans could have been directed to empty areas o f the wings and this disaster could
       still have been avoided. Failure to give the order was a blunder o f the first
       magnitude.

         232. Significantly, when permission was given to open gate A, Mr Duckenfield
       did order serials to go to that part o f the concourse to monitor the influx towards the
       north stand. He did this because he feared that if fans went to the north stand
       without tickets, they would not get seats and, there being no perimeter fences at the
       north side they might invade the pitch. This illustrates again the preoccupation with

                                                                                            17
       avoiding pitch invasion as against safety and the risks o f overcrowding. Because
       those entering through gate C could not get onto the pitch, it was not thought
       necessary to alert officers to monitor them. The possibility o f overcrowding simply
       was not considered."

       The Crushing not Recognised

6.13   The Report considers that as the stream from gate C flowed through the tunnel, the
       officers in the control room could be expected to keep a close watch on pens 3 and
       4. They had a direct view o f them from an elevated position and by using the zoom
       facility on the TV camera. Attempts could have been made using the now
       functioning radio to alert officers on the perimeter track to watch for overcrowding
       and to report their observations. As the pens became more and more crowded, fans
       were showing and signalling their distress. None o f this was seen or recognised in
       the control room. The written instructions to the perimeter track officers made no
       reference to the avoidance or detection o f overcrowding. The 1988 Operational
       Order instructed officers to forbid fans access to the pitch without a senior officer’s
       consent.    This prohibition was further emphasised in the 1989 Order. The
       combination o f no instructions as to overcrowding and the strong prohibition on
       opening the perimeter gates was likely to make police recognition o f crushing slow
       and their response reluctant. Even after the recognition o f a problem it still required
       consent to open the gates. However, action was taken to alleviate the situation once
       officers recognised the distress, although there was a period during which the failure
       to recognise the problem and the inhibition against tackling it caused vital time to
       be lost.

       The Response of the Police

6.14   Even when the realisation o f the problem came to the officers on the track, it was
       some minutes before it reached the control room where the immediate assumption
       was that there was a pitch invasion.       John Motson, the BBC commentator,
       considered that the trouble appeared to be overcrowding and not misbehaviour17.
       Until Mr Murray rang for ambulances at about 1506 the assumption in the control
       room persisted. Only then was the Major Disaster Plan started. Initially there was
       no effective leadership either from control or on the pitch to harness and organise
       rescue efforts. Despite this many officers did all they humanly could to rescue and
       revive the victims.




              Although in his statement o f 4 May 1989 he says that at about 1445 hours
              "...I suddenly spotted that two end sections o f the Leppings Lane terrace
              were only just over half full....I must also stress that the two central sections
              were fully occupied and gave the usual impression o f a solid heaving mass
              o f fans who were chanting, singing and clapping." He was not aware o f
              anything untoward, o f any panic or if anyone was experiencing discomfort.

                                                                                            18
            The Evidence o f Chief Superintendent Duckenfield

6.15        The relevant points from his statement made on 5.5.89 were :

                   At 1430 there was space at the front and sides o f the Leppings Lane terraces.

                   At that time he was told by Superintendent Murray that all the fans would
                   be in by kick-off. He then took the view that there was no reason to delay
                   the match.

                   At 1440 he was aware from the CCTV o f the increasing crowd situation at
                   the Leppings Lane end.

                   Shortly after 1445, being aware o f the increasing pressure on the turnstiles,
                   he looked at the Leppings Lane terraces and saw there was room for
                   supporters. He then considered delaying the kick-off but as one o f the teams
                   ran out onto the pitch (at 1454 hoursj^ie
                                                   Toursjjhe discarded
                                                              dis       that option.

                   On receiving the demand from Superintendent Marshall to open the gates
                   before someone was killed, thoughts about monitoring and control o f
                   supporters entering the ground crossed his mind but there was still space on
                   the terrace and the concourse to ease the situation.

                   If the gates were opened there might be crushing and injury on the inside as
                   compared to the serious situation outside the gates where people could be
                   seriously injured or killed.

                   On being asked by Superintendent Murray if he was going to open the gates
                   he said "If there’s likely to be serious injury or death I ’ve no option but to
                   open the gates - open the gates."

                   He watched the Leppings Lane terraces for any development as a result o f
                   the gate opening. He noted that the centre pens were almost full but that
                   there was room in the two side pens.

                   He saw officers opening perimeter gates to let fans onto the pitch but was
                   unable to assess the situation and the need to open these gates. He then saw
                   an increasing number o f people spilling onto the perimeter track by way o f
                   the gates or over the fence. He was still unaware o f what the exact problem
                   was.

6.16        The relevant points from his evidence given to the Inquiry18 are:

                   While he had walked around looking at the ground, he had not appreciated
                   that the lack o f signs at the Leppings Lane turnstiles would cause problems.


       18
                   Inquiry transcript o f 24 to 26 May 1989.

                                                                                               19
    His understanding was that the filling and monitoring o f the pens was a Club
    responsibility. He was aware o f the importance o f ensuring there was no
    overcrowding in the pens.

    If at 1430 Superintendent Murray .had said there was a problem in getting the
    fans into the ground in time, he would have seriously considered delaying the
    kick-off.

•   At 1440 while he considered that he could still get 5 to 6,000 people through
    the turnstiles by kick-off he was concerned, but this was overtaken by events
    (disruption by loss o f radio communications).

    At 1445 he considered that there was still plenty o f room in the centre pens,
    but it was becoming clear that not all the fans would be in by 1500 with the
    situation outside the turnstiles. He did not make a decision to delay the kick-
    off because his mind was taken up with these difficulties.

•   At 1447 when the first request was made for gate C to be opened, he was
    reluctant to agree. On receiving Superintendent M arshall’s demand at 1448
    that the gates be opened he accepted that he took until 1452 to make a
    decision.

    He appreciated that if people came through gate C they would have to go
    somewhere though not necessarily through the tunnel. He had no option but
    to order the gates to be opened because o f the risk o f serious injury or death
    outside. His thoughts at this time were concentrated on the gate and not on
    the tunnel. It did not cross his mind to issue an instruction for officers to
    direct the flow o f fans.

    He was concerned about the effects o f opening the gates and allowing people
    to enter the ground, He anticipated that there would be pushing. He watched
    the Leppings Lane terraces intently for developments. He did not see
    anything untoward on the terraces until the perimeter gates there were
    opened.

    He considered that it was the responsibility o f the Club stewards to be
    present at the tunnel entrance in order to prevent overcrowding in the pens.

    While he made a mistake in not following up the consequences o f opening
    gate C, he would have hoped that officers in the area should have remedied
    the mistake by using their initiative.

•   He considered that it was a matter for the fans to level themselves out on the
    terraces.

    At about 1515 he saw Mr Kelly, the Chairman o f the FA, a id others in the
    police control room. On being asked by them what had happened he accepted
    that he had told them a lie about a gate being forced by fans when in fact it

                                                                                 20
              was opened on his instruction. He was not being deceitful, he believed he
              may have referred to the first time the gate was opened (at 1447 when some
              fans pushed through after one was ejected). He was in a state o f shock, and
              wanted to collect his thoughts and assess the situation. At that stage he did
              not want to communicate fully the situation until he had seen a senior
              officer.

              He was concerned about the crowd situation and did not want the public to
              become aware o f what had happened as he feared there would be massive
              disorder. He agreed that there was nothing to stop him telling his Assistant
              Chief Constable the truth or the full picture when he saw him, but he did not
              do so.

             When asked why he told a lie about the supporters he apologised and said
             that "In the crisis o f the moment, sir, with all those pressures that are so
             evident, I can’t give an honest answer other than the stress o f the situation."

       The Evidence of Superintendent Murray

6.17   The relevant points from his statement made on 2.5.89 are:

       •     As the previous year’s fixture had passed without serious incident it was
             decided by Chief Superintendent Mole, himself and others to base the 1989
             operational order on that o f 1988. There was concern in preventing a pitch
             invasion. The order and planning was discussed with Chief Superintendent
             Duckenfield in the two weeks before the match.

             At 1430 on the day the centre pen was filling but there were large clear
             sections still.

             At 1445 there was a compacting crowd outside the turnstiles and then a
             message was received from Superintendent Marshall requesting that gate C
             be opened. He was asked to standby. That officer then asked for the
             Leppings Lane gates to be opened or people would be crushed. At this stage
             he was attempting to contact the Club Security Officer on the radio to inform
             him o f the problems at the turnstiles, but was unable to do so (due to poor
             communications).

             The officer is somewhat confused as to the exact timing o f the various calls
             made about the gates between 1445 and 1452 hours. He does state that there
             were calls to open gates otherwise people would be killed and that gate C
             was opened as a result.

             At 1452 he was aware that the centre two pens were almost full.

             At 1458 he saw fans from the centre pens going onto the track but was
             unaware o f the real problem until about 1506 hours.


                                                                                          21
6.18   The relevant points from his evidence given to the Inquiry19 are:

       •      His role on the day was to be in overall control o f the control room and as
              adviser to Mr Duckenfield20.

       •      It was the duty o f police to monitor the filling o f the pens at league matches.
              At the game on the day o f the disaster the fans were given the whole terrace
              to go where they wanted to. No officer was given the specific duty to
              monitor the filling o f the centre pens. It was not considered to be a problem.

              When the centre pens were filling up he never considered that there might
              come a time there would be a need to divert people from them.

       •     At 1445 he was concerned about the crowd at the turnstiles and tried to
             contact the Club Security Officer on the radio but could not raise him. He
             was then overtaken by the serious events that followed. No attempt was then
             made to instruct the stewards to close off the tunnel.

              After gate C was opened he didn’t consider where the fans would go, he
              thought that they would disperse throughout the ground. He did not realise
              that people going through gate C would necessarily go towards the tunnel.
              He had not envisaged that gate as an entry point. However it was obvious
              after the event.

       •     When people were let out o f the centre pens onto the perimeter track he did
             not see anything untoward about them or that there was any overcrowding.
             It was only when he went down onto the field at Mr Duckenfield’s request
             that he saw the distress there.

              He understood that it was the responsibility o f both the police and the
              stewards to monitor and report any concern about the numbers on the
              terraces.

       •     When the last request to open the gates was made, he did not think that Mr
             Duckenfield was dithering in coming to a decision but was weighing the
             considerations.

       •     It was only in hindsight that it was obvious that the number o f fans still
              trying to get into the ground at 1447 would cause a problem o f overcrowding



              Inquiry transcript o f 31 May and 1 June 1989.

              The operational order for 1989 has Mr Duckenfield in overall command o f
              the event, three superintendents being responsible for their own sectors (the
              inside o f the football stadium, and outside the ground designated to either the
              home or away fans, and Mr Murray was noted as being in the control room
              in overall control o f overseeing the entire operation.

                                                                                            22
               unless checked. He had not foreseen problems with the centre pens.

       The Evidence of Mr Kelly

6.19   He was the C hief Executive o f the Football Association. When he went to the
       police control box to find out what was happening he spoke to M r Duckenfield who
       told him that the gates had been forced and there had been an in-rush o f Liverpool
       Supporters. At that time ACC Jackson was also present

       Inquiry Conclusions re Police and Others

6.20   The performance by the City Council o f its duties in regard to the Safety certificate
        was inefficient and dilatory. Their failure to revise the certificate over the previous
        three years was a serious breach o f duty. As a result there were no fixed capacities
        for the pens. Breaches o f the Green Guide standards were permitted.

6.21   The Club had in general adopted a responsible and conscientious approach to its
        responsibilities. However it was aware o f the problems involving the shortage o f
        turnstiles and the number o f fans expected to turn up at the Leppings Lane end.
        Although the police had assumed responsibility for the monitoring o f the pens, the
        Club’s officials ought to have alerted the police to the grossly uneven distribution
        o f fans on the terraces. The onus here was on the Club as well as on the police.
        The poor signposting outside the turnstiles and on the concourse before the tunnel
       tended to produce under-filling o f the wing pens and over-filling o f pens 3 and 4.

6.22   There can be no valid criticism o f the emergency services (by which he meant the
       various ambulance services or the fire brigade).

6.23   The 1989 Operational Order left much unsaid. There was no provision for the late
       or congested arrivals, nor for the avoidance o f overcrowding on the terraces.
        Satisfaction with the 1988 event led to complacency. That some thought the pens
       to be overfull in 1988 and that the tunnel was closed o ff on that occasion did not
        figure in or influence the plan for 1989. While it was understandable that the newly
       promoted Mr Duckenfield should have been expected to take command o f events
       in his Division from the date o f that promotion, in view o f the lack o f his experience
        at the ground it was imperative that he be fully briefed. It might have been wiser
       to have left Mr Mole, who had been in command both in 1987 and 1988, in charge
       o f the operation.

6.24   The policing on 15 April 1989 broke down in the ways already described, and
        although there were other causes, the main reason for the disaster was the failure of
       police control. Some senior officers in command were defensive and evasive
       witnesses to the Inquiry, neither their handling o f problems on the day nor the
        account o f it in evidence showed the qualities o f leadership to be expected o f their
        rank. Mr Duckenfield leant heavily on Mr Murray’s experience. Between them
        they misjudged the build-up at the turnstiles and did little about it until they received




                                                                                              23
            Mr M arshall’s request to open the gate21. A t this stage M r Duckenfield’s capacity
            to take decisions and to give orders seemed to collapse. Having sanctioned, at last,
            the opening o f the gates, he failed to give necessary consequential orders or to exert
            any control when the disaster occurred. He misinterpreted the emergence o f fans
            from pens 3 and 4. When he was unsure o f the problem, he sent others down to
            assess the situation rather than descend to see for himself. He gave no information
            to the crowd22.

6.25        Lord Justice Taylor said that it was most surprising that Mr Duckenfield gave the
            Chairman o f the FA, his Assistant Chief Constable and others to think that there had
            been an inrush due to Liverpool fans forcing the gate. This was not only untruthful,
            it set o ff a widely reported allegation against the supporters which caused grave
            offence and distress. He could only assume that Mr Duckenfield’s lack o f candour
            on this occasion had been out o f character. The reason given for not telling the
            truth was that if the crowd had been aware o f the real situation there might have
            been a very hostile reaction that might impede rescue work. However the reluctance
            to tell the truth did not require that a falsehood be told.

                   "284. The likeliest explanation o f the officer’s conduct was that he simply
                   could not face the enormity o f the decision to open the gates and all that
                   flowed therefrom. That would explain what he said to (the FA Chairman),
                   what he did not say to (the Assistant Chief Constable), his aversion to
                   addressing the crowd and his failure to take effective control o f the disaster
                   situation. He froze."




       21
                   Interim Report at Para 281.
       22
                   Interim Report at para 282.

                                                                                                24
7.    THE CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION

      Interim Report II

7.1   Following the publication o f the Interim Report the Chief Constable o f West
      Midlands Police immediately referred it to the DPP asking for a decision on the
      question o f criminal liability o f any member o f South Yorkshire Police. On 15
      August 1989 the Director advised that the matter should be the subject o f a full
      criminal investigation. As the West Midlands Police had done considerable work
      in gathering evidence for the Taylor Inquiry it seemed sensible that they should be
      invited to continue. In October 1989 Assistant Chief Constable Mervyn-Jones, who
      was in charge o f the Hillsborough Inquiry Team o f the West Midlands Police, sent
      to the Head o f the CPS Police Complaints Division a revised copy o f the report
      prepared for the Taylor Inquiry (known as Interim Report II). Though it was up to
      date there were still some other statements being taken. The findings worthy o f note
      some o f which have been covered previously are as follows:

             The barrier breaking in pen 3 must be a primary factor for the high
             proportion o f deaths in pen 3 as compared to pen 4;

             The 1988 blockade o f the tunnel by police officers was not documented, and
             was not a decision made by the senior officers present at the 1988 game.
             One retired officer recalled what had happened and his recollection is
             vague23. The probability is that some officers acting on their own initiative
             turned supporters away having recognised that part o f the terrace was full;

             The fact that access to the tunnel was not controlled was a significant factor
             in the deaths;

      •      The visual evidence available shows supporters at the rear o f pens 3 and 4
             to be totally oblivious to the unfolding events as their fellow supporters died.

      The Report

7.2   This was produced by the Chief Constable o f West Midlands Police, Geoffrey Dear,
      on 30 March 1990 following the formal commencement o f the criminal and
      disciplinary investigation on 27 September 1989. The Police Complaints Authority
      were supervising the conduct o f the investigation. The Chief Constable had major
      concerns about the admissibility o f much o f the evidence adduced before the Inquiry
      and on which his report was based24. A number o f his findings are reproduced
      below:




              Statement number R516 o f PS Trevor HIGGINS dated 2.6.89.

              THE REPORT, Part VII at pp 181-5.

                                                                                          25
              Following the media attention and what was seen as the adverse effects o f
              a public inquiry it was seriously questionable whether Mr Duckenfield would
              receive a fair trial if a prosecution for manslaughter was pursued against him.

              At 1451 hours on the day the video evidence shows that the fans in pens 3
              and 4 were enjoying the event, singing, raising arms and acting seemingly
              quite normally.

              Criminal interviews should be conducted o f those police officers subject to
              formal complaint as well as members o f other organisations.

              Whatever the understanding between the Club and the police re the
              monitoring o f the terraces, in the event neither police nor Club employee
              recognised the fact that pens 3 and 4 were overcrowding. Nor did any other
              observer recognise that fact including professionals who regularly attend
              matches. A photograph taken at 1454, two minutes after gate C was opened
              still suggests that there was no real crush at the time.

              M r Murray was part o f the decision making team at the match. His post in
              the control box placed him in a position o f overall responsibility with Mr
              Duckenfield.

7.3   Subject to the analysis o f interviews under caution the interim recommendation was
       there was insufficient evidence for a prosecution for Corporate Manslaughter in
       respect o f any o f the identified organisations. Criminal responsibility o f individuals
       could only be assessed following interviews.

      Interview of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield on 3.7.90

7.4   The officer declined to answer any questions.

      Interview of Superintendent Murray on 25.6.90

7.5   Relevant points from the transcript o f interview are:

      •       He had no knowledge o f any problems o f overcrowding in either 1981 or
              1987.

      •       Although he was in the control room in 1988 at the semi-final match it had
              not been brought to his attention that fans had been injured because o f
              overcrowding, or that the centre tunnel to pens 3 and 4 had been closed off.

              His responsibility on the day was to have overall command o f the control
              room.      That would involve overseeing the event, arranging the
              communications and acting on information received. Mr Duckenfield’s role
              was to be in overall command o f the event, which he conducted from the
              control room.


                                                                                             26
             He considered that any question o f opening gates was for M r Duckenfield
             and not for him to make. If his senior officer had not been in the control
             room at the time he would have had to contact him for a decision to be
             made.

             At about 1430 he did consider that all the fans would be in by 1500.

      •     As the requests to open the gate were coming in he was trying to contact the
            Club Security Officer for him to take action on the problem at the turnstiles.
            He had no discussion with Mr Duckenfield about the decision to be made
            except to ask his superior if we were going to open the gates.

      •     Prior to the decision to open the gates he saw nothing on the terraces to give
            him cause for concern.

             At about 1508 when the Assistant Chief Constable, Mr Jackson, asked Mr
             Duckenfield what had happened, he was not told that the gate had been
             opened at police request. At that stage Mr Murray did not associate the
             deaths with the opening o f the gate.

      Interview of ACC Jackson on 28 June 1990

7.6   He believes that it was Mr Duckenfield who told him that the gates had been
      stormed. It was about 1615 when he first learnt the true situation.

      Police Complaints Authority

7.7   On 11 July 1990 the PCA directed that disciplinary charges o f neglect o f duty be
      preferred against Chief Superintendent Duckenfield and Superintendent Murray. In
      November 1990 Mr Duckenfield retired on grounds o f ill health and subsequently
      the PCA announced that they would not pursue the charge against Mr Murray on
      the ground that it would be unfair to pursue what was in essence a joint charge
      against one officer only.




                                                                                        27
8.    CPS REVIEW OF 1990

8.1   The Director sought the advice o f two very experienced Queen’s Counsel, Gareth
       Williams QC and Peter Birts QC. They produced a joint opinion on 6 August 1990.
       They considered the police report and documentation produced for the Taylor
       Inquiry as well as the Police Interim Report II. The terms o f their brief was to
       advise whether there existed sufficient evidence to justify bringing criminal
       proceedings against any o f the organisations or individuals concerned.

      Joint Opinion

8.2   Counsel commented that a notable feature o f the disaster was the absence o f conflict
      o f fact as to what had happened, and that the criminal investigation, for all its
      thoroughness, had not significantly added to or contradicted the Inquiry findings.
      The layout o f the ground was the responsibility o f four organisations, the Club, the
      consultant structural engineers, the Council and the police. None o f them foresaw
      that the progressive alterations made to the ground from 1977 onwards in the
      interest o f safety and good order would come to constitute in effect a death trap for
      supporters entering pens 3 and 425. The circumstances o f the crushing at the
      turnstiles and the opening o f gate C were also not foreseen. While all four
      organisations must share some responsibility for the lack o f safe maximum
      capacities, the lack o f controlled entry to the pens, the absence o f any proper system
      o f monitoring and the inadequacy o f the Safety Certificate, it is the police that had
      the main responsibility for the policy o f letting the fans find their own level.

8.3   That there had been a crushing incident in 1981 where large numbers o f fans were
       admitted to the West terraces via the tunnel access and were crushed against the
      perimeter fence was not such as to have alerted the police and Club to potential
      problems in 1989. That earlier problem was believed to have been properly
       addressed by the installation o f radial fences. It had no direct bearing on the
       disaster and did not add to the potential criminal responsibility o f the Club or the
      police.

8.4   Mr Duckenfield’s decision to open gate C was correct in the circumstances. That
      was his responsibility alone as was his serious error in failing to give any order to
      accommodate the influx. While the competence o f this newly promoted Chief
      Superintendent to take charge o f a match o f this importance could be questioned,
      there is no evidence that those responsible for his promotion should share the
      responsibility for his errors.

8.5   That the tunnel was cordoned off in 1998 by a handful o f junior officers was
       apparently on their own initiative - an action that would have almost certainly
       averted the disaster o f 1989. At first sight the operational organisation o f the police
       might seem responsible for failing to incorporate that tactic into the match planning.



              Joint Opinion at page 18-19.

                                                                                             28
      However that Mr Duckenfield despatched a serial to deal with the opening o f gate
      A demonstrates that it was within his power to accommodate the opening o f gate
      C, and the blame for his not doing so cannot in our view be laid elsewhere26.

8.6   The buildup outside the ground was again the responsibility o f the four
      organisations. While the layout and slow admission rate o f the turnstiles gave rise
      to policing difficulties, the loss o f police control and the failure to follow the
      filtering employed in 1988 was solely a police responsibility, but it was a collective
      one that could not be attributed to any individual officer.

8.7   Counsel gave lengthy consideration to the relevant law for involuntary manslaughter
      and culpable misfeasance (misconduct in a public office). On the basis o f the law
      as it was in 1989 they correctly covered the required elements o f a manslaughter
      involving "recklessness" as defined by Lord Diplock in R v Lawrence. They were
      quite rightly concerned as to the then uncertainty in the law about the application
      o f the "gross negligence" test as a separate head o f liability, following two recent
      cases at the time where it was held that manslaughter should not be defined in terms
      o f negligence and that Lord Diplock’s test should be applied universally27. They
      therefore approached the evidence on the basis that the gross negligence test (in
      addition to that o f "recklessness") was sufficient to establish the offence o f
      manslaughter. As for culpable misfeasance they were satisfied that the offence
      existed and that it involved the wilful neglect o f a police officer to perform a duty
      which he was bound to perform by common law or statute. They applied the
      definition from R v Dytham ante. They were o f the opinion that this little known
      offence was a difficult one to prove to the satisfaction o f the jury.

8.8   In considering the evidence to support manslaughter charges they dealt with each
      o f the four organisations in turn:

             The Club: There was no sufficient evidence to support a prim a facie case
             that the Club or any o f its officials caused the deaths based on either
             recklessness or gross negligence.

             The consultant engineers: There was no evidence to support a charge o f
             manslaughter.

             The Council: There was no evidence o f recklessness or gross negligence on
             their part.

      •      The police: They were responsible for the heavily criticised policy whereby
             supporters were left "to find their own level" and not monitored as they
             entered the pens in semi-final matches. There was also a serious failure o f



             Joint Opinion at page 21.

             Seymour (1983) 76 Cr App Rep 211 and
             Kong Cheuk Kwan v R (1985) 82 Cr App Rep 18.

                                                                                         29
    policing in Leppings Lane. These errors were to be viewed as part o f a
    complex series o f events, many o f which were outside the control o f the
    police. Once responsibility for the failure to postpone the kick-off and to
    cordon off the access tunnel was confined to Mr Duckenfield as it should be,
    then the police as an organisation cannot be said to have caused the deaths
    by their strategy and operational errors28. In considering the structure o f the
    police command, the operational orders for 1988 and 1989, police practice
    at Hillsborough and the interviews o f officers including Mr Murray, they
    were o f the opinion that while there were undoubted errors o f judgement and
    practice, neither the police organisation nor any individual within it acted
    recklessly or in a grossly negligent manner. There was no basis on which
    to advise a charge o f corporate manslaughter against any directing mind
    within the police organisation.

•   Chief Superintendent Duckenfield: That Mr Duckenfield was criticised for
    the failure to cordon off the tunnel access and for his decision not to
    postpone the kick-off was thought to be entirely justified. However he had
    under his command officers who had considerable experience o f policing the
    ground and who also made operational errors or failed to react as they should
    have done.      It seemed likely that the operational orders and police
    intelligence were inadequate; this was not the fault o f Mr Duckenfield who
    inherited a ready made match plan compiled by others and tried to follow it.
    Counsels’ opinion was that the slowness o f his response to the disaster was
    due in part to his lack o f experience o f this type o f match. In their view the
    officer’s errors in not cordoning o ff the tunnel or postponing the match were
    a substantial cause o f the deaths. They then looked at the sufficiency o f
    evidence on a charge o f manslaughter as against the officer. They concluded
    that there was no unlawful and dangerous act for that head o f manslaughter,
    and then went on to consider the other tests:

           "We consider that there are difficulties in proving that he intended to
           do an act which created an obvious and serious risk o f causing
           personal injury. In the first place there was no "act" as such, but an
           omission or omissions to act which contributed to a rapidly
           developing state o f affairs ending in serious risk o f injury. But was
           it an obvious risk at the time? We think not. The complexity o f the
           disaster as now known to those who have analysed it in hindsight
           demonstrates that there must be grave doubt as to whether the
           omissions created a risk which was obvious to anyone at the
           time We conclude, therefore, that there is insufficient evidence on
           which to found a charge o f recklessness against Mr Duckenfieki. Nor
           is there evidence that he was grossly negligent in failing to act as
           mentioned above It follows, and we have come to the clear
           conclusion that there is no evidence that M r Duckenfield was wilfully
           neglectful o f his duty or was culpable so as to have committed the



    Joint Opinion at paras 80.

                                                                                  30
                         offence o f culpable misfeasance29."

8.9        The final conclusion o f counsel was that there was no sufficient evidence to support
           criminal proceedings o f any kind against those persons mentioned in the West
           Midlands Report who counsel did not identify in their opinion.

8.10       In the autumn o f 1990 the DPP announced that there would be no prosecutions.




      29
                  Joint Opinion at paras 88-89.

                                                                                             31
9.    THE INQUESTS

9.1   In April 1990 the Coroner for South Yorkshire commenced the 9530 mini inquests
       to decide the statutory questions as to who each o f the deceased was and when and
       where he or she died. They were then adjourned to await the D PP’s decision on a
       criminal prosecution. They were resumed in November 1990 to decide the final
       statutory question as to how each o f the deceased died. A t the end o f March 1991
      the jury returned majority verdicts o f accidental death in all cases.

      Coroner’s Summing Up

9.2   The coroner described to the jury three possible conclusions that might be returned;
       that is, o f an unlawful killing, accident/misadventure or an open verdict. For a
       verdict o f unlawful killing the criminal standard o f proof was required, and for
       accident/misadventure the standard would be that o f the balance o f probability. In
       the case o f an open verdict there was no standard as such. He went on to describe
       the legal requirements for each o f the possible verdicts which should be considered
       in turn.

9.3   For unlawful killing (the criminal equivalent being one o f the forms o f involuntary
       manslaughter) he paid particular attention to the case o f R v West London Coroner
       ex parte Gray [1988] QB 467, which dealt with an alleged unlawful killing by a
       police officer by way o f neglect.

9.4   For accident/misadventure he described it as an unforeseen event arising out o f a
       situation that was meant to occur. Whether or not there was culpability due to
       negligence would depend on the circumstances.

9.5   If after due deliberation the jury came to the conclusion that there was insufficient
       evidence to reach either o f the above two verdicts to the required standard o f proof
       then the open verdict was appropriate.

9.6   The relevant points that the Coroner made to the jury concerning the actions o f the
       police were:

              The police practice o f letting the fans "find their own level" which had
              appeared to work without problem until 1989. While criticised this had not
              been condemned by any witness, although it was accepted that there had to
              be some monitoring.

              The Chief Superintendent who was in command prior to Mr Duckenfield did
              not know o f any diversion o f the fans from the tunnel in previous years,
              however it was fairly conclusive that such diversion happened in 1988,
              although it was not reported to senior officers.



              Subsequently the 96th victim, Mr Bland, died.

                                                                                          32
         As there was no means o f counting people into the pens the only way to
         monitor the packing density o f the fans there was by a visual perception.

         Senior officers had indicated that if they had seen something which caused
         them concern they would have expected to report it. They had a reliance
         upon the initiative and the capability o f the people within the ground,
         whether or not that was a wise reliance that was the practice.

         Virtually all the evidence pointed towards the decision to open the gates as
         being a reasonable one in the circumstances.

         A number o f witnesses did not think that the centre pens were crowded while
         others saw disaster looming. Mr Motson,the BBC commentator, noticed the
         discrepancy between the centre and outer pens but not that the centre ones
         were overcrowded. Mr Hicks appeared to have the earliest concern about the
         overcrowding based 011 what he could see from his position close to the
         police control box.

         The Coroner considered that there was at least some evidence to put before
         the jury on the question o f an unlawful killing and therefore did not
         withdraw that verdict from them.

         Mr Duckenfield did not have a detailed knowledge o f the Green Guide or of
         the ground. He did have a plan and Operational Order that had been used
         in the past without difficulties. He could be justified in taking the view that
         he had staff that were sound and adequate, that the ground itself was safe,
         and that the capacity o f the ground was in accordance with the Safety
         Certificate. He probably had no duty to satisfy him self on every item
         relating to the running o f the match. It was not surprising that he did not
         know the detail o f the signing (on the concourse and by the tunnel access).
         It was not surprising that he did not relate the geographical locations o f the
         tunnel access and the exit gate (gate C). There was nothing to alert him that
         an exit gate might be used as an entry point.

         There was a great deal o f criticism that the Operational Order adopted by Mr
         Duckenfield did not include specific references to the monitoring o f the pens
         or to the distribution o f the fans within the pens. Most o f the police officers
         took the view that they would act on their own initiative and that the safety
         o f the public was one o f their primary functions31.

     •   Mr Duckenfield’s briefing made a strong reference to the safety o f the
         spectators; it was o f paramount importance. Would it have made any
         difference if he had said "monitor the pens" rather than the word "safety"?
         Did the briefing make it clear that in addition to their public order functions
         safety was a matter o f great importance.


31
         Inquiry transcript 25 March 1991 at page 111.

                                                                                       33
Mr Duckenfield’s evidence is that his objective in opening the gates was to
save life.

       "...firstly he took the view that the concourse was larger than the
       turnstile area and therefore people would have room to expand.
       Secondly he knew there were three routes, although he did not know
       their detail and he certainly did not know their signing, on to the
       terraces....He also said that his attention was focused on Lepping
       Lane; firstly upon Gate C and then he was taken up with the issue of
       Gate A. The first time he realised that anything was happening on
       the terraces was when he saw the gate open and people climbing
       over....He certainly did not associate the entry - at least that is my
       understanding o f his evidence - the entry through the gates with what
       appeared to him to be a pitch invasion. M r Duckenfield, o f course
       was supported by Mr Murray whose job it was to control the ground.
       He was entitled to assume, I think, that people in Mr M urray’s
       position would take appropriate action in the light o f developments.
       Indeed, I think he was right to assume that people further afield
       would keep him informed as to what was happening, with a view to
       enabling him to take decisions."

The Coroner considered that the assessment o f the terraces was a very
important factor to be weighed. None o f the staff in the control room had
noticed any problems with the pens until people came over the fence or the
perimeter gates were opened. Their attention was focused on the outside.

       "...the evidence...is reasonably clear that...when Gate C was
       opened...the centre pens certainly were not empty but they were not
       necessarily so full and, indeed, they had been playing with beach
       balls and various other things in those pens very shortly before
       that...So you have two problems: one, would a prudent observer have
       noted at the point in time when the gates were opened that those pens
       were so full or so over full that diversion was something which had
       to be taken; and secondly, o f course, would the connection, would a
       reasonably prudent, skilled police officer in the shoes if you like, o f
       Mr Duckenfield or indeed Mr Murray, have connected the need, the
       opening o f the gate, diversion o f the tunnel, and conditions on the
       pen?"

The radio problems were said to have caused a considerable amount of
disruption.

M r Murray saw his role as a communicator and disseminator, a man o f rank
who was in a position to take decisions, and an adviser to Mr Duckenfield,




                                                                            34
    particularly as the latter was a newcomer32. He says that he had no
    knowledge o f any diversion from the tunnel in 1988, he believed the ground
    to be safe, the system under which he was operating to be safe and that it
    had worked satisfactorily in 1987 and 1988. When gate C was opened it did
    not cross his mind to close the tunnel. He expected people to disperse from
    the concourse. He did not expect they would all go through the tunnel. He
    said that his primary concern was to relieve pressure, to avoid injury, and he
    went on to say that nothing else was obvious to him.              Nothing o f
    significance was noted on the terraces.

•   Mr Duckenfield said that he operated on the assumptions that the ground was
    safe, the system o f policing and the Operational Plan were satisfactory and
    had worked in previous years, and he had a team o f officers who were
    experienced and supportive. He expected to receive reports o f overcrowding
    if noted by officers on the track. He would expect officers to respond to a
    "developing situation". As far as he was concerned, he did not accept that
    there was on the day an obvious risk to people when the gates were opened.
    He thought that the time interval in which he had to take various decisions
    was short.




    Inquest transcript at page 22 o f 11 March 1991: "I saw my role as being sort
    o f monitoring the event as a whole, being responsible for the reception and
    the transmission o f all radio communications and saw m yself as adviser to
    Mr Duckenfield." Mr Murray accepted that his superior might have to make
    decisions requiring his advice based on experience.

                                                                               35
10.    THE ATTORNEY GENERAL AND JUDICIAL REVIEW

10.1   In April 1992 solicitors acting for the relatives o f some o f the deceased sent a
       ‘memorial’ to the Attorney General requesting him to grant them leave to apply to
       the High Court for the inquest verdicts to be quashed and a fresh series o f inquests
       held. This was refused in August 1992 on the ground that he had concluded that
       there was nothing which would justify an application to the High Court for a new
       inquest, as the application would have no reasonable prospect o f establishing that
       it was necessary or desirable in the interests o f justice for a fresh inquest to be held.

10.2   In May 1992 an application was made to the Divisional Court for judicial review
       in respect o f the various decisions made by the Coroner in the course o f the inquest.
       Leave was granted in April 1993 and the case came before the Court in November
       1993. The relief sought was for a quashing o f the verdicts and an ordering o f fresh
       inquests.

10.3   One o f the grounds put forward by the applicants was that the Coroner misdirected
       the jury on the law concerning unlawful killing when he defined it in terms of
       recklessness33, because a later and unreported case34 in the Court o f Appeal had
       decided that the offence o f involuntary manslaughter was established if there was
       proof o f a grossly negligent act or omission causing death. It was submitted that if
       such a direction on gross negligence had been given then the jury would have found
       unlawful killing. The Court, however, was o f the view that the actual verdict
       brought in by the jury was a perfectly rational one.

10.4   An interesting note is that when the Court asked counsel for the applicants, Alun
       Jones QC, what would be the point o f sending the matter back for another inquest,
       he stated that whatever the verdict might prove to be, the function o f the jury would
       have been fulfilled. He agreed that no prosecution o f any police officer would result
       because the decision had been taken in 1990 that no one should be prosecuted. It
       was a point o f legal purity.

10.5   The judgem ent o f the Court was given by Lord Justice McCowan:

              "I would hold that the inquisition was correctly completed and the Coroner’s
              direction to the jury as to the manner in which they should approach its
              completion was impeccable....Accordingly, I have discovered no good reason
              for ordering a new inquest or for merely quashing the existing verdicts."




              Following the judgement o f Watkins LJ in R v West London Coroner ex
              parte Gray and others [1987] 2 WLR 1020.

              R v Holloway and others [1994] QB 302.

                                                                                              36
11.    THE NEW EVIDENCE

11.1   In early December 1996, Granada TV screened a drama-documentary programme
        concerning the Hillsborough Stadium disaster. It was later said by the Hillsborough
        Family Support Group (HFSG) that the pre-production research for the programme
        and its subsequent airing brought fresh evidence and new witnesses to light proving
        that suppression o f evidence, perjury and conspiracy to pervert the course o f justice
        featured in the legal process that followed the disaster.

11.2   In M arch 1997 the HFSG made representations (supported by the opinion o f their
       counsel, Alun Jones QC, and a large bundle o f ‘new evidence’) to the DPP, the
       Home Secretary and the Attorney General. The Legal Secretariat to the Law
       Officers (LSLO) considered it important that while each o f the various Government
       Departments formed their own judgement in relation to the discharge o f their own
       duties, it was equally important that there was a coherent and co-ordinated response
       to the representations made. It was agreed that each o f the three groups would
       report the results o f their reviews to the Police Policy Directorate.

11.3   The new evidence was said to be a video tape o f footage from the scoreboard
       camera on the Leppings Lane terraces that was alleged to have been suppressed by
       the police, the evidence o f the Club engineer responsible for the CCTV systems, and
       a doctor’s statement also alleged to have been suppressed.

11.4   The Chairman o f the HFSG, Mr Trevor Hicks, formally requested the CPS to
       examine the evidence and to initiate an urgent criminal investigation into the
       allegations. Their counsel had concluded that the new pieces o f evidence called for
       a full police enquiry or public enquiry.




                                                                                            37
12.    THE 1997 CPS REVIEW

12.1   I was nominated to review the evidence and allegations and to prepare a report for
        the Director. This report was completed and sent to the Director on 8 May 1997 via
        the CCP for Central Casework.

12.2   My recommendations were that there were no grounds for the CPS to recommend
       to the Home Office that there should be a further investigation o f criminal
       allegations against the police or other persons. In particular I found that:

              The police video tapes alleged to have been suppressed were available to the
              Taylor Inquiry and to the Coroner. One was actually shown to the inquest
              jury as part o f the evidence.

              Tapes alleged to have been stolen from the Club CCTV room ( the inference
              being that the police were involved in suppressing material evidence o f their
              complicity in criminal offences) were not relevant. One would have been a
              detailed study o f a brick wall and the second o f an area covered by other
              cameras.

              There was insufficient evidence o f police control room officers perjuring
              themselves at the inquest when giving their opinion o f the video quality seen
              on a CCTV monitor.

              There was no suppression o f medical evidence by either the police or other
              persons. The ‘new’ evidence provided by the HFSG had little weight when
              compared to the overall evidence considered by the various judicial hearings.




                                                                                         38
13.    THE SCRUTINY

13.1   In June 1997 the Home Secretary announced to the House that his department, the
        Attorney General and the CPS had carefully considered all the evidence that had
        been put forward but were unable to find anything which would have materially
        affected the outcome o f any o f the investigations into the disaster. There was no
        evidence from which it could be concluded that a new public inquiry should be
        established, that would justify fresh criminal investigations or that an application for
        a new inquest would have any hope o f succeeding. However, in order that no
        matter o f significance was overlooked and a conclusion was not made without a full
        and independent examination o f the evidence, it had been decided that there should
        be an independent scrutiny. It was to be conducted by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.
        As regards the CPS his terms o f reference were:

               "To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the
               Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available....to the
               Director o f Public Prosecutions....for the purpose o f discharging...
               (her)...statutory responsibilities....and to draw to (her) attention any evidence
               not previously considered by (her) which may be relevant to (her) duties...."

13.2   The scrutiny report was submitted to the Home Secretary in January 1998. It was
       made plain that the judge had looked at all the evidence that he was asked to
       consider whether or not it had been previously available to the legal advisers acting
       for the families or was in the public domain.

13.3   The judge was only invited by counsel for the HFSG to make recommendations to
       the DPP re criminal proceedings in the case o f Mr Duckenfield and M r Murray. He
       stated that as the DPP had concluded that there was not sufficient evidence to justify
       charges against either o f these two officers (having accepted the advice o f two very
       experienced Queen’s Counsel), any fresh evidence would have to be o f sufficient
       significance that there would be a real possibility that in considering it the DPP
       might change her mind and institute proceedings for manslaughter, or for any other
       offence, against one or both o f these officers.

       Key Points from the Scrutiny

13.4   These are as follows:

               Chapter 1.22: "Lord Taylor had to decide a number o f controversial issues,
               for example, why the police lost control o f the crowd outside the Leppings
               Lane turnstiles. The evidence o f the witnesses who have not previously
               come forward is unlikely significantly to affect the weight o f the evidence
               already given on these controversial issues."

               Chapter 1.44: No fresh evidence had been heard about what had happened
               outside the ground before 1500 therefore there was no question o f reviewing
               Lord Taylor’s findings on that.

                                                                                             39
•   Chapter 1.45 to 1.51: Lord Justice Stuart-Smith reiterated Lord Taylor’s
    criticism o f the police in not closing the access tunnel to the central pens
    when gate C was opened, that was said to be "a blunder o f the first
    magnitude". However there was also criticism o f others because o f the
    inadequate turnstiles, the unsatisfactory monitoring o f the pens except by a
    visual check, the misleading and inadequate signposting, and the lack o f
    stewards on the concourse directing people where to go. The result was that
    most standing spectators going through the turnstiles or gate C did not realise
    that there was any alternative but to go down the tunnel. He stated "None
    o f the evidence I have been invited to consider could make Lord Taylor’s
    censure o f the police more severe, and it does not add any separate or
    additional ground o f criticism in respect o f events leading to the tragedy."

•   Chapter 1.53: In considering the joint opinion o f Counsel the judge said that
    they had set out a full, detailed and careful resume o f the facts on the basis
    o f the evidence then available. There was no error or omission in that resume
    nor was any particular aspect understated or exaggerated. In their statement
    o f the law, Counsel considered both the offences o f manslaughter and
    culpable misfeasance in a public office; they were plainly correct to consider
    that the latter offence would be no easier to establish than manslaughter in
    the circumstances o f the case.

    Chapter 1.54 to 1.57: In order to recommend that the DPP reconsider the
    decision not to prosecute there would have to be fresh evidence to establish
    facts not previously considered, or the significance o f which was not fully
    appreciated, that would make it more likely that charges o f manslaughter
    could be established.       He said that "Essentially this relates to Mr
    Duckenfield’s and Mr M urray’s knowledge and appreciation o f the risk o f
    injury in doing what they did or omitted to do....Any prosecution o f an
    individual police officer would have to establish his individual responsibility.
    It would not be enough simply to prove the composite failure o f the police
    operation. The causes o f the disaster were many and complex. So far as
    these two officers were concerned the prosecution would have to prove to the
    high standard required for a criminal conviction that the failure to give the
    order to close o ff the tunnel when Gate C was opened amounted to the
    serious degree o f recklessness necessary to constitute manslaughter."

    Chapter 1.66: The verdict o f accidental death at the inquests did not
    undermine or reverse Lord Taylor’s findings. In order to justify a further
    application to the Divisional Court for judicial review any new evidence
    must show that had it been presented to the jury they would have been likely
    to reach the only other possible verdict, namely unlawful killing.

    Chapter 2.18: The police video tapes that contained footage o f the Leppings
    Lane terraces were not suppressed as alleged but were available in their
    entirety to the Inquiry and to the Coroner.

    Chapter 2.22: The loss o f the video tapes from the Club control room would

                                                                                 40
not have shown anything relevant. There is no evidence for the suggestion
that they were taken by police officers as part o f a ‘cover up’.

Chapter 2.61: The submission that the police blamed their failure to
appreciate the overcrowding onto a faulty CCTV camera is quite untenable.

Chapter 2.96 to 2.97: Mr Houldsworth (the Club CCTV engineer) gave
evidence that he realised from looking at coverage from police cameras that
the central pens were overcrowded and that the influx o f people through gate
C would create a dangerous situation. This evidence is rejected. His
explanation as to why he did not come forward until 1996 is not convincing;
what he says now is inconsistent with what he said before. Like almost
everyone else observing the situation he thought he was looking at a pitch
invasion.    "The importance o f M r Houldsworth’s evidence has been
exaggerated out o f all proportion."

Chapter 2.101: "There is nothing in any o f the submissions about the video
evidence that calls for any further inquiry or consideration by the prosecuting
or disciplinary authorities ...”

Chapter 4.101: Here Lord Justice Stuart-Smith refers to M r Duckenfield’s
"disgraceful lie" about gate C being forced open by fans as part o f his
consideration o f the allegation that there had been a cover-up by the police.
The other part was o f malpractice and irregularities in the taking o f witness
statements. The latter were not substantiated.

Chapter 5.26 to 5.34: South Yorkshire Police hold the extensive archive o f
material about the Hillsborough disaster. The ‘body files’ are held on behalf
o f the Coroner and access to them is at his discretion. Access to the rest o f
the material in the archives is at the discretion o f the police.

Chapter 6.7 to 6.20: Evidence from the structural engineer who advised the
South Yorkshire police in 1990 re the safety o f the ground was not available
for either the Taylor Inquiry or the Coroner. It was available for the civil
contribution proceedings in October 1990. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith says
that it is reasonable to assume that the engineer’s opinion was a material
factor in persuading the Club and others to make a substantial contribution
to the overall cost o f the claims. Two matters which the engineer pointed
to had not been considered or fully considered by the Taylor Inquiry; the
height o f the crush barriers resulted in the failure o f one that contributed to
the substantially larger number o f deaths in pen 3; and the wrongly
calculated overall capacity o f the Leppings Lane terrace that resulted in
excessive number o f tickets being sold over the safe capacity. While these
matters do not give any ground for the re-opening o f any proceedings, and
would not change the central conclusion that the primary cause o f the
disaster was the failure o f police control, if the responsibility o f the other
parties was somewhat greater than had earlier been appreciated, that might
have a bearing on any reconsideration o f criminal proceedings against police

                                                                              41
              officers.

       •      Chapter 6.22 to 6.30: In his summing-up the Coroner dealt fully and fairly
              with all the evidence. The Divisional Court rejected the criticisms made o f
              him.

13.5   In conclusion the judge said that none o f the evidence that he had been asked to
       consider added anything significant to the evidence which was available to the
       Taylor Inquiry or to the Inquests. Also that the investigation o f the disaster by the
       West Midlands Police was not biased in favour o f the South Yorkshire force.

       Home Secretary’s Statement

13.6   On 18 February 1998 the Home Secretary announced to the House that he, the
       Attorney-General and the Director o f Public Prosecutions had no reasons to doubt
       the conclusions o f the scrutiny. Much o f the evidence considered was already in the
       public domain but he was arranging for the other material (subject to certain
       overriding reasons) to be placed in the Library o f the House.




                                                                                          42
     14.    THE HFSG REPRESENTATIONS

     14.1   The HFSG have provided us with a copy o f a bundle o f documents which they say
            is the kernel o f their case. It comprises five large folders o f their evidence and a
            further folder covering the law. It includes a number o f witness statements o f police
            officers and others (including details o f amendments made to police statements),
            Taylor Inquiry transcripts o f oral evidence, and the Inquest transcript o f the evidence
            o f Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray. I understand that they may not have the consent                     ^^
            o f many o f the police witnesses that they would wish to call for the prosecution.             .     .    7
                                                                                                        ^   ^"1            >



     14.2   The folder containing the amended police statements has added notes describing
            what is said to have been deleted or amended. In addition the HFSG solicitor has                           L
            made personal comments on the quality o f this mainly opinion evidence as well as                      7
            the failure o f Lord Justice Stuart-Smith to properly address some o f the points
            raised.

     14.3   The formal representations were received on 28 September 1998. They are said to
            be in opposition to the defendants’ request for the case to be taken over and
            discontinued. There is a discussion o f the right to a private prosecution and the test
            which should be applied. The general points that they make are:

                 (    [n deciding to prosecute a private prosecutor is entitled to apply a test less
            x    y   strict than the CPS test o f evidential sufficiency from the Code for Crown
                 I   Prosecutors. The CPS should not approach a review o f the present kind on
                 v   the basis that it should apply its own test o f evidential sufficiency. The
sp                   Taylor findings alone show there is a realistic prospect o f conviction for
                     manslaughter and misfeasance.

                     Except in the plainest o f case it would be a misuse o f the discretion given
                     to the CPS to take over a prosecution such as this in order to discontinue it.

                     The significance o f the witness statements disclosed in the course o f the
                     scrutiny and the hundreds o f unsworn police statements disclosed by the
                     Home Secretary in 1998 is difficult to overstate. They disclose a prima facie
                     case o f manipulation o f evidence to the benefit o f the defendants and the
                     South Yorkshire Police. The independence o f the West Midlands Police was
                     a sham.

            •        There was calculated selection o f the documents sent to the DPP in 1990.
                     Many important statements were excluded, eg, edited statements o f police
                     officers.

                     The South Yorkshire Police solicitors have acted under a serious conflict o f
                     interest in the course o f previous inquiries and continue to deny access to the
                     families to the South Yorkshire archive.




                                                                                                  43
              In the opinion o f leading counsel there is sufficient evidence on which to
              commit for trial already. The archive o f statements and exhibits in the
              possession o f the police will add significantly to the prosecution case at
              committal.

       Sufficiency of Evidence
                                                                                    (°|         1
14.4   The HFSG accept that the law follows Adomako (ante) and submit that all the
       elements o f the offence o f this specie o f involuntary manslaughter are not disputed
       except for the last which is a jury question. The key points made are:

              The decision to open the gates without taking steps to divert the oncoming
              spectators was a "blunder o f the first magnitude". The decision was taken by
              Duckenfield with the agreement or acquiescence o f Murray.

              Certain police evidence, which was suppressed until 1998, suggests that it
              was the practice o f senior officers to ensure that the tunnel was closed when
              the pens were full.

              Duckenfield and Murray were in the Control Box and could see the central
              pens. They had an even better view on the CCTV. Murray, who had been
              on duty in 1988, culpably failed to give the proper and obvious advice;
              Duckenfield "froze" and later admitting lying about how the gate came to be
              opened.

              Duckenfield’s lie was an obvious attempt to impede inquiries and to suppress
              the truth.

       Public Interest and Interests of Justice Factors

14.5   The key points made by the HFSG under this heading here are:

              The HFSG has been deprived o f critical information, statements and
              documents about the disaster for years. When the DPP investigation began
              information and statements were closely guarded. Following the open
              approach o f the Home Secretary in 1998, the information now available
              undermines the inquest verdicts o f accidental death and calls into question
              the validity o f all previous investigations.

              The findings o f the Taylor Inquiry have survived for 9 years. Prosecutions
              for the present offences are justified. Prosecutions for additional offences on
              the basis o f the new material are justified in spite o f the "scrutiny".

              There has been a sustained suppression o f the truth in the course o f the
              original investigations. The scrutiny was misled on the practice o f editing
              statements for the Taylor Inquiry. Some o f those statements are still missing.
              The South Yorkshire Police adopted a policy o f withholding information,
              critical to the issue o f negligence, from the Taylor Inquiry, the DPP, the

                                                                                          44
              Coroner and presumably the Police Complaints Authority.

              The unedited statement o f the C hief Constable o f Merseyside, who was
              present at the match, contained hearsay, impression, commendation and
              comment. It bestows lavish praise on the senior officers at the match in
              sharp contrast to the edited statements o f junior officers whose criticisms
              were painstakingly excused. In the Master Witness List for the Taylor
              Inquiry it was placed between the statements o f Duckenfield and Murray.
              It has to be inferred that this was done in order to influence the reader
              against prosecutions.

              The HFSG argue that only if the West Midlands Police as the investigating
              force was truly independent o f those it investigated, and impartial, could any
              o f the four inquiries ( Taylor, DPP, Coroner and PCA) be regarded as full,
              independent and complete. If it was not then no weight could be attached
              to its report and the value o f the conclusions o f those to whom their officers
              reported is diminished.

              The inquest, ostensibly objective and dispassionate, is now shown to have
              been manipulated by South Yorkshire Police for their own ends, and by West
              Midlands Police. For this reason the defendants are not entitled to rely upon
              the inquest verdicts to put an end to this prosecution.

       The Limitations of the Stuart-Smith Report

14.6   The HFSG consider that caution has to be employed in accepting facts set out in the
       report. They cite the conclusions about the edited statements being seriously wrong.
       The scale o f the editing now revealed exceeds anything shown to the scrutiny. The
       report is economical with information. Only small parts o f advice o f counsel in
       1990 are set out. The provision o f the whole advice is required so that the whole
       reasoning is apparent. They say it is clear that privilege has been waived by the
       provision o f the report to the scrutiny. Justice requires that the West Midlands
       Police report and the advice o f counsel be disclosed to the HFSG.

14.7   They state that there is no evidence that the judge saw the Master Witness List or
       knew what the DPP had considered, and that there was no ground to believe that he
       sought to compare the evidence available to the Director with the total evidence
       available.

14.8   Their final word is that it would be a most serious injustice to discontinue the
       prosecution.

       Supplementary Representations

14.9   These were received on 2 October 1998. As to the allegation o f PCOJ the HFSG
       say that previous inquiries were seriously misled by Mr Duckenfield and both the
       police forces. At the Taylor Inquiry the officer made a half hearted admission
       followed by a denial o f an intent to deceive and a claim to have been in a ‘state of

                                                                                           45
       shock’. Earlier in his evidence when asked if he could help as the genesis o f the
       lie, he replied "No". This was a lie as his later admissions demonstrated. The ‘lie’
       was transmitted to the Fire Service, the Ambulance Service and the BBC. The
       management o f the Club were misled. The officer admitted that he withheld the
       correct information but said it was for "good motives". There was an attempt to
       limit the number and effect o f his lies by the omission o f this detail from police
       witness statements. At the inquest he said that he could not remember what he had
       said on the topic. He lied to the Coroner’s jury about this.

14.10 It is said that the scrutiny report suggests that the DPP may not have considered in
       1990 the question o f the attempt to pervert the course o f justice. The true position
      is that the ‘lie’ was repeated to a number o f persons, carefully and deliberately, by
      Duckenfield or by others with his encouragement. The HFSG is actively studying
      the significance of these matters in relation to the integrity o f the investigations by
      the two police forces.

14.11 The HFSG argue that Duckenfield’s admissions "...show gross negligence causative
      o f death, and that they disclose a wanton and perhaps angry disregard for the safety
      o f people in the pens, when other people, whom Duckenfield regarded as o f the
      same ilk, were causing him a serious problem outside the ground."

14.12 They submit that the responsibility o f Murray for the offences is greater than that
      o f his superior as can be seen from the admissions made during his evidence to the
      Inquiry and the inquest.

14.13 Much of the rest o f the representations are a recital o f the evidence at the various
      inquiries, allegations o f evidence suppression by witnesses in the making o f their
      statements and a final submission. This latter concludes that the PCA rightly
      recognised that the charge o f neglect was joint and that the reckless or grossly
      negligent decision to open the gates without closing o ff the pens was the
      responsibility o f both defendants.

       Further Supplementary Representations

14.14 These were received on 12 October 1998. They concerned the obtaining o f
      documents, including the West Midlands Police report, from the Public Record
      Office. There is a complaint about the denial o f access to the report by the CPS.


14.15 An example o f the quality o f representation being put forward is based on a
      comparison between a paragraph from the report on how the tunnel to the central
      pens came to be cordoned off, and the statement o f an officer who closed off the
      tunnel access in 1988:

              West Midlands Report: "Enquiries have found just one retired officer who
              recalls this happening. He, it must be said, is vague in his recollection but
              the probability is that some officers acting on their own initiative....(turned
              spectators away)".

                                                                                           46
              HFSG: They say that the retired officer, Higgins, is not v§§pe#He said this
              in his statement o f 2 June 1989: "I received instructions to close the gates to
              the entrance and thereafter direct fans to the outer pens o f the stand. I
              cannot recall where the instruction came from. Under normal circumstances
              instruction came from a Serial Inspector or via radio from control. I cannot
              say from which the instruction came. Bearing in mind the time lapse and
              having attended several matches at Hillsborough, it is difficult to relate detail
              regarding this particular match."

              HFSG: "The significance o f this evidence is that ‘control’ used as a matter
              o f habit to give this instruction, as did an Inspector, no doubt in liaison with
              each other. This instruction was given in 1988 when Murray was in the
              Control Box. It is to be assumed that the DPP was given the same account
              in 1990 about the opening o f the gates in 1988, as appears in the Interim
              Report o f October 1989. If so, he was demonstrably misled."

14.16 The alleged ‘forcing’ o f the perimeter gate was often raised by South Yorkshire
      officers at the Taylor Inquiry. The purpose o f the suggestion was to imply that the
      lying assertion made repeatedly by Duckenfield that the fans had broken down the
      gates might have had some basis in fact, and been the result o f some confusion.

14.17 The appendices to the Police Interim Report appear to demonstrate that much time
      was devoted by police officers (probably both West Midlands and South Yorkshire)
      to collecting statements from officers o f other forces to bolster what Lord Taylor
      derided as the ‘conspiracy theory’ that there was a plot by ticketless, late arriving
      and intoxicated supporters to force an admission into the ground.

14.18 As the Police Interim Report is now in the public domain, there can be no
      justification o f any kind for withholding the final report, or the advice o f counsel
      that was made on the basis o f that report. The CPS is asked to produce them.




                                                                                            47
15.    THE DEFENCE REPRESENTATIONS

15.1   The initial request for the CPS to take over the case in order to discontinue was
       received from the defence solicitors on 2 July 1998 and was on the basis that
       continuation would be contrary to the public interest. The points raised to support
       this were:

              The conclusions o f the joint opinion o f counsel in 1990;

              The accidental death verdicts o f the inquest jury;

       •      The conclusion o f the scrutiny that there was no ‘new evidence’ which
              would influence the decision not to prosecute;

              The intensity o f the media coverage and the effect on public opinion;

              The emotional stress that the two officers have been under since the disaster;

              Witness recollection o f events after the passage o f time;

              Nothing would be served by the expenditure o f resources on a trial that
              would achieve nothing in addressing the causes o f the disaster.

15.2   Further new representations were received from Mr M urray’s solicitors in early July:

              That Mr Murray had suffered a complete breakdown in his health;

              That following the clear conclusions o f the scrutiny report there is under
              section 23 o f the Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985 insufficient evidence;

       •      The view o f the Home Secretary and Lord Justice Stuart-Smith that re­
              opening the inquiries would serve no useful purpose whatsoever.

15.3   The final batch o f defence representations were sent to the CPS on 9 October 1998.
       The solicitors for Mr Murray make comments on the quality o f the HFSG
       submissions on the law and the reasoning put forward.             Solicitors for Mr
       Duckenfield say that the HFSG have concentrated on the evidential basis for the
       summons issued. They submit that the Director is well placed to consider the public
       interest as well. They disagree with the HFSG assertion that a clear prima facie
       case exists. They counter the HFSG allegations o f the suppression o f evidence by
       the police and support the scrutiny findings that there was no improper interference
       with witnesses or manipulation o f evidence. They cite examples where the
       representations made by the HFSG are clearly wrong in their criticisms, for example,
       that Mr Duckenfield met Lord Justice Stuart-Smith who then failed to refer to this
       in his report. No such meeting took place and that criticism is therefore unfounded,




                                                                                         48
15.4   They submit that the HFSG concedes that the findings o f the Taylor Inquiry fall
        short o f those needed to establish a prima facie case when it was said that "The
        Taylor findings in themselves amount to almost to a prim a facie case."35

15.5   There is no evidence that Mr Duckenfield was ever told about the police action in
        1988 (closing off the tunnel access) or should have been aware o f it. The analysis
        o f the ‘new evidence’ from the HFSG adds no strength to the their case.

15.6   The solicitors take issue with the stated CPS Policy o f taking over a private
        prosecution in order to discontinue it only where there is ‘clearly no case to answer’.
        They request clarification for the justification o f the policy and cite the observation
       made by the Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure (Phillips Commission)
        (1981):

               "The test applied to the Director’s cases (ie, whether or not there is a realistic
               prospect o f conviction) should be applied by all who make the decisions that
               bring a case to court".36

15.7   They consider that pursuant to the Code for Crown Prosecutors, if there is
       insufficient evidence for a realistic prospect o f conviction, the Director will be
       bound to take over the conduct o f the proceedings and discontinue. However on the
       basis that the Director applies a lesser standard they ask the CPS to consider the
       admissibility and reliability o f the evidence. They emphasise that from the material
       so far submitted by the prosecution there is a clear paucity o f evidence relating to
       vital issues. They argue that admissions o f liability by the South Yorkshire Police
       in negligence proceedings have no force in relation to the specific actions of
       individual officers.

15.8   As regards the allegation o f perverting the course o f justice, they say that it has
       never been suggested that Mr Duckenfield ever uttered the words complained o f to
       anyone charged with investigating the disaster. There is no evidence that he played
       any role in the transmission o f the comment to those who were not present at the
       time, or that he engaged in what is said to be a damage limitation exercise where
       witness statements are taken without any mention o f the ‘lie’.

15.9   They put forward a number o f representations as to the public interest factors that
        should be considered if that test becomes relevant . Their concerns are especially
        addressed to the matter o f the 9 year delay, that the offence was committed as a
        result o f a genuine mistake or misunderstanding (as balanced against the seriousness
        of the offence) rather than any pre-meditation, and o f the ill health o f the defendant.

15.10 Finally, they are of the view that the Director is bound to give full and detailed
       reasons for the decision taken addressing the issues raised by all the parties.



               HFSG submission o f 24 September 1998 at para 12.

               Phillips Commission at para 8.9

                                                                                              49
16.    KEY CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE CPS REVIEW

       An Overview

16.1   The correspondence and formal representations from the private prosecutor and the
       solicitors for the two defendants raise many points. Some o f these are relevant to
       this review, others are not. The key issue to be resolved is whether or not there is
       clearly no case to answer and/or the public interest/interests o f justice circumstances
       do not require a prosecution for the charges against Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray.
       Once that point is decided then other more minor issues, such as disclosure, will fall
       into place.

16.3   In conducting this review and in the making o f my recommendations in chapter 17,
        I have looked at material in the public domain, material provided to me by the
        parties to the prosecution, other non-sensitive material in my possession and also
        confidential papers subject to public interest immunity or legal privilege. A
        schedule o f this material as attached at Appendix 2. Some o f the material is not in
        a form admissible in the criminal courts, however I have proceeded on the basis
        that, if relevant, it is capable o f being adduced by the HFSG in an acceptable
        format. I accept the findings o f the Taylor Inquiry, the Coroner’s Inquests, the
       judicial review in the Divisional Court, and the scrutiny. I have no reason not to
        accept those relevant findings o f fact made by the police in the course o f their
        investigations, however I do not necessarily accept their conclusions on the
        evidence. I find persuasive the conclusions o f joint counsel in their advice o f 1990
        to the Director.

16.4   While I note the concern expressed as to the validity o f the CPS policy on the
       taking over and subsequent discontinuance o f a private prosecution, I consider that
       I am bound by what the Director has laid down as guidance and my later
       recommendations will reflect this.

       CPS Policy Guidelines

16.5   I have considered the Code for Crown Prosecutors and the Explanatory
       Memorandum. The Code discusses the two stages in the decision to prosecute. Only
       when the evidential test, ‘the realistic prospect o f conviction’, is passed does a
       Crown Prosecutor go on to consider if a prosecution is needed in the public interest.
       If the first test is not passed then there must not be a prosecution.

16.6   The CPS decision o f 1990, following Counsels’ advice and based on the evidence
       provided by the West Midlands Police, stated that the evidential test had not been
       passed. Until late 1996 nothing was put before the Director which would have
       affected that decision. Following my review in 1997, our decision was that the so-
       called ‘new evidence’ provided by the HFSG did not provide new grounds for a
       recommendation o f a further criminal investigation. There was no suppression o f
       medical or video evidence as alleged by Alun Jones QC. The scrutiny report o f
       Lord Justice Stuart-Smith fully supported this stance. In the latest representations
       from the HFSG it is being said that all the judicial inquiries and proceedings to date

                                                                                            50
       have been misled. They make a strong inference that this is because o f a criminal
       conspiracy between the South Yorkshire and the West Midlands Police. They point
       to the editing o f statements taken by the police in 1989 which they say was not put
       before the scrutiny. They consider that all previous hearings are therefore tainted.
       The HFSG ‘evidence’ shows that while there were details o f opinion and fact that
       were not put before Lord Taylor (because o f the editing that was done by the police
       solicitors in 1989), or were allegedly not considered by the scrutiny, my examination
       o f them has not found anything material that would affect the previous CPS
       decisions. Quite simply, there is still no realistic prospect o f conviction on the
       allegations o f manslaughter and misconduct in a public office. The matter o f the
       alleged PCOJ is discussed under the evidential test sub-headirtg.

16.7   The defendants through their legal representatives have asked the CPS to take over
       the proceedings. That should only be done in accordance with the principles set out
       in chapter 7 o f Volume 1 o f the Prosecution Manual where there is a particular need
       to do so on behalf o f the public. Para 7.11 applies and I requested copies o f
       relevant papers from the defendants and the prosecutor. These have been supplied,
       although all the parties consider that I or the police have more evidence that would
       be relevant to their case. The South Yorkshire Police have assisted me in the
       obtaining o f other material that I wished to consider.

16.8   I have looked at para 7.12 and decided that it was not part o f my review to consider
       taking the case over in order to prosecute it. The original CPS decision o f 1990 that
       there was not a realistic prospect o f conviction against any person for any criminal
       offence then considered was forefront in my mind, as were the conclusions o f my
       previous review and the subsequent decision.

16.9   Para 7.13 pointed me towards the provisions o f para 7.8 and 7.10 in the taking over
       o f a prosecution in order to discontinue it. As the overall evidence on the five
       charges now before the Magistrates’ Court (a short discussion on the merits or
       otherwise o f the PCOJ allegation will follow later in the chapter) falls short o f the
       evidential sufficiency test set out in the Code for Crown prosecutors, I next
       considered the circumstances for discontinuance:

       i)     There is clearly no case to answer: This is the main question to be
              resolved.

       ii)    The public interest factors tending against prosecution clearly outweigh
              those factors tending in favour; especially a consideration o f a malicious
              or vexatious prosecution under section 42 o f the Supreme Court Act 1982 as
              amended by section 24 o f the Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985. This
              provision concerns an application by the Attorney General to the High Court
              where it is perceived that a person is instituting a vexatious prosecution. I
              also looked at the delay o f 9 years in bringing the criminal prosecution to
              court. While the two defendants may have general health problems, I have
              seen no medical evidence or representations which would affect the decision
              to be made.


                                                                                           51
       iii)   The prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests of justice: I have
               found nothing to support this point.

16.10 The policy guidelines in chapter 7 discuss a duty to take over a private prosecution
      No mention is made about the division o f a case into the separate charges, where,
      following the application o f para 7.10, only some offences may be suitable for
      taking over and subsequent discontinuance and it would be for the private prosecutor
      to continue with the remainder. However section 23 o f the Prosecution o f Offences
      Act 1985 describes the power to discontinue where the DPP has the conduct o f
      proceedings for an offence. Section 6 o f the Act refers only to "criminal
      proceedings" without reference to an offence. As the Director has the power to
      discontinue the proceedings for one offence where she has the conduct o f
      proceedings for a number o f related matters, it must surely be that the term
      "criminal proceedings" in section 6 should be read as referring to individual charges
      within the total proceedings.     In which case all o f the options below may be
      considered:

       i)     Allowing the private prosecution to proceed in its entirety.

       ii)    Taking over the whole o f the prosecution in order to discontinue allcharges.

       iii)   Taking over only that part o f the prosecution where:

              •      there is clearly no case to answer and/or public interest factors apply
                     on a particular charge, for example, on the allegation o f the pervert
                     course o f justice rather than that o f manslaughter/misconduct, or

              •      there is clearly no case to answer and/or public interest factors apply
                     against a particular defendant on all the charges against him.

16.11 Para 7.10 shows that the test to be applied is not the two part test from the Code.
      Rather it is a consideration o f all the circumstances both as to evidence and the
      noted public interest criteria. These are reviewed below under the various sub­
      headings.

      Application of CPS Policy

16.12 The test o f ‘clearly no case to answer’ can be equated with the Galbraith Test37
      which Archbold accepts as being applicable to the Magistrates’ Court:

              "(1) I f there is no evidence that the crime alleged has been committed by the
              defendant there is no difficulty - the judge will stop the case. (2) The
              difficulty arises where there is some evidence but it is o f a tenuous nature,
              for example, because o f inherent weakness or because it is inconsistent with



              R v Galbraith [1981] 73 Cr App R 124 CA referred to in Archbold 1998 at
              paras 4.294 to 297.

                                                                                         52
              other evidence, (a) Where the judge concludes that the prosecution evidence,
              taken at its highest, is such that a jury properly directed could not properly
              convict on it, it is his duty, on a submission being made, to stop the case,
              (b) Where however the prosecution evidence is such that its strength or
              weakness depends on the view to be taken o f a w itness’s reliability, or other
              matters which are generally speaking within the province o f the jury and
              where on one possible view o f the facts there is evidence on which the jury
              could properly come to the conclusion that the defendant is guilty, then the
              judge should allow the matter to be tried by the jury" (per Lord Lane CJ).

        A Crown Court case, R v Shippey38, is often quoted to show that the requirement
        to take the prosecution evidence at its highest did not mean "picking out all the
        plums and leaving the duff behind". The judge said that it was necessary to make
        an assessment o f the evidence as a whole.

16.13 However the use o f the word "clearly" in our present test implies that we have to
      be satisfied (or perhaps in a stronger sense, ‘to be sure’) that there is no case to
      answer before taking over and discontinuing a private prosecution., It is submitted
      that it is a slightly lower standard than the prima facie test used in Galbraith. This
      can be seen as a parallel to the way in which we apply the evidential test from the
      Code, where we do not look for the same high standard o f proof that a jury or bench
      of magistrates needs to find before it can convict. If it is considered that the case
      is finely balanced as to the merits then the scales should fall on the side o f the
      private prosecutor.

16.14 The test from R v Adomako sets out the four essential elements o f gross negligence.
      For the purpose o f this review I accept the findings o f previous courts and inquiries
      that the first three elements are sufficiently proved; that there was a duty o f care by
      the police generally towards the deceased, that there was a breach o f that duty, and
      the deaths o f the victims then ensued. Mr Duckenfield and M r Murray were the two
      senior officers available to make decisions that would affect the events resulting in
      the death o f the fans in the central pens. They were the representatives o f the police
      force who were involved in the making o f the decision that led to what was
      described as a "blunder o f the first magnitude". The general duty o f the police force
      as a whole was therefore visited upon them for their specific acts. There was a
      breach o f that duty by them, as on an objective assessment o f what happened they
      could have prevented the deaths by taking certain actions rather than omitting to act.

16.15 The private prosecutor and I have recently agreed as to what constitutes the alleged
      acts or omissions said to constitute gross negligence. I doubt that the defendants
      would take issue at the narrowing o f the grounds. For the purposes o f the main
      charges the prosecution say that while the decision to open gate C was a proper one,
      the omission o f the two defendants in properly considering where the resultant
      inrush o f fans would go and in not taking the necessary action in preventing
      crushing in pens known to be full, was the act o f gross negligence.


   38
              R v Shippey ( 1988) Crim L R 767, Turner J.

                                                                                           53
16.16 The fourth element from R v Adomako is whether the act complained o f should be
      characterised as gross negligence and therefore a crime. It was held that this is
      supremely a question for the jury. As previously stated in R v Khan the appropriate
      course would be to leave to the jury the four questions posed based on the above
      principles where the allegation is o f manslaughter by omission.

       Evidential Test: Manslaughter

16.17 That there is evidence o f negligence by the two officers is incontrovertible. I submit
      that it at least amounts to individual civil liability for the two officers. It does not
      amount to criminal liability following the Code tests. There is evidence which could
      be put before the jury just as there is evidence tending to rebut the allegations.

16.18 The evidence in support o f a prosecution o f both officers can be seen in the previous
      chapters and may be summarised as follows:

       •      That both officers had a joint responsibility in the circumstances o f their
              respective duties in the control box, to take such action as was necessary to
              secure the safety o f the fans and others. Further Mr Duckenfield leant
              heavily on Mr M urray’s experience.

       •      There was a lack o f monitoring o f the terraces by the police and specifically
              by the two senior officers who had a direct eye-view o f the central pens as
              well as by the use o f the CCTV monitors.

       •      There was a lack o f realisation by the two senior officers in the control box
              as to the overcrowding or potential overcrowding in the central pens.

       •      They failed to consider the foreseeable consequences o f allowing a large
              number o f fans to enter the ground through gate C without supervision and
              direction.

       •      They failed to warn police officers on the concourse or nearby o f the gate
              being opened in order to relieve the crush outside.

       •      They failed to direct police officers under their control to close o ff the access
              to the central tunnel in order to prevent a foreseeable crushing incident.

       •      They should have realised that the policy o f "letting the fans find their own
              level" was not one to apply in the circumstances o f this particular match.

16.19 The evidence against a prosecution o f one or both officers may be summarised as
      follows:

       •      It was Mr Duckenfield who had overall responsibility for the conduct o f the
              policing at the match as well as an assumed command role within the control
               box itself Mr Murray was only acting in an advisory role when considering

                                                                                              54
     the decision to open gate C. This is as advised by Counsel at para 49 o f
     their joint opinion o f 1990. It was Mr Duckenfield’s responsibility alone.

•   Mr Duckenfield was newly promoted and was in a position where he had to
    depend on the experience o f others in advising him on the policing o f this
    type o f match. His general experience was not sufficient to prepare him for
    problems that had not been foreseen in the Operational Order for the match.

•   Mr Duckenfield was dependent on an operational order that he had no part
    in preparing. It was a virtual copy o f the previous year’s order which was
    seen as being satisfactory in the light o f the perceived success by senior
    officers o f their policing o f that match. That there had been some foresight
    o f possible crushing in the central pens by junior officers, resulting in the
    tunnel access being blocked, was not known to officers o f the rank o f
    Inspector or above and therefore did not feature in the considerations for the
    1989 game.

•   Mr Duckenfield had emphasised at his pre match briefing that the safety of
    the spectators was o f paramount importance, although the monitoring o f the
    pens to that end was not specifically mentioned. He was entitled to depend
    on other officers under his command to react appropriately. Unfortunately
    some failed to react as they should have done.

•   It was not surprising that the two senior officers did not notice that the
    central pens were "full" prior to the opening o f the gate as overcrowding was
    not apparent to almost all other observers.

•   Mr Murray did attempt o f his own volition to warn the Club Security Officer
    o f the crushing outside prior to the opening o f gate C but was unable to send
    a message on the radio due to temporary communication problems. By the
    time the communications were restored it was too late to control the tunnel
    access.

•   At the time o f the opening o f gate C, the attention o f both officers was on
    the obvious life threatening situation o f the crush by the turnstiles. Their
     failure to take an all round view o f this incident instead o f a single minded
    concentration on the gate is perhaps understandable and should make them
     liable for negligence in civil law only. Their attention was focused on a
    known risk o f serious injury or death outside the gate, to the prejudice o f any
    regard o f the possible risk inside the ground if the further correct action was
    not taken. What is obvious in hindsight was difficult to appreciate as the
    emergency was unrolling.

•   Although the main cause o f the disaster is placed at the door o f the police
    generally, the individual actions o f M r Duckenfield and M r Murray form
    only a part o f that liability. The congestion outside the turnstiles that led to
    gate C being opened had a number o f causes that were for the most part
    outside the control of the two defendants. Other persons should take a

                                                                                  55
               greater share in the blame as was recognised by the scrutiny.

        •     There is no new evidence that might have affected the verdicts o f the Inquest
              jury. They were not misled as a result o f any alleged suppression of
              evidence by the police. They rejected the option o f verdicts o f unlawful
              killing based on the criminal standard o f proof. Their verdicts were of
              accidental death on the balance o f probabilities. Therefore it can be argued
              that the jury found that they had sufficient information before them to reject
              even a prima facie case o f unlawful killing. If they had not then it is
              submitted that they would otherwise have brought open verdicts.

        Public Interest Circumstances for Manslaughter

16.20 While some might have a view that the prosecution by the HFSG is being
      undertaken for reasons o f revenge, or a perverse desire to obtain ‘justice’ that
      allegedly is being denied them, the HFSG are properly taking the various legal
      channels open to them. That others may disagree is part o f the judicial process. I
      recognise the considerable distress that members o f the HFSG have suffered since
      the disaster, and do not consider that their private prosecution is either malicious or
      vexatious.

16.21 Delay is said to be a relevant factor. After 9 years the memories o f witnesses may
      have faded or been coloured by what has happened since. However the allegations
      are extremely serious and on the basis o f the large number o f written statements
      taken at the time on each and every aspect o f the disaster, I accept that those
      memories can be sufficiently refreshed to alleviate the problem.

16.22 There is no medical evidence which would justify serious consideration as a factor
      against prosecution.

        Misconduct in a Public Office

16.23 The evidential and public interest considerations are as above.

        Evidential Test: Perverting the Course of Justice

16.24 This is a new allegation which has not featured in previous reviews. The ‘lie’ about
      gate C being forced by the fans has been admitted by Mr Duckenfield but with a
      number o f explanations (i) that he was not being deceitful but may have referred to
      an earlier time when the gate was briefly forced open, and (ii) he was in shock and
      wanted to collect his thoughts and assess the situation before communicating the
      truth. Lord Taylor may have been close to the truth when he gave his assessment
      that the officer could not face the enormity o f the decision to open the gates and
      what happened afterwards: "He froze"39



   39
              See page 24 o f this review.
16.25 I consider that in the circumstances the deliberate misdirection o f the various
      witnesses, including his own Assistant Chief Constable, was conduct that might have
      had the tendency to pervert the course o f public justice. That judicial proceedings
      were going to result from the disaster was not just a possibility it was a certainty*0,
      and must have been within Mr Duckenfield’s contemplation. However the ‘lie’ had
      no impact on judicial proceedings except to bring vilification upon the officer.
      Further I have grave concern about the proof required to show that Mr Duckenfield
      intended to pervert the course o f justice. There is no good and sufficient evidence
      that the officer was attempting a cover up o f his own and other police actions at
      1515 on the day as victims were still dying on the field. Lord Taylor had the
      opportunity to observe Mr Duckenfield and the relevant witnesses on this point
      during his Inquiry. His conclusions were the result o f those observations coupled
      with his vast experience. I find nothing in the evidence that would bring me to any
      other conclusion. Mr Duckenfield could not cope with the great stress he was put
      under, his reaction was out o f character. He did not have the intent necessary so as
      to have a realistic prospect o f conviction on this allegation. For that reason I do not
      go to consider the public interest test from the Code. However policy guidelines are
      that tha offence is reserved for for the more serious cases o f interference with the
      course o f justice rather than where proceedings are at an early stage (or had not
      started), and there was little impact on them.

16.26 The above argument applies equally to the consideration o f the test for taking over
      the case in order to discontinue it, both as regards the quality o f the evidence and
      also the stated policy on the public interest.

       The Interests of Justice

16.27 I have found no factors that would affect any o f the CPS recommendations as being
      clearly likely to damage the interests o f justice. None o f the stated examples in para
      7.10 o f Volume 1 o f the CPS Prosecution Manual apply. Although disclosure may
      involve voluminous material, it should not pose any real difficulty. Documents
      subject to claims o f public interest immunity or legal privilege can be dealt with
      under the normal rules applicable to third party disclosure.




              See R v Rafique at page 10 o f this review.
17.    RECOMMENDATIONS

       Mr Duckenfield

17.1   On the charges o f manslaughter and misconduct in a public office I find that while
       there is both insufficient evidence for a realistic prospect o f conviction and for a
       prima facie case (on the balance o f probabilities), there is some evidence o f
       negligence that can be put before a jury. I am unable to say that there is clearly no
       case to answer. In coming to this opinion I have taken into account not only th
       verdicts o f the jury but also the Coroner’s summing up and his consideration that
       there was some evidence to go before the jury on the question o f unlawful killings.

       Recommendation: That the private prosecution be allowed to continue on these
       three charges.

17.2   As regards the PCOJ, this charge adds little to the private prosecutor’s case. In my
       opinion there is clearly no case to answer as well as there being valid public interest
       factors against this matter proceeding.

       Recommendation: That this part of the proceedings be taken over and then
       discontinued.

       Mr Murray

17.3   I consider that the individual responsibility o f this officer for the omission to act
       after gate C was opened is less than that o f Mr Duckenfield. Mr Murray deferred
       to his superior for the making o f the crucial decision, although he quite properly
       prompted him when delay set in. While I note Lord Taylor’s comments about the
       joint misjudgement by the two officers concerning the buildup o f fans at the
       turnstiles, I am more persuaded by Counsels’ opinion o f 1990 where they lay the
       sole blame for the omission to act after the gate was opened at the feet o f Mr
       Duckenfield. The evidence therefore passes the ‘clearly no case to answer’ test.

       Recommendation: That ail three offences against this officer be taken over and
       discontinued.

       Disclosure

17.4   The disclosure o f material in our possession should follow in accordance with our
       stated policy. The South Yorkshire Police are likely to follow our lead albeit
       grudgingly. A claim for documents attracting public interest immunity and legal
       privilege should be maintained for the advices o f counsel, internal CPS reports and
       correspondence with the police based on the standard grounds. I consider that there
       is no relevant information in them that cannot be found in disclosable documents.
       Our material may be inspected at York by prior arrangement.




                                                                                           58
18.    CONCLUSIONS

18.1   My review o f all the evidence and representations has caused me some difficulty as
       I find that there is a fine balance between the arguments for and against. It is a
       matter o f judgement as to w hether or not there is clearly no case to answer (in
       conjunction with the public interest factors) on the issue o f gross negligence. I
       accept that another reviewing lawyer could come to a different, although still
       justifiable, decision. It may be that the Director has certain policy views that would
       affect his decision.

18.2   The potential ramifications o f the various decision options are:

       (i)     Decision to take over and discontinue the case in its entirety: The HFSG will
               take the matter to judicial review o f the CPS decision.

       (ii)    Decision to let the private prosecution proceed in its entirety: The defendants
               are unlikely to proceed by way o f judicial review o f the CPS decision. They
               have already intimated that they are prepared to put forward abuse o f process
               arguments to the Magistrates’ Court. A committal will be strongly contested,
               and if my arguments are correct will fail.

       (iii)   Decision to accept the review recommendations: There would be pressure on
               the HFSG to decide between continuing with the remaining charges or
               accepting delay while they go to the Divisional Court. Those representing
               Mr Duckenfield would have more fuel for their abuse o f process arguments
               on a fair trial.

18.3   Whatever our decision may be, if the eventual proceedings are not favourable to the
       HFSG they are most likely to take further action, either by way o f their
       representations that all previous judicial proceedings are invalid because o f an
       alleged conspiracy by the police to suppress evidence, or by use o f the European
       Convention on Human Rights.




George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
CPS Central Casework
York

27 October 1998




                                                                                           59
  HILLSBOROUGH REPORT




       APPENDIX 1




1990 BRIEFING NOTE FOR THE
     ATTORNEY GENERAL
ATTORNEY GENERAL

               Background Note: Hillsborough Disaster


1.      On the 15th April 1989 at the Hillsborough stadium,
        Sheffield 95 people died and over 400 were injured due to
        gross overcrowding and crushing in the two pens behind
        the goal at the Leppings Lane end of the ground.

2.      A public enquiry headed by Lord Justice Taylor produced
        an interim report in August 1989.  The West Midlands
        Police assisted in the preparation of the report and
        later conducted a criminal investigation which was
        requested by the D.P.P.  The criminal investigation was
        extensive producing bulky documentation and a full
        transcript of the evidence given at the enquiry.   The
        police investigation was meticulous.

3.      A copy of Lord Justice Taylor's Interim Report and a copy
        of Counsel's opinion by Gareth Williams Q.C. and Peter
        Birts Q.C. are attached.  It would be useful to refer to
        the plans at Appendix 1 and Appendix 4 of the report.


Facts

4.      There is little, if any, dispute as to what actually
        happened,Chief Superintendent Duckenfield was the police
        officer responsible for policing the match.

5.      At 2.5 2 pm (8 minutes before kick-off) Duckenfield
        ordered one of the exit gates, Gate C, at the Leppings
        Lane end to be opened.   This was to relieve massive
        overcrowding and crushing at the turnstiles caused by a
        build up of supporters arriving after 2.30 pm.   In the
        five minutes after the gate was opened 2000 supporters
        entered the ground and went into a tunnel under the west
        stand which gave access only to the central pens 3 and 4.
        Those pens were already full.   There was no controlled
        way in which supporters were allowed in to the pens.    The
        additional influx caused intense pressure and resulted in
        the collapse of a crush barrier 124A near the front of
        pen 3. Many died from suffocation and crushing and some
        were trampled on.   Perimeter gates were not opened by the
        police partly because of orders not to do so without
        permission and partly because officers did not appreciate
        the severity of what was occurring initially.   Later when
        the emergency was appreciated the small size and number
        of the gates made evacuation extremely difficult.

6.      The build up of fans outside the ground was due to the
        geography of the turnstiles, their marking and numbers
        and to a loss of police control of supporters outside
        becoming keen to get inside before the kick-off.
7.    The three major causal factors were:-

      i.    the layout of the ground
      i i . the opening of the exit gate (gate C)
      iii. the build up outside the ground

Layout of the Ground

8.    The club were advised by a structural engineer, Dr
      Eastwood.  The Safety of Sports Grounds Act 1975 required
      expert advice to obtain a safety certificate under the
      Act from the local council.  Dr Eastwood advised
      additional crush barriers, these were installed in 197 9.
      A certificate was granted.

9.    The safety certificate did not specify maximum numbers
      for the pens.  This, with turnstile monitoring of
      numbers, would have limited entrance to the p e n s .

10.   It was the policy of the police at semi-finals to allow
      movement of supporters between pens before the kick-off
      after which the radial gates would be closed and locked.
      Hence without a control on the numbers entering the
      tunnel access pens 3 and 4 were liable to become grossly
      overcrowded.  The police had accepted responsibility for
      monitoring the pens and their policy of "letting the fans
      find their own level" was severely criticized by Taylor.

11.   The exit gate C, opened following Duckenfield's
      instruction, is opposite the tunnel.  No steps were taken
      to cordon off the tunnel or divert the fans around the
      sides of the West stand.  The supporters had nowhere to
      go but the already crowded pens 3 and 4.

12.   At 3.04 pm a surge forward in pen 3 caused the crush
      barrier 124A to break.  This appears to have been a major
      factor in the deaths since there were far fewer deaths in
      pen 4 where no barrier collapsed.  Barrier number 144 had
      been removed in 1986, its absence meant there was no
      retarding structure as fans emerged from the tunnel into
      pen 3. There was unbroken diagonal pressure from the
      mouth of the tunnel down to barrier 124A.  the collapse
      of barrier 124A was a major factor in the cause of the
      deaths.  Barrier 124A was slightly corroded but it had
      been tested in July 1988 and had passed loading tests
      specified in the Government's Green Guide.  Taylor found
      that corrosion played a part in the collapse but the
      effective cause was the excessive unanticipated pressure
      exerted at the time of the forward surge.

13.   The crushing in pens 3 and 4 was not recognised by police
      either in the control box or on the perimeter of the
      pitch.  Even supporters nearby, broadcasters and stewards
      were not immediately a w a r e .

14.   Even after the crush, and until 3.06 pm, the main police
      concern was to prevent a pitch invasion.
The build up outside the Ground

15.   The opening of gate C which precipitated the disaster was
      made necessary by the massive build up of supporters at
      the Leppings Lane turnstiles between 2.30 and 2.50 pm.
      As kick-off time approached the crushing increased.    The
      police lost control of the crowd.  The crush became
      unmanageable, many feared for their lives.  The kick-off
      was not postponed.  This course was only to be taken if
      there was a major cause of delay eg. a motorway accident
      or fog.  Taylor concluded that the kick-off should have
      been postponed.

16.   There was considerable evidence that people would be
      killed if gate C was not opened and that Duckenfield had
      no alternative but to do s o . That being so neither
      Duckenfield nor other officers took any steps to deal
      with the consequences of opening the gate.   The tunnel
      was not closed off even though such action had been taken
      by the police in 1988.. Duckenfield did order the influx
      at gate A, which had been opened earlier, to be
      monitored.  His omission to do so at gate C was said by
      Taylor to be "a blunder of the first magnitude". This
      was the immediate cause of the crushing in pens 3 and 4.
      It was not the sole cause.

17.   The layout of the turnstiles, inadequate space for the
      formation of orderly queues and the limited extent of the
      waiting area combined with poor designation and marking
      of turnstiles contributed to slow turnstile operation.

18.   There were only 7 turnstiles to admit 10,100 fans at the
      other end of the ground there were 60 turnstiles to admit
      29,800.  Taylor concluded that the police and club should
      have foreseen potential queuing and waiting to admit
      fans.

19.   Many supporters arrived after 2.30 pm.   Tickets advised
      arriving 15 minutes before kick-off.   Some arrived
      without tickets.   The evidence shows many had been
      drinking.   Taylor concluded the majority had not been
      affected by drink.   Unruliness contributed to the pushing
      effect.   This contributed to the loss of control by the
      police.

20.   The main factor in the police loss of control was
      ineffective strategy planning for the large number of
      arrivals. Taylor concluded that by controlling the fans
      and postponing the kick-off gate C could have remained
      closed.

Responsibilities

21.   The layout of the ground was the responsibility of the
      Club, Eastwood, the Council and the police.  No one
      foresaw that up to 2000 fans would ever be allowed to
      enter pens 3 and 4 when they were already overcrowded.
      No one anticipated gate 3 being opened or the crushing
      outside the ground.  The police must take the main
      responsibility for letting the fans "find their own
      level", however, the Club must share responsibility for
      the way in which supporters were allowed to fill the pens
      at semi-finals.

22.   The opening of gate C was Duckenfield's responsibility.
      In the circumstances his decision was correct.     His
      failure was to give no order to deal with the sudden
      influx of f a n s . Had the tunnel been cordoned off the
      disaster would almost certainly have been averted.

23.   The layout of the turnstiles, their numbers and marking
       are primarily matters for the police and the Club, but
       the Council have a partial responsibility to ensure safe
       access to the ground.

Criminal Offences

24.   The two offences would be Manslaughter and Culpable
      Misfeasance.  These potential offences were considered
      against all parties, i e . the club, the Council, the
      police and the structural engineers (Mr Eastwood).

The Club

25.   The Club's responsibility for the layout and alterations
       inside the ground and for the layout of the turnstiles is
      where any potential liability exists.    It is clear that
       these were not the sole, or even the major causes and
       that any actions and omissions by the club only partly
       contributed to the crushing and deaths.   The Club not
      only relied on its own consultant engineer Dr Eastwood
       but it responded to the suggestions and advice of the
      police in important m a t t e r s .

26.   There is insufficient evidence to establish the actus
      reus of manslaughter against the Club.  Additionally the
      evidence does not show either the recklessness or gross
      negligence required for the manslaughter offence.
Eastwood and Partners

27.   Eastwood's advice formed only part of the events that
      lead tot he structural condition at the ground.       It could
      not be said that his advice caused the d e a t h s . In fact
      some of his advice, not acted on for financial reasons,
      may have lead to maximum limits being set for pens 3 and
      4.

28.   Again there is insufficient for the actus reus of
      manslaughter nor can the required recklessness or
      negligence be established against Eastwood or his firm.

The Council

29.   The Council is responsible for the safety certificate and
      compliance with the Green Guide.  There were minor errors
      on the council's part but these only contributed in part
      to the ground conditions.   These are too remote to
      amount to the actus reus of manslaughter.  Again there is
      no evidence of recklessness or gross negligence.

The Police

30.   It is agreed that the main responsibility for the
      disaster must rest with the police.   They have partial
      responsibility for the ground layout.   They were
      responsible for the "find their own level" policy with
      the supporters and also for supervising the Leppings Lane
      turnstiles.  The difficulties of large scale admission to
      the ground should have been foreseen.   However, the
      police failures occurred as part of a complex sequence of
      events, often outside the control of the police.   The
      difficulties at Leppings Lane were partly geographical
      and resulted largely in the arrival of vast numbers of
      supporters after 2.30 pm.  Those matters were beyond
      police control. Unruly behaviour by a minority created
      problems.

31.   Responsibility for the failure to postpone the kick-off,
      and to cordon off the access tunnel is confined to
      Duckenfield.  As an organisation the police cannot be
      said to have caused the deaths by their strategy and
      operational shortcomings.  Whilst there were errors of
      judgement and practice there is no evidence that the
      police acted recklessly or in a grossly negligent manner
      as an organisation.

Chief Superintendent Duckenfield

32.   The failure to cordon off the access tunnel and not to
      postpone the kick-off were bad errors of judgement.  They
      were his ultimate responsibility.  He failed to notice
      the overcrowding in pens 3 and 4. He was recently
      promoted and had little experience for this semi-final
      match.  His slowness to respond to what was happening was
      a result of is lack of experience.
33.   His failures significantly contributed to the crowd
      pressure which caused the crushing and collapse of
      barrier 124A. ' Had Duckenfield the requisite intention to
      support a charge of manslaughter?   Clearly there was no
      unlawful or dangerous act on his part.   In failing to
      postpone the kick-off or order closure of the tunnel
      after opening gate C did he do an act: which created an
      obvious and serious risk of causing personal injury
      either not giving thought to the possibility of such risk
      or having recognised that there was some risk involved
      nevertheless gone ahead and taken it?

34.   There are difficulties in proving that he intended to do
      an act which created an obvious and serious risk of
      causing personal injury.  The Director and Counsel
      concluded that it was not an obvious risk at the time.
      It is easy with hindsight to judge, but there must be a
      grave doubt as to whether the omissions created a risk
      which was obvious to anyone on the ground at the t i m e .

35.   The Director concluded that there was insufficient
      evidence under the recklessness head of manslaughter
      against Duckenfield.  Nor was there evidence that he was
      grossly negligent in his failures to act.

36.   Counsel and the Director concluded that there was no
      evidence that Duckenfield was wilfully neglectful of his
      duty or was culpable so have to committed the offence of
      Culpable Malfeasance by a public official.

Conclusions

37.   The Director's decision not to issue proceedings was
      reached solely on the basis of an insufficiency of
      evidence to prove any criminal offence against any
      individual or body corporate i e . the City Council, the
      Police, the Engineers. The decision was reached in
      accordance with the Director's code for Crown
      Prosecutors.  The Public Interest factor was not one
      which came into play as the evidential sufficiency
      criterium had not been established in respect of any
      potential defendant.  Full consideration was given to the
      possibility of the proseuction of each of the bodies
      involved despite their corporate status.

38.   The disaster was caused not by one single error or
      failure but by the combined effect of a series of
      mistakes, mis judgments and poor decisions, made by groups
      of people both over a period of time and by individuals
      on the day of the disaster.

Coroner's Inquests

39.   The Inquests began after the disaster and were adjourned
      when the Director requested a criminal investigation.
      The Coroner is obliged to adjourn an inquest when the
      Director makes such a request under the Coroner's Rules.
                                                                   1
                                  7.

       Once the Coroner has received notification that the
       Director has decided not to issue criminal proceedings
       (or after such proceedings have concluded) the Coroner
       may resume the Inquest hearing.  The Hillsborough Inquest
       recently recommenced in November 1990.  The latest
       estimate is that the Inquests will continue hearing
       evidence and are likely to conclude in March 1991.

40 .   The point made by Kenneth Hind MP about the matter being
       forgotten if action is not taken against those
       responsible can be answered by pointing to the detailed
       interim and final report of the Public Inquiry conducted
       by Lord Justice Taylor, the civil proceedings at which
       the police admitted liability and the fact that
       disciplinary action is being considered by the Police
       Complaints Authority against various officers.

41.    The Coroner's jury may be influenced by the publicity
       surrounding the Director's decision.  The criminal
       investigation and any prosecution must take precedence
       over the Coroner's Inquisitorial hearing where no
       individual can be held responsible.  The Public Inquiry
       itself has been widely reported and such publicity can
       also be said to influence the jury's conclusions.




                                                   /
                                               /
                                               /
                                                /
                                           /
                                           /
                                       /
 HILLSBOROUGH REPORT




       APPENDIX 2




 SCHEDULE OF MATERIAL
CONSIDERED IN 1998 REVIEW
