f i i C   U    j ,         (C                              :              |

                                           YZrv-,                                     ~



                                              J                                c- ( e ^ y J C                     ^ -v                        ^       ^            a*-*                 t —N >I

                ''J*/^-»            £|             f A^ue.                     /Vv~fct-,^-»^-Lx-j

                                           *~y                                        j v '-              (e-tf\W e,                          ^           cLo».Ct




                      /v \ o ^ a                                ^ 1 £~ S               ^ C- ^C”0 ^                  ^ Q-O-I^c.- p 1 •


                            "            ^ 7 v4 g.                     u ie.          W eA —.                                             ?

                            "’ "         '& " »                * -J£                      k          1 ^ --------*v \   j   > -I< L a -           ffv e -L         * J i_ p s   •         ^


                                                       -           p           ^J             d*|j) U z ^ W ^ V \                             |ii3V          1<7     ^              •

                                ~                                                                          U -                U lT K ^ b                     )


                C £/ CJ C                         U                    L^-vVc.                      av^ ^ s
               6^w^wU/                            t        ,              .


 &        4          fcL ^ L             - ~           .                  2-13                      8 o sr-2 _

                ^    J ~        /    p - t^ (3 -                   V ^cu       C .1           U ~           1 V * - l » -S          f                                     •




 <§>      JW                                      ••                      2T 3                      I-2-3-2-
                                                                 y
Chris

R v DPP EX PARTE DUCKENFIELD

Sue Ross rang.

There is to be a conference with Counsel, Philip Havers QC, tomorrow (4 March) at 2.15pm
at 1 Crown Office Row.

It would be yourself, Sue, Mr Havers and Stephen Wooler.

I took it upon myself to ring Chris Enzor. He said that he was reading his way through the
papers and that he knew there was to be a conference, but that it was not his intention to
attend. But, o f course, he is very happy to discuss if you thought otherwise about his
attendance.


Ann
3 March 1999
                                                                                                    RECEIVED
                                                                                                      03 MAR 1999
From:                Chris Enzor
To:                  CPSHQL.DCOS.STOCKSC, CPSHQL.DPP.Director, CPSHQL.D...                           DIRECTOR
Date:                3 March 1999 7:41am                                                           (CASEWORK)
Subject:             Hillsborough

Some recipients will know that the defendants in the Hillsborough case (retired Superintendents Duckenfield and
Murray) have applied for leave for Judicial Review of the CPS decision not to intervene and take over and
discontinue the private prosecution launched on behalf of the Hillsborough Family Support Group.
The application for leave is listed on 8 March 1999.
Treasury Solicitors have been instructed (Sue Ross is dealing with it). She is instructing counsel - Philip Havers,
all being well.
HFSG, whilst not strictly a party to this application, may seek to make representations.
It has been suggested that this application and the JR application of the South Yorkshire Chief Constable against
his own police authority on the funding issue be linked. I do not think this is appropriate as the issues are entirely
separate as far as we are concerned. Sue is of the same view.

CC:                 CPSHQL.DCE.NEWELLC, CPSHQL.DCE.longmana, JENNINGP,...
                                                                                             RECEIVED
From:              Michael Kennedy
To:                CPSHQL.CCU(sharplid), CPSHQL.DCOS(STOCKSC), CPSHQL.                         0 3 MAR 1999
Date:              3 March 1999 8:45am                                                         DIRECTOR
Subject:           Hillsborough-Reply
                                                                                             (CASEWORK)
Chris

Thanks. For what it's worth, I agree.
The arguments which will be raised on these issues, so far as I understand it, are not connected and so should not
be linked. I can, however, see good sense in having the police funding case heard first.

Mike

CC:                 CPSHQL.CCU(KilpatrJ), CPSHQL.DCE(longmana, NEWELLC.
MAE. 1 999 1 2 : 2 1                                                                                                                  NO. 8 4 1 8     P. 1 / 3 3
                                                                                                                                            — sU
                                                        W A L K E R
                                                        M O R R I S                                                                           n ~ '         ? r^i
                                                             Solicitors

                                                                                                                                  V           Vv.u-W ;
                  Kings Court, 12 King Street, Leeds, LSI 2HL- Telephone 0113 2832500.
                 Facsimile 0113 2459412. Document Exchange 12051 Leeds 24, Email info®valkermorris.co.uk
                                           Web: http://w w .w sJkerm orris.co.uk
                                                                                                                                                  & L
                                                                                                                                                             H iy
                                FACSIMILE                         TRANSM ISSION




       To                       Sue Ross                                From                Walker Morris RBM

       At                       Treasury Solicitors                     D ate               4 March 1999

        Fax                                        ~                    Page 1 of 32

        Telephone                                                       M atter N um ber MUR.313-1




                                              PLEASE SEE ATTACHED:-


    Letter




                                   Private and Confidential
      This facsimile may contain information that is privileged, confidential or otherwise
      protected from disclosure. It must not be used by, or its contents copied or
      disclosed to persons other than the addressee. If you have received this facsimile
      in error please notify us immediately by telephone at the number listed above and
      return it to us by mail. We will reimburse postage.

             A list o f Ac pzm cn1   is opm n mspaxion at * r ttbxM   R'g»L*itd b y lic L to ) Sncierf m lit   w » A irt   afm vatm m t bmtnas.
4. MAE. 1 3 9 9 1 2 : 2 2                                                                                                                           NO. 8 4 1 8    F. 2 / 3 3

                                                                     W A L K E R
                                                                     m o r r i S
                                                                           Solicitors



                      Kings Court, 12 King Street, Leeds, LSI 2HL. Telephone 0113 2832500.
                     Facsimile 0113 2459412. Document Exchange 12051 Leeds 24. Email info@walkermorris.co.uk
                                               Web: hxxp://nrw"9r.-walkermorris.co.uk



       FAO Sue Ross                                                                                        Our ref              RBM/BQW/MUKRA
       Treasury Solicitors                                                                                                      Y
       Queen Anne’s Chambers
       28 Broadway                                                                                          Your ref
       LONDON
       SW1
       BY FAX                                                                                               4 March 1999


       Dear Ms Ross

       OUR CLIENT : M R B MURRAY

       As requested I attach a copy of the form 86A. Our application is likely to be lodged on
       Friday morning and we would then anticipate serving you with the whole bundle later
       that morning.

       Yours sincerely




       R B Manning
       PARTNER
       Enc




               A tiis o f the pdrmers* norm's is open n? inspection at die above address. Jtegulaticd by The Law Soatty in the conduct i f inw& tm tnt butiniis,
4. MAE, 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 2                                          NO, 8 4 1 8   P, 3 / 3 3




    TN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
                                                            CO
    QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION

    CROWN OFFICE LIST

           TN TT-TF MATTER OF AN APPLICATION OF LEAVE TO APPLY FOR JUDICIAL
                                        REVIEW

     BETWEEN:

                                        THE QUEEN

                                           and

                             DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
                                                                       Respondent
                                         EX PARTE

                                  BERNARD DEAN MURRAY
                                                                          Applicant




                            NOTICE OF APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO
                                APPLY FO R JUDICIAL REVIEW
4. MAP, 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 2                                                 NO. 8 4 1 8   P. 4 / 3 3



   IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE                                                         Crown Office

   Ref
   QUEENS BENCH DIVISION                                                          CO: 856/99

   CROWN OFFICE LIST


   In the matter of an application for Judicial Review


    The Queen v Director of Public Prosecutions


    Ex parte Bernard Dean Murray


    Notice of application for leave to apply for Judicial Review Order 53 rule 3(2)


    Judgement order, decision etc.:
    The decisions communicated by the Respondent on 18,h December 1998:

              Not to take over, pursuant to Section 6(2) of the Prosecution of Offences Act

               1985, the conduct of criminal proceedings brought against the Applicant in the

              Leeds Magistrates Court by Ann Adlington for offences of manslaughter and

               misfeasance in public office, and further,

               Not to give notice to the Magistrates Court, pursuant to Section 23(3) of the

               Prosecution of Offences Act 1985, that he did not want those proceedings to

               continue.



     Relief sought:

      Judicial Review in the form of:

                j.          Certiorari to quash the decisions identified above.

                ii.         Mandamus to compel the Respondent to reconsider those decisions and in


                                                            1
4. MAP, 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 2                                                                    NO. 8 4 1 8   P. 5 / 3 3



                        doing so to apply a lawful policy consistent with the judgment o f the Court

                        as to law and public policy.

              iii.     Alternative to ii above, Mandamus to compel the Respondent to take over the

                        prosecution and thereafter either,

                            [a] to discontinue the proceedings, or alternatively,

                            [b] to conduct the same in accordance with the Code for Crown Prosecutors

                            1994, issued under Section 10 of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985.

    Interim relief in the form of:

              iv.      An order staying proceedings in the Leeds Magistrates Court pending

                            determination of the Judicial Review.

              v.       A direction that the substantive hearing of the instant Application be not listed

                            for hearing until after the determination of an application for judicial review

                            by the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire against a determination by the

                            South Yorkshire Police Authority to rescind a decision to provide the

                            Applicant with funds [a] to defend the criminal charges, and [b] to bring and

                            conduct the present application.




     GROUNDS ON W HICH RELIEF IS SOUGHT

      Background

      1.1        The Applicant is jointly charged with manslaughter and misfeasance in public office

      arising out of the 96 deaths following the disaster on 15 April 1989 at the Hillsborough Football

      Ground where he was a senior Police Officer, second in command. The prosecution is brought

      privately on behalf of the Hillsborough Families Support Group [HFSG].


                                                             2
4. MAR. 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 3                                            NO. 8 4 1 8   P. 6 / 3 3



     1.2       In August 1990, after considering the Report of Lord Justice Taylor’s Inquiry into the

     disaster, and following the advice of two leading counsel, the Director of Public Prosecutions

     announced his decision that no criminal prosecutions would be instituted arising out o f the

     disaster. In March 1991, verdicts of accidental death were returned by a juiy at the Coroner’s

     Inquest; verdicts of unlawful killing were not returned. In 1993, the Divisional Court rejected

     applications by HFSG to quash the verdicts and order a fresh Inquest.



     1.3       In 1997, following pressure from HFSG to reconsider the decision not to prosecute, the

     Director affirmed the original decision,



      1.4      In 1997, after further pressure from HFSG, the Home Secretary appointed Stuart-Smith

     LJ-, to cany out an independent scrutiny o f the previous Inquiries, investigations and decisions,

     with particular emphasis on whether the Director should reconsider the decisions not to

     prosecute. Claims by HFSG that new evidence existed to justify such a recommendation were

      firmly rejected by the Lord Justice who concluded that there was no basis for re-opening the

      Hillsborough Inquiry, the Inquests or for changing the decisions not to prosecute the Applicant,



      1.5       On 18 February 1998, in presenting the Scrutiny Report to the House of Commons, the

      Home Secretary announced his conclusion that there was no basis for inviting the Director to

      reconsider decisions not to prosecute. He expressed his acceptance of the conclusions and

      recommendations of Stuart-Smith L.J., and disclosed that both the Attorney-General and the

      Director o f Public Prosecutions concurred.



       1.6       The private prosecutions were first commenced in June 1998.


                                                       3
4. MAR, 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 3                                                                          NO, 8 4 1 8   P, 7 / 3 3



     1.7       Between 27 July 1998 and 9 October 1998, the Applicant made submissions to the

    Director that this was a proper case for his intervention to take over the private prosecution and

     withdraw the summonses, pursuant to the provisions of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985

     [the 1985 Act], His refusal to do so was announced on 18 December 1998.




     Issues o f Low

     2.1       Whether the Respondent’s policy on the circumstances in which he will intervene to take

     over and discontinue a private prosecution is wrong and unlawful. The Applicant submits that

     it is because:

            ' L [a] it does not give proper effect to his duties and powers under the 1985 Act, and

            | [b] it does not take proper account of material public interest considerations.



     2.2        Whether the Respondent’s decision was, in any event, Wednesbury unreasonable. The

                Applicant submits that it was perverse.




      Statutory provisions

      3.1       The Director’s powers and duties. Section 3 of the 1985 Act (so far as material):

                 (1) The Director shall discharge hisfunctions under this or any other enactment under

                the superintendence o f the Attorney-General.

                 (2) It shall be the duty o f the Director, subject to any provisions contained in the

                 Criminal Justice Act 1987 -

                 (a)    to take over the conduct o f all criminal proceedings, other than specified

                 proceedings, instituted on b eh a lf o f a police force (whether by a member o f thatforce

                 or by any other person);

                 (b) to institute and have the conduct o f criminal proceedings in any case where it

                                                             4
4. MAP, 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 3                                                                              NO. 8 4 1 8   P. 8 / 3 3



               appears to him that -

                             (i)   the importance or difficulty o f the case makes it appropriate that

                            proceedings should be instituted by him; or

                            (ii) it is otherwise appropriatefor proceedings to be instituted by him;



     3.2       Preservation of the right to bring a private prosecution, and the Director’s powers in

               relation to that right. Section 6 of the 1985 Act:

               (1) Subject to subsection (2) below, nothing in this Part shall preclude any person from

               instituting any criminal proceedings or conducting any criminal proceedings to which

               the Director's duty to take over the conduct o f proceedings does not apply.

                (2) Where criminal proceedings are instituted in circumstances in which the Director

                is not under a duty to take over their conduct, he may nevertheless do so at any stage.



     3.3       The Director’s power to discontinue proceedings. Section 23 of the 1985 A ct

                (1) Where the Director o f Public Prosecutions has the conduct o f proceedings for an

                offence, this section applies in relation to the preliminary stages o f those proceedings.

                (2) In this section, ‘preliminary stage " in relation to proceedings for an offence does

                not include -

                (b) in the case o f an indictable offence, any stage o f the proceedings after *

                             ( i) the accused has been committedfor trial;

                (3) Where, at any time during the preliminary stages o f the proceedings, the Director

                gives notice under this section to the clerk o f the court that he does not want the

                proceedings to continue, they shall be discontinued with effectfrom the giving o f that

                notice..."



      3.4        By section 3(2)(b) Parliament has imposed a duty upon the Director to institute and


                                                                5
4. MAR. 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 3                                                     NO. 8 4 1 8   P. 9 / 3 3



    conduct cases o f importance or difficulty. This case would be both. It was plainly not

     Parliament’s intention that the conduct of such cases should be left to a private prosecutor,

     although the right to do so is not precluded. Section 6(1) has effect that the right of an ad hoc

     private prosecutor to institute proceedings extends to cases to which section 3(2)(b) applies: R

     -v- Bow Street Stipendiary Magistrate and another, ex parte South Coast Shipping Co Ltd and

     others [1993] 1 All E.R. 219 [Divisional Court]. But section 6(2) makes plain that the private

     prosecutor’s right is subject to an overriding power of the respondent to take over such

     proceedings. By necessary implication, where a private prosecutor institutes proceedings in a

     case to which section 3(2)(b) applies, the Director has a duty to consider whether to take over

     such proceedings. He may thereafter exercise all his powers including the power to discontinue

     the proceedings under section 23. Thus, the right to institute and conduct a private prosecution

      is not unfettered, and the statutory provisions expressly empower the Director (acting under the

      superintendence of the Attorney-General) to intervene.



      3.5       The scope for private prosecution. In R -v- Bow Street Stipendiary Magistrate and

      another, ex parte South Coast Shipping Co Ltd and others, Lloyd LJ cited a quotation from the

      Report of the Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure 1981, as to the justification for ad hoc

      private prosecution: (see p.222e):

                 "It provides a useful and effective safeguard against ‘improper inaction' by the

                prosecuting authority. ”

      In Gouriet -v- Union o f Post Office Workers [1978] A.C. 435 at 477b Lord Wilberforce said;

                  “This historical right... though rarely exercised in relation to indictable offences, and

                 though ultimately liable to be controlled by the Attorney-General (by taking over the

                 p ro secu tio n   and, if he thinks fit, entering a nolle prosequi) remains a valuable

                 constitutional safeguard against inertia or partiality on the part o f authority.

                                                              6
4. MAR. 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 4                                                                               NO. 8 4 1 8   P. 1 0 / 3 3




     3.6       It is recognised that the Respondent’s policy on intervention would be unlawful if il

     operated to deny the right of private prosecution in cases where as a matter of constitutional

     principle that right might be an essential safeguard against impropriety by the established

     prosecuting authority of the State. But the Respondent’s policy is equally unlawful if, in a case

     of undoubted importance and difficulty, its operation amounts to an abdication o f responsibility

     to stand by and give effect to a dutiful decision not to prosecute. A fortiori where there can be

     no suggestion of inertia, partiality or improper action, and the decision not to prosecute has been

     vindicated by the conclusion of an independent scrutiny accepted by the Home Secretary, the

     Director and the Attorney-General.



      The Respondent’s Policy

     4.1        Letter 27 July 1998 (see paragraph 28 of the affidavit of the Applicant’s solicitor: page

      [x in the bundle]:

                “The CPS will take over a private prosecution where there is a particular needfor it

                to do so on behalfo f the public. ... In the instant case where we have been asked by the

                Defendants to take over the prosecution in order to discontinue it, we would do so if one

                (or more) o f the following circumstances applies:

                            There is clearly no case to answer: A private prosecution commenced in these

                            circumstances would be uttfbunded, and would, therefore be an abuse o f the right to

                            bring a prosecution.

                            The public interestfactors tending againstprosecution clearly outweigh thosefactors

                            tending in favour.

                            The prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests o f justice, ’’




                                                                7
4. MAP, 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 4                                                    NO. 8 4 1 8   P. 1 1 / 3 3



     4.2       Application of the policy to the present case. Letter 1 February 1999, (see paragraph 34

     of the accompanying affidavit, [bundle page: ]:

                "/« this case I took the decision not to intervene. After careful consideration I

               concluded in respect o f the charges o f manslaughter and wilful neglect to perform a

               public duty ... that 1 could not say there is clearly no case to answer. It was not right,

               therefore, for the service to take over the proceedings with a view to terminating them.



               I also considered whether, nevertheless, there were overriding public interest factors

                that should lead to the service intervening with a view to discontinuance, but I came to

                the conclusion that any public interestfactors tending against a Prosecution did not

                clearly outweigh those in favour. Nor did I consider that the Prosecution is clearly

                likely to damage the interests o f justice. ’’



      The ‘clearly no case to answer ’test

      5.1      This test is wrong and unlawful. It imposes an unwarranted fetter upon the Director s

      statutory power to take over the conduct of proceedings (section 6(2)), and to discontinue them

      (section 23(3)). It effectively reduces the scope for intervention to cases where there is no

      evidence at all to afford a basis for conviction. As against a private prosecutor, the Director will

      only intervene and discontinue where he concludes that the magistrate would be bound to

      Hifitnks the charges at committal, or the Crown Court would be bound to dismiss the case at the

      close o f the prosecution’s case.



      5.2      Where the Respondent or the Crown Prosecution Service have the conduct o f a

      prosecution they “must be satisfied that there is enough evidence to provide a "realistic

      prospect o f conviction ” against each defendant on each charge, (para. 5.1 Code for Crown


                                                                 8
4, MAR. 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 4                                                   NO. 8 4 1 8   P. 1 2 / 3 3



     Prosecutors [’Hie Code’]). This involves not only that there should be a prima facie case in law,

     but also that the evidence should be good enough to found a basis for conviction. From 1990

     up to the challenged decision in December 1998, the Respondent’s view has consistently been

     that there is no realistic prospect of conviction. See the letter of 1st February 1999:

                     the CPS is not satisfied, on the basis o f its own assessment o f the strength

               o f the evidence, that the evidence would pass the evidential sufficiency test in the

               Code (that there should be a ‘realistic prospect o f a conviction )




     The Public Interest Factors test

     6.1        The Respondent has wholly failed to identify any public interest factor in favour of

     prosecution upon which reliance has been placed and which is said not to be clearly outweighed

     by the public interest factors tending against a prosecution.



      6.2      The policy as formulated is wrong. The Respondent’s policy should lean towards

      intervention in a section 3(2)(b) case where the private prosecutor is unable to show a

      defensible justification for proceeding after a decision not to prosecute has been taken.



      6.3      In this case, the pretext for private prosecution following the Scrutiny of Stuait-Smith

      L J,, was the claim that new or fresh evidence had emerged since the Scrutiny. The Director has

      correctly accepted the Applicant’s submissions that such claims were spurious. No other public

      interest reason foT private prosecution can be substantiated.



      6.4      Public interest factors against the prosecution include:

                 •          there is no realistic prospect of conviction;


                                                             9
4. MAP, 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 5                                                                         NO. 3 4 1 8   P. 1 3 / 3 3



                            for over nine years, the Applicant has been assured by various public

                            pronouncements of the Director, the Home Secretary and the Attorney General

                            that his prosecution is unjustifiable; this has created a legitimate expectation that

                            he will not be prosecuted;

                            committal proceedings and any subsequent trial would be a protracted and

                            expensive use of court time;

                            defence of the proceedings would impose a substantial costs burden upon either

                            the South Yorkshire Police Authority, or the legal aid fund and the Applicant

                            personally, which may be irrecoverable against HFSG which is (so far as the

                            Applicant is able to determine) an unincorporated body which has made no

                            disclosure as to its funding;

                            the private prosecutor claims not to be bound to adhere to the principles of the

                            Code for Crown Prosecutors, (and the Respondent appears to accept that this is

                            a correct view);

                            both Stuart-Smith L.J. (in his Scrutiny Report) and McCowan L.J. (in the

                            Divisional Court) accepted that recollections of witnesses are likely to be, or

                            already have been, adversely affected by passage of time;

                            Since 1990f the South Yorkshire Police Force has publicly accepted substantial

                            liability for the disaster and has to date paid over £13 million in compensation

                            to the bereaved and injured;

                             in August 1992, the Applicant was forced to retire from the police service on

                             grounds o f ill health occasioned as a consequence o f his involvement in the

                             tragedy;

                             continuation of the present prosecution would be injurious to his health.


                                                              10
4. MAP, 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 5                                                                 NO. 8 4 1 8   P. 1 4 / 3 3




     6.5       The Respondent’s policy should have reflected the fact that public interest in the tragedy

     was addressed by the Taylor Inquiry and Report and the decisions flowing therefrom. Moreover,

      in response to subsequent pressure from HFSG based on claims of new evidence, Stuart-Smith

      U was appointed to carry out his Scrutiny. His conclusions were that the, “new evidence” had

      been before the Taylor Inquiry and/or was unreliable and/or did not provide grounds for

      r W iH irm   to prosecute the Applicant. Genuine public concern has thus been satisfied by enquiry

      and scrutiny, rather than by prosecution.



      The prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests o f justice test

      7.1       Thus expressed, the policy is wrong. It misplaces the emphasis. In any case to which

      section 3(2)(b) applies, where there is reason for the Respondent to believe that a private

      prosecution might damage the interests of justice, he should intervene.



      7.2       There is overlap between this and the public interest aspect of the policy.



      7.3       Regrettably, it is necessary to assert that HFSG has become a relentless campaigning

      pressure group driven by an obsessive belief that the South Yorkshire Police Force and the West

      Midlands Police Force (appointed by the Police Complaints Authority to investigate the conduct

       o f the South Yorkshire Force) have been involved in a conspiracy to suppress the truth about

      the disaster. Their highly publicised campaign to have the Taylor Inquiry and the Inquests re­

       opened, or an entirely new enquiry, continues. The prosecution of Mr Duckenfield and the

       Applicant appears to be collateral to the main purpose of HFSG which is to attack the two

       police forces. It is not in the broader interests of justice for such a serious and high profile


                                                        11
4. MAR. 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 6                                                                NO. 8 4 1 8   P. 1 5 / 3 3



      criminal prosecution to be mounted and conducted by a highly partisan body lacking a proper

      capacity for objectivity,



      7.4       The private prosecutor has actively and publicly campaigned to attack a decision o f the

      South Yorkshire Police Authority to provide funding for the Applicant’s defence, (See below,)

      The effect has been to undermine the Applicant’s funding.



      Interim R elief- committal proceedings

      8.        The stipendiary magistrate has been invited to adjourn proceedings pending the outcome

      of the Judicial Review. He has stated that, for the time being, the issue is best determined by the

      High Court on the present application.



      Interim R elief - associated proceedings fo r Judicial Review by the C hief Constable o f South

       Yorkshire - [CO 582 - 99]

      9.1        On 22 December 1998, (the day after a hearing before the stipendiary magistrate for the

      purposes o f fixing a timetable for proceedings), HFSG wrote to the Clerk and Treasurer

       awanlring a decision of the Police Authority to provide funding both for the Applicant’s defence

       of the criminal charges and for the present application.



       9.2       The eventual outcome was a decision by the Police Authority to withdraw that funding,

       followed by an application for judicial review by the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire of his

       Police Authority’s decision. Leave was granted by Latham J. on the 12 th February 1999. The

       date fixed for the substantive hearing is 13th * 16th April 1999. Both the Applicant and HFSG

       are to attend,


                                                        12
4. MAR. 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 6                                                                     NO. 8 4 1 8   P. 1 6 / 3 3



     9.3        It is the Applicant’s case that the interests of justice are best served by ensuring that the

     issue o f funding is determined prior to the substantive hearing of this application. To do

     otherwise would expose the Applicant to substantial financial pressure and involve the

     reorganisation of his finances which have been so arranged as to provide for he and his family

     in his retirement.




                                                                        MICHAEL HARRISON Q.C.

                                                                        SIMON MYERSON



     3 March 1999.




                                                         13
  1999 1 2   :                                                            .   7/33



IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
                                                     CQ             /99
QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION

CROWN OFFICE LIST

   IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION OF LEAVE TO APPLY FOR JUDICIAL
                              REVIEW

BETWEEN:

                               THE QUEEN

                                  and

                   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
                                                           Respondent
                               EX PARTE

                        BERNARD DEAN MURRAY
                                                            Applicant



                 AFFIDAVIT ON BEHALF OF THE APPLICANT
4. MAR. 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 6                                                              NO. 8 4 1 8   P. 1 8 / 3 3




                                                                              (1) R B Manning
                                                                             (2) First Affidavit
                                                            (3) Sworn on behalf o f the Applicant
                                                                        (4) Sworn 3 1037^0,
      IN THE H IG H CO U RT OF JUSTICE                                                CO             m
     Q U E EN ’S BEN CH DIVISION

      CROW N OFFICE LIST

     BETW EEN:

                                               THE QUEEN

                                                     and


                              DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
                                                                                         Respondent


                                                E X PARTE


                                     BERNARD DEAN MURRAY
                                                                                            Applicant


                            AFFIDAVIT OF RICHARD BRUCE MANNING




    I, RICHARD BRUCE MANNING, solicitor and partner in the firm o f Walker Morris of Kings

    Court, 12 Kings Street, Leeds LSI 2HL, a Solicitor of the Supreme Court MAKE OATH AND

    SAY AS FOLLOWS:

    I,         I have been at all material times a Partner of Walker Morris Solicitors, Leeds. In 1989

              I was instructed by Mr Bernard Murray to act on his behalf during the Inquest

              proceedings relating to the Hillsborough football disaster which occurred at the

              Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield on the 15th April 1989.



                                                     1
4. MAE. 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 6                                                                NO. 8 4 1 8   P. 1 9 / 3 3



     2.        In 1998, when the Hillsborough Families Support Group (HFSG) commenced private

               prosecution proceedings against Mr Murray, I was further instructed by him in relation

               to defending him against these proceedings.



     3.      I make this affidavit from my own knowledge through the extensive work that I have

               carried out on this matter since 1989.



    4.       There is now produced and shown to me marked “RBM 1 " a bundle o f documents

               relevant to this application.



    5.       Bernard Murray worked as a police officer for 26 years. He attained the position of

              Police Superintendent with the South Yorkshire Police and was stationed at Hammerton

              Road Police Station, Sheffield. On Saturday 15 April 1989, Bernard Murray held the

              position of Sub-Divisional Commander of the FI Sub-Division which includes Sheffield

              Wednesday Football Ground at Hillsborough- Bernard Murray had been posted to this

              Sub-Division on the 14 March 1988. He had been regularly carrying out duties in

              connection with football matches at Hillsborough, including the 1988 FA Semi-Cup

              Final     Match. On the day of the Hillsborough disaster, the Divisional Commander in

              charge o f Police operations at the match was Chief Superintendent David Duckenfield.

              The match was the FA Cup semi-final between Liverpool Football Club and Nottingham

              Forest Football club. The events of the day led to 96 people losing their lives.



   6.         Lord Justice Taylor was appointed by the Government on the 17th April 1989 to carry

              out a public enquiry into the events of the disaster. Oral evidence was heard from 174


                                                        2
- 4. MAE. 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 7                                                                   NO. 8 4 1 8   P. 2 0 / 3 3



                 witnesses between 15th May and 29th June 1989. On the 4th August 1989, Lord Justice

                 Taylor presented an interim report in which he found as follows:



                 6.1          The immediate cause of the gross overcrowding and hence the disaster was the

                              failure, when Gate C was opened, to cut off access to the tunnel leading to the

                              central pens behind the goal which were already overfull;

                6.2           They were overfull because no safe maximum capacities had been laid down, no

                          attempt was made to control entry to individual pens numerically and there was

                          no effective visual monitoring of crowd density.

                6.3      The layout of the barriers afforded less protection than they should and this led

                          to the collapse of the barrier.

                6.4       The Operational Order and police tactics on the day failed to provide for

                          controlling a concentrated arrival of large numbers should that occur in a short

                          period.

               6.5       The presence of a minority who had drunk too much aggravated the problem, as

                          did the Club’s confused and inadequate signs and ticketing.



     7.       Lord Justice Taylor’s final report was dated the 18th January 1990 and he made several

               recommendations in relation to crowd control and safety at sporting events.



     8.       The West Midlands Police had been appointed immediately after the disaster to conduct

               a review o f the policing operation of the South Yorkshire Police. In March 1990, their

               report was submitted to the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) for his consideration

               as to whether there was sufficient evidence for prosecutions for manslaughter to be


                                                            3
4. MAE. 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 7                                                                NO. 8 4 1 8   P. 2 1 / 3 3



                brought against seven officers who were in command during the Hillsborough Football

                disaster (including Bernard Murray).



     9.         The Director of Public Prosecutions referred this report to two experienced Queens

                Counsel for their opinions. Counsel considered whether there was sufficient evidence

               for charges of manslaughter and offences of culpable misfeasance in public office to be

               made out against the officers. Counsel delivered a joint opinion on the 6 th August 1990.

               Based upon the benefit of these advices, the then Director of Public Prosecutions Alan

               Green QC announced on the 30th August 1990 that there was insufficient evidence to

              justify any prosecution for a criminal offence against any member o f the South Yorkshire

               Police Force, or any other party.




    10.       On the 18th April 1990, the HM Coroner for South Yorkshire, Dr Stefan Popper

              commenced the first of a series of “mini inquests”.The purpose of these was to decide

              statutory questions as to when and where a particular victim died. These were necessary

              because during this period the DPP was still considering possible prosecutions against

              the parties involved. The Coroner did not examine how each victim died.



    L1.       Following the announcement by the Director of Public Prosecutions on the 30th August

              1990 that there would be no prosecutions, the Coroner’s Inquest resumed on the 19th

             November 1990 and continued until March 1991. This was the “main” inquest into the

             disaster and examined how each of the victims died. Some 230 witnesses gave evidence

             to the resumed Inquest. On the 28th March 1991 thejuiy returned a verdict o f accidental

             death.


                                                       4
4. MAR, 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 7                                                                   NO, 8 4 1 8   P. 2 2 / 3 3



       12.       In April 1993, an application was made by the families o f the Hillsborough victims for

                 a judicial review to quash the inquest verdict and seek a fresh inquest. On the 5th

                 November 1993 the Divisional Court declined to grant an Order of a Certiorari to quash

                 the verdict o f Accidental Death and to Order a fresh inquest.




      13.       Disciplinary proceedings were brought by the Police Complaints Authority alleging

                neglect o f duty against Bernard Munay and also Chief Superintendent David

                Duckenfield. However before the planned hearing, it was announced by the South

                Yorkshire Police on the 29th October 1991 that Mr Duckenfield would be retiring from

               the force on the grounds of ill health. As a result of his early retirement, he did not have

               to face the disciplinary tribunal.




      14.      Following Mr Duckenfield’s decision to retire, the Police Complaints Authority decided

               on the 13th January 1992 not to proceed with the remaining charges against Bernard

               Murray. The reasons for this decision was that it would b e :

                             “An injustice to the Superintendent who had conducted him self with dignity at
                            the Inquest and throughout the investigations fo r him to stand alone and thus
                            appear to be a scapegoatfo r faults that may well be attributable to others”




      5.      On the 27 day of August 1992 Bernard Murray retired from the South Yorkshire Police

              on the grounds of ill health, having been certified by the Police Surgeon, Dr Everson,

              as medically unfit for performing the ordinary duties of a member of the force.



              The apparent catalyst that led to a further review o f the evidence in relation to the

              disaster was a television drama documentary called “Hillsborough”. It was written by

                                                          5
4. MAE, 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 8                                               NO, 8 4 1 8   P. 2 3 / 3 3



                Mr Jimmy McGovern a native of Liverpool. The programme was broadcast on                       5

                December 1996.




     17.       Various allegations were made within this programme, in particular that there was fresh

               evidence in relation to the Hillsborough disaster.




     18.       Between March and May 1997, the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) conducted a

              further review o f the allegations that had been broadcasted within the Hillsborough

              drama-documentary and generally. The conclusion reached and confirmed (inter alia)

              in a letter dated February 1999 from Mr C W P Newell, Director Casework of the CPS

              said “it is correct that the Crown Prosecution Service decided in 1997 that the evidence

              at that time was not sufficient in its view to provide a realistic prospect of the conviction

              by either your Client or Mr Duckenfield for any offence”.



   19.        On the 30th June 1997, the Rt Hon Jack Straw, the Home Secretary announced in

             Parliament that there would be an independent scrutiny to examine whether there was

             any fresh evidence in relation to the Hillsborough disaster. In particular, the Scrutiny was

             to examine whether this “new” evidence might have a bearing on the various legal

             procedures and decisions that have been taken in relation to the disaster. Lord Justice

             Stuart-Smith was appointed to cany out this task. The terms o f reference of the Scrutiny

             were as follow s:

                       “To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the

                       Hillsborough Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available;

                       (a).   To the enquiry conducted by Lord Taylor; or


                                                      6
4. MAE. 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 8                                                                       NO. 8 4 1 8   P. 2 4 / 3 3




                            (b).    To the Director of Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General for the

                                    purpose of discharging their respective statutory responsibilities; or

                            (c).    To the Chief Officer of South Yorkshire Police in relation to Police

                                   disciplinary matters; and

                            (d).   In relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available

                                   is of such significance as to justify establishment by the Secretary of State

                                   for the Home Department o f a further public enquiry; and

                            (e).   In relation to (b) and (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not

                                   previously considered by them which may be relevant to their respective

                                   duties and to advise whether there is any other action which should be

                                   taken in the public interest”.



   20.       Whilst undertaking the Scrutiny, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith received various submissions

             both in writing and in oral form from the HFSG, he met family members in Liverpool

             and other people that he thought could aid him in his scrutiny including “new” witnesses

             or witnesses who could, it was submitted, supply “additional” evidence.



   21.       His report was presented to the House of Commons on 18 February 1998. Lord Justice

             Stuart-Smith concluded within Chapter Seven of his report th a t:

                       "I have come to the clear conclusion that there is no basis upon which there
                      should be a further judicial inquiry or a re-opening o f Lord Taylor's inquiry.
                      There is no basis fo r a renewed application to the Divisional Court or fo r the
                      Attorney General to exercise his powers under the Coroners Act 1988.1do not
                      consider that there is any material which should be placed before the Director
                      o f Public Prosecutions or the Police Complaints Authority which might cause
                      them to re-comider the decisions they have already taken


            On the 18th February 1998, the Rt Hon Jack Straw, the Home Secretary said in the

                                                           7
4. MAE. 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 3                                                 NO. 8 4 1 8   P. 2 5 / 3 3



                House o f Commons in regard to the Scrutiny inter a lia :

                            "I, the Attorney General and the Director o f Public Prosecutions have considered
                            Lord Justice Stuart-Smith's report very carefully. We have no reason to doubt his
                            conclusions "


     23.       On the 26th June 1998, informations were laid before a Justice of the Peace in the Petty

               Sessional Division of South Sefton by Ann Adlington, Solicitor, acting on behalf of the

               HFSG. These informations alleged that Bernard Dean Murray on the 15th day o f April

               1989 at Hillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield:




                            23.1   Unlawfully killed John Alfred Anderson, contrary to common law.

                            23.2   Unlawfully killed James Gary Aspinall, contrary to common law.

                            23.3   Willfully neglected to perform a public duty, contrary to common law.



    24.     Mr Murray was summoned to appear subsequently at the Court.



    25.     As a result o f objections made on behalf of Mr Murray to the HFSG and to the South

              Sefton Magistrates Court, the informations were not proceeded with. On the 10th July

              1998, the South Sefton Magistrates’ Court allowed the Prosecution to withdraw the

              charges and made a consequential order for Defendant’s costs, pursuant to Section 16 of

             the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985.



   26.       On the 13th July 1998, informations identical as to those that had been laid at South

             Sefton were laid by the HFSG before the Leeds Petty Sessional Division. Summonses

             were issued by the Stipendiary Magistrate, Mr Nigel Cadbury. These proceedings

             continue and Committal proceedings have been listed for the 19th April 1999, with an

                                                          8
4. MAE. 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 8                                                                    NO. 8 4 1 8   P. 2 6 / 3 3



                 estimated duration o f four weeks.




      27.        Upon the receipt o f the original summonses, I wrote on 3 July 1998 to the Director of

                Public Prosecutions to request that the Director take over the conduct o f the proceedings,

                pursuant to Section 6 (2 ) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 and discontinue them,

                pursuant to Section 23(3) of the same Act.




     28.        On the 27th July 1998, the CPS wrote Mr Keva Coombes, the then legal advisor to the

                HFSG. Within this letter, Mr George Croston, the Prosecution Team Leader stated :

                 “It may help you if you are acquainted with our policy in cases o f this type. The Code for
                Crown Prosecutors contains principles that apply to the Crown Prosecution Service
                review o f criminal proceedings started by the police. There are two stages in the decision
               to prosecute. Thefirst being the evidential test. I f the case does not pass that test, it must
               not go ahead, no matter how important or serious it may be. I f the case does pass the
               evidential test then a Crown Prosecutor must decide i f a prosecution is needed in the
               Public Interest. This second stage is the Public Interest test which I shall come to
               later.

              The Evidential test is an objective one and a Crown Prosecutor must be satisfied that
              there is enough evidence to provide a ‘realistic prospect o f conviction ’ against each
              defendant on each charge. In other words, a jury or bench o f magistrates, properly
              directed in accordance with the law, is more likely than not to convict the defendant o f
              the offence charged.

              Where there is enough evidence to provide a realistic prospect o f conviction the public
              interest must be considered. Crown Prosecutors must balance the factors fo r and against
              prosecution carefully and fairly.

             The policy where proceedings have been commenced by a private prosecutor builds on
             that contained in the Code fo r Crown Prosecutors. The right to bring a private
             prosecution is preserved by Section 6(1) o f the Prosecution o f Offences A ct 1985 subject
             to the power under Section 6(2). The Crown Prosecution Service will take over a private
             prosecution where there is a particular needfo r it to do so on behalfo f the public ".



             In the instant case where we have been ashed by the Defendants to take over the
             prosecution in order to discontinue it, we would do so i f one (or more) o f the following
             circumstances applies :

                                                        9
4. MAR. 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 2 9                                                                      NO. 8 4 1 8   P. 2 7 / 3 3




                •           There is clearly no case to answer. A private prosecution commenced in these
                             circumstances would be unfounded, and would, therefore be an abuse o f the right
                             to bring a prosecution.

                             The public interestfactors tending against prosecution clearly outweigh those
                            factors tending in favour.

                •           The prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests o f justice.

               The Crown Prosecution Servicewould then regard itself as having to act in
               accordance with our policy.

                Clearly there is a distinction between the “realistic prospect o f conviction ” test in the
               Code and the “clearly no case to answer " test mentioned above. Accordingly we
               recognise that there will be some cases which do not meet the Crown Prosecution Service
               code tests where nevertheless we will not intervene. It has been considered that to apply
               the Code tests to private prosecutions would unfairly limit the right o f individuals to
               bring their own cases




              On the 24th August 1998, the HFSG served upon us the 38 witness statements upon

              which they are seeking to rely for the purposes of the private prosecution proceedings,

              and to secure a committal to the Crown Court under Section 6(2) or section 6 ( 1) o f the

              Magistrates’ Court Act 1980.




   30.        On the 24th September 1998, the HFSG served upon us their submissions that they were

             making to the DPP in relation to our application for the DPP to take over and discontinue

             the proceedings. The HFSG served further representations upon us on the 2nd October

              1998.




             In the light of the submissions made by the HFSG and also the policy letter o f the Crown

             Prosection Service of the 27th July 1998, a detailed set of submissions was prepared and

             sent to the Crown Prosecution Service on behalf o f Mr Murray on 8 October 1998. This


                                                           10
         .2:2'                                                                     NO. 8 4 1 8   P. 2 8 / 3 3 '



        is now produced to me and marked “exhibit RBM6 ". Within these submissions, it was

        argued that the statements and material alleged by the HFSG to be “new fresh evidence”

        was in fact information and material which had been available to the 1989 public enquiry

       of Lord Justice Taylor.




32.    After lengthy period of consideration, The DPP through a letter from Christopher Enzor

       dated the 18th December 1998 and stated th at:

                  "We have considered the evidence, the representations made by the parties and
                  all the surrounding circumstances o f the case. We have concluded that we should
                  not intervene to take over any o f the charges ”


33.    I was extremely concerned that this important correspondence from the Crown

      Prosecution Service contained no reference as to the factual matters upon which the

      Crown Prosecution Service arrived at their decision and secondly, that no information

      was given as to the way the Crown Prosecution Service applied their discretion under the

      Code for Crown Prosecutors and statutes. I therefore wrote to the Crown Prosecution

      Service on the 18th December 1998 requesting that they supply this information by

      10:00am on the 2 1 st December 1998.




4.    The response from the Crown Prosecution Service was eventually provided by a letter

      dated   1   February 1999 from M r C W P Newell, Director Casework of the Crown

      Prosecution Service which said inter alia”

              “A s you know, the Code fo r Crown Prosecutors sets out the general principles
              applied by the Service when (inter alia) deciding whether to continue a
              Prosecution it has taken over; or whether to institute proceedings, or to advise
              the Police whether to do so. It is correct that the Crown Prosecution Service
              decided in 1997 that the evidence at that time was not sufficient, in its view, to
              provide a realistic prospect o f the conviction o f either your Client or Mr
              Duckenfield fo r any offence. However, the decision whether to intervene in a

                                               11
4. MAE. 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 3 0                                                                        NO. 8 4 1 8   P. 2 9 / 3 3 '



                            private Prosecution with a view to terminating it calls fo r different
                            considerations to apply. It is quite possible fo r a private Prosecution to continue,
                            notwithstanding that the Crown Prosecution Service is not satisfied, on the basis
                            o f its own assessment o f the strength o f the evidence, that the evidence would
                            pass the evidential sufficiency test in the code (that there could be a "realistic
                            prospect o f conviction ”).

                             In broad terms the reason fo r this is that Section 6(1) o f the Prosecution o f
                             Offences A ct 1985, the Act which established the services, powers and duties,
                            specifically preserved the right o f private individuals and prosecuting authorities
                            or bodies other than the Crown Prosecution Service to bring criminal
                            proceedings. This right is subject (among other limitations) tot he limitation in
                            Section 6(2) that the Crown Prosecution Service may nevertheless take over the
                            proceedings with a view either to conducting or terminating those proceedings

                            Private prosecutors are not bound to apply the Code fo r Crown Prosecutors
                            when deciding whether to institute proceedings, nor do the Court supply the
                            evidentiary sufficiency test in the Code when deciding whether there is a case to
                            answer. The Service therefore recognises that it is not appropriate to intervene
                            to terminate a private Prosecution without good reason. That general principal
                            has recently been endorsed by the Law Commission in its consultation paper
                            number 149 ‘'Consents to Prosecution" (seeparagraph 6.3 a n d 6.4).

                            The Services ’policy is that it will not take over a private Prosecution with a view
                            to terminating it unless one or more o f the following apply.

                            1.     There is clearly no case to answer. A private Prosecution started in these
                                   circumstances would be unfounded and ought not to be perm itted to
                                   continue; or


                                   those in favour (examples might be where the Prosecution is malicious,
                                   or vexatious o f the offence is one fo r which the Defendant should clearly
                                   have been cautioned, or where although the offence may be serious, the
                                   Defendant is terminally ill); or

                        3.         The Prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests o f justice.

                       In this case I took the decision not to intervene. After careful consideration I
                       concluded in respect o f the charges o f manslaughter and wilful neglect to
                       perform a public duty (which, fo r the avoidance o f doubt, were considered
                       against each individual separately) that I could not say there is clearly no case
                       to answer. It was not right, therefore, fo r the service to take over the proceedings
                       with a view to terminating them.

                       Against that background, and after specifically considering the appropriate
                       course to take in these circumstances, I concludedfurther that it would not be
                       right to intervene in respect o f the one remaining charge against M r Duckenfield,

                                                           12
4. MAP, 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 3 0                                                                      NO. 8 4 1 8   P. 3 0 / 3 3




                            or attempting to pervert the course o f justice, albeit that I had form ed the view
                            that there was clearly no case to answer on that charge alone. The charge o f
                            attempting to pervert the course o f justice is a serious one, particularly when
                            levelled against someone who was, at the relevant time, a serving Senior Police
                            officer. Nevertheless, in the context o f the case as a whole, that charge is not the
                            gravamen o f the criminality alleged against Mr Duckenfield and I concluded that
                            my approach to that charge should be led by my conclusions on the charges o f
                            manslaughter and willful neglect to perform a public duty

                             I also considered whether, nevertheless, there were overriding public interest
                            factors that should lead to the service intervening with a view to discontinuance,
                             but I came to the conclusion that any public interestfactors tending against a
                             Prosecution did not clearly outweigh those in favour. Nor did I consider that the
                            Prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests o f justice



    35.        Upon the issue of the summonses the South Yorkshire Police Authority had agreed to

              provide financial assistance to Bernard Murray by indemnifying him in relation to the

               legal fees that he would incur.           The South Yorkshire Police Authority received

              representations from the Hillsborough Family Support Group by their letter of 13 January

               1999 and which effectively asked the authority to review and rescind its decision in

              relation to payment o f legal costs and not to provide any further financial assistance to

              Bernard Murray.




   36.        Throughout the whole course of time since the disaster but in particular unabated since

             the issues o f the summonses, HFSG have continued to make press statements, give

             interviews to newspaper, television and radio including the repetition of allegations

             already judicially discounted. They run a website updated with publicity as to the action

             they are taking and seeking to enlist others to support their activities e.g. the draft letter

             for South Yorkshire council tax payers to object to the continuation of funding,



  37.        At a meeting of the South Yorkshire Police Authority on 5 February 1999, written and

                                                          13
4, MAE, 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 3 1                                                                NO, 8 4 1 8   P, 3 1 / 3 3



               oral submissions were considered. The Authority resolved that on balance it did not have

               the legal power to provide financial assistance to Bernard Murray either in regard to the

               Defence of the private Prosecution brought by HFSG or in regard to the costs o f Judicial

               Review proceedings against the Crown Prosecution Service. The Authority therefore

               rejected the application of Bernard Murray for financial assistance and further declared

               that its previous decision to make assistance available to him in the criminal Prosecution

              was rendered null and void.




              As a result o f recognition by the Authority that the legal advice they had received was

              that the point remains arguable” the Authority agreed to find an appropriate means by

              which the decision could be reviewed by the High Court with expedition.



              On the 19 day of February 1999,1 received from Hammond Suddards (Solicitors for the

             Chief Constable of South Yorkshire a copy of the Chief Constable’s application for

             Judicial Review of the decision of the South Yorkshire Police Authority lodged with the

             Crown Office under number C0582-99.



   SWORN at             Lj ZJZ-A.S*,




   This CUVrd day of            avch   199^



  Before me




  Solicitor/Commusioiii f fof Odths

                                                     14
4. MAE, 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 3 1                                                          NO. 8 4 1 8   P, 3 2 / 3 3




                                                                              (1) R B M anning
                                                                             (2) F irst Affidavit
                                                             (3) Sworn on behalf of the A pplicant
                                                                  (4) Sworn 3 (0 3 j 3 ^
                                                                          CQ                  /99
                                                        IN THE HIGH COURT OF JIISTTrF.
                                                        QUEENS BENCH DTVTSTON
                                                        CROWN OFFICE 11ST

                                                        IN THE MATTER OF AN APPT.TCa t t h m
                                                        FOR LEAVE TO APPLY FOR JUDTCTAT
                                                                    REVIEW

                                                       BETWEEN:

                                                                    THE QUEEN

                                                                         and

                                                               DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC
                                                                  PROSECUTIONS
                                                                               Respondent.

                                                                     EX PARTE

                                                            BERNARD DEAN MURRAY
                                                                             Applicant



                                                         AFFIDAVIT OF RICHARD BRUCE
                                                                  MANNING




                                                      Walker Morris Solicitors
                                                      11 Quebec Street
                                                      LEEDS
                                                      LSI 2HA
                                                      Tel: 0113 283 2500
                                                      Fax: 0113 245 9412
                                                      Ref: RBM.AQL.MURRAY

  H;\WP\CRlM-MA.T\TZB\DRAFnMURRAYlOW?D\3 March 1909
4, MAR, 1 9 9 9 1 2 : 3 1                                                            NO, 8 4 1 8   P. 3 3 / 3 3




                                                                        £0                         /99
                                                        IN THE HIGH COURT o f t i j s t t p p
                                                        QUEEN’S BRNCH DTVTSTDN
                                                        CROWN OFFICF T.WT

                                                        IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION!
                                                        FQR LEAVE TO APPLY FOR JU D in a r
                                                                    REVIEW

                                                        BETWEEN:

                                                                      THE QUEEN

                                                                           and

                                                               DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC
                                                                  PROSECUTIONS
                                                                                        Respondent

                                                                      EX PARTE

                                                             BERNARD DEAN MURRAY
                                                                                          Applicant



                                                         AFFIDAVIT ON BEHALF OF THE
                                                                 APPLICANT




                                                      Walker Monis Solicitors
                                                      11 Quebec Street
                                                      LEEDS
                                                      LSI 2HA
                                                      Tel: 0113 283 2500
                                                      Fax; 0113 245 9412
                                                      Ref: RMB.AQL.MURRAY



  H:\WP\CRIM-MAT\TZB\DRAFnMURRAYi, WPD\3 March 1999
