                                                                                                      Central Cstemaric
                                                                                                         Untied House
  Facsimile                                                                                                   Piccadilly
                                                                                                        rat* rat ipq.

                                                                                             Oirea Line: f l |
                                                                                            Swtchbeard: 0l90*-*i0070
                                                                                              r'tcs!i*tle:
                                                                                                 OX ,'b . 4S2G* fork a
Attention of: M s . A                               ^ t4 - P - S

Address: ^                                   'o fT d fi.lr,

Fax Mo: 0 ( ^ 1 ' ^ 3 b ~ 1 9 3 6 .

From;Q A n b E-rtao/
CPS Division:

Dace:                       Time: C R 1+3 .

This fax transmission consists o f chis page plus 2 - a d i e r s

Please acieiowledge receipt:



If transmission is not property received please ctzLl 0 1 904 -




                               Cro<~« fm ecu tio n Sel^ce   •   “ '« « ■ * « * < /. r » «
iss D. H. Sharpling                                                                                /'D C


«
lief Crown Prosecutor
                                                                                                              CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                              United House
                                                                                                              Piccadilly
                                                                                                              York Y01 1PQ

                                                                                               Switchboard:   01904-450070
r     Ms A Adlington                                    1                                          DX No:     65204 York 6
      Hillsborough Family Support
      Group                                                                  Facsimile:   01904-
      1st Floor, Central Buildings
      41 North John Street                                                 Direct Line:   01904-
      Liverpool
      L2 6RR                                                            Our Reference:
                                                                                                   YBF/3341/89
L                                                       J               Your Reference:



                                                                                                   31 December 1998


      Dear Madam

      RE: ADLINGTON v. DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

      I understand that you spoke to Mr Booth on 30 December 1998 on the question of
      voluntary disclosure in this case. I thought it would be helpful if I wrote setting out
      the position o f the CPS.

      Given the enormous public interest in the case and the overriding need to ensure that
      there is a fair trial, the CPS is anxious to be as open and fair as possible. This means
      being fair to you the prosecutor as well as the defendants. I am sending a copy o f this
      letter to the solicitors for the defendants.

      In our view, the course most likely to achieve fairness would be voluntary disclosure
      o f some o f the material we hold. However, as you are aware, the South Yorkshire
      Police do not necessarily agree that voluntary disclosure is appropriate at this stage
      and they have, through their solicitors, suggested a delay until such time as the
      judicial review proceedings are concluded. Accordingly I have written to them
      indicating the CPS view but also asking whether there are any further reasons they
      can put forward which might influence our view. I have asked for a reply on or before
      6 January 1999 so that I can write to you before the hearing on 7 January 1999 with
      the CPS decision in principle.

      I refer to ‘some’ o f the material. I know that there have been discussions about the
      material held by the CPS. It is not our intention to disclose material which attracts
      either legal professional privilege or public interest immunity. For example, we will
      not voluntarily disclose copies o f counsel’s advice, our own internal memoranda and
      opinions nor correspondence with the police. In effect, the material we are proposing
      that we will disclose will comprise copies o f witness statements and accompanying
      exhibits. O f course, disclosure will be even handed and we intend that any material or
      facility we make available to you will also be made available to the solicitors for the
      defendants.




                        Crown Prosecution Service   •   Working in the interests of justice
You will be aware that the material we hold does not comprise original witness
statements as, to the best o f my knowledge, they are held by the police.

It appears from correspondence that you have already acquired a large amount of
material as you have pointed out differences between versions o f the same witness
statement. To avoid unnecessary duplication, it would be very helpful if you could
provide a list o f the material you already hold so that we can see what further material
you require. Alternatively, you might like to indicate on a copy o f the schedule we
provided what further material it is that you require.

I will endeavour to make a decision before the next court hearing but will write again
in any event.

Yours faithfully




Christopher H. Enzor
Branch Crown Prosecutor
