Chris Newell
DCE
CPS HQ
DX 300850
LUDGATE EC4



CC    Dru Sharpling
      Robin Booth
      George Croston




RE:   HILLSBOROUGH -
      THE ATTEMPT PERVERT COURSE OF JUSTICE CHARGE


1     I have spent some time over the last couple of days thinking about the
       complex issue of whether to take over the attempt pervert course of justice
       charge alone, i.e. intervening in part in the Hillsborough prosecution. I have
      looked very carefully at your letter to Stephen Wooler. I initially started this
      minute on the basis that I felt there were powerful arguments in favour of
      partial intervention. I have since reconsidered, but I thought it might be
      helpful to expose these arguments in case they are useful at a later stage in the
       event that the policy is rewritten.

2     In your letter you set out a tentative conclusion that it is possible to take over
       part of a private prosecution in order to discontinue it and leave the remainder
       of the case to be run by the private prosecutor. This follows the arguments
       contained in George Croston’s review and I support those arguments.

3     Further support for this view may be derived from the argument that our
      policy on private prosecutions is in effect a duty, where a request has been
      made by either party that we take over “the case” for whatever reason. It is
      important here to note that any ‘duty’ is very limited in its application.

4     The right to bring a private prosecution is enshrined in statute, of course. It is
      considered an important constitutional right and is one which should not be
      interfered with lightly. To intervene when it is not strictly necessary to do so
      would be to act to the prejudice of the private prosecutor. Our own policy
      states that where there is clearly no case to answer a prosecution commenced
in such circumstances would be unfounded and would therefore be an abuse of
the right to bring a prosecution. Thus we must be sure that there is clearly no
case to answer before stepping in to discontinue. The principle underlying the
policy here must be to give maximum effect to the right of the individual to
bring a private prosecution.

Dru has drawn my attention to the case of Doody -v- Secretary o f State for the
Home Department [1993] 3 All ER 92. At page 106, Lord Mustill summarises
the principles to be applied in the exercise of statutory powers. The following
principles can be summarised thus:

•    Statutory powers must be applied in a manner which is fair in all the
     circumstances
•    Standards of fairness are not immutable and may change over time
•    The principles of fairness are not to be applied by rote identically in
     every situation; the context must be taken into account
•    Fairness will often require the opportunity for a person affected to make
     representations either before or after the decision is taken
•    Fairness will often require that a person affected should know the gist of
     the case against him in order to make representations.

I suggest we should consider the principles set out in Doody in making our
decision.

If the relative seriousness of the charges were reversed, i.e. a private
prosecution consisted of several charges, the most serious of which was so
weak that there is clearly no case to answer. In those circumstances, I suggest
we would conclude that we would have little choice but to intervene in the
most serious charge and discontinue it. Our position on the other charges
would depend on our assessment of the strength of the evidence. If, as in
Hillsborough, we concluded that the charges fell between clearly no case to
answer and realistic prospect, I suggest we would let the private prosecution
continue on those charges only.

The question I pose here is whether there is any logical distinction of
substance which can be made between that hypothetical situation and the
Hillsborough situation? On one view, there is not and I refer to paragraph 4.1
of the Code, “if the case does not pass the evidential test, it must not go ahead,
no matter how important or serious it may be”. The Code does not permit a
distinction to be made on the basis of the seriousness of the charge when
applying the evidential test. It could be argued that there is a read across to the
private prosecution policy, ie. where there is clearly no case to answer the
charge must not be allowed to proceed no matter how serious (or trivial, I
might add) it is.

I think there are other arguments which militate in favour of taking over the
attempt pervert course of justice charge and I thought it would be helpful if I
briefly rehearsed these as I think there are some potential dangers for us if we
do not act.
It could be argued that taking over the case in part is more readily justifiable
than not intervening at all. In developing these arguments, I am mindful that
our policy on private prosecutions has been exposed to both the prosecutor and
defendants. I am also aware that the defendants are funded by South
Yorkshire Police and further that they have each put together very powerful
defence teams. There is every reason to suppose that they will go for judicial
review whatever our decision.              There has already been a hint in
correspondence when the defence argued that they considered the code tests
ought to have been applied. To the best of my knowledge, there has not been
a challenge on our policy on private prosecutions and the defence may well
consider that this is potentially fertile ground for them.

Leaving aside judicial review, I think there is still an issue in justifying a
decision not to intervene in part on its merits. If asked about the attempt to
pervert the course of justice charge, we could fairly quickly be backed into a
comer on the basis that we considered we could intervene in part, we thought
there was clearly no case to answer but we were influenced by our decision on
the other charges. It might be difficult to maintain a justification. I appreciate
that we could attempt to avoid the issue by declining to comment on an
individual charge basis. In any event we would have to be extremely careful in
what we say to the press as the case will still be sub judice, of course. Here it
is appropriate to note the distinction between justifying our decision to the
parties and justifying it more widely to the press.

I agree that it would be difficult to explain a decision to intervene in part,
given the tight limits on our ability to explain a decision in relation to a case
which continues before the courts. It ought not to be impossible, however, and
the decision would be capable of being justified to the parties on the basis of a
proper application of our policy on a charge by charge basis. It could be
argued that we would be in a stronger position should judicial review
proceedings be commenced. We would then be able to demonstrate with ease
to the court that we had considered our policy, we felt it should be applied on
a charge by charge basis and we had applied it accordingly.

The converse argument is that we might find it difficult to sustain the non
intervention line before the Divisional Court as we would have to agree that
we had not applied our own policy on an individual charge basis. This could
taint, in the eyes of the Court, a decision in relation to the other charges. The
defendants would have a better chance of persuading the court that the whole
decision was wrong if they were able to point to part of it and criticise it. I
pose the question whether this could in itself put the entire policy on private
prosecutions at risk?

Having exposed some of the arguments in favour of partial intervention, I
readily accept that there are arguments which go the other way.

In paragraph 8 1 pose the question whether there is a logical difference. At one
level the answer is probably not, in pure logical terms. However there are
powerful practical/rational arguments which enable a distinction to be made.
16    Where the more serious charge fails the ‘clearly no case to answer’ test, it
      would be likely that it would be appropriate to step in and take over and
      discontinue, even on a partial basis. It would be wrong for the defendant to be
      in before the court where there is clearly no case. Intervention would thus be
      necessary to achieve a fair result. Whilst the defendant would still face other
      charges, it would be unfair on the defendant to face the trauma of the more
      serious charge.

17    The distinction where the weak charge is less serious is that the defendant will
      continue to suffer the trauma of the more serious charges. It is unlikely that
      continuing to face the less serious charge would unduly add to the trauma of
      the proceedings. There can be little doubt that the manslaughter charges in the
      Hillsborough case far outweigh the attempt pervert charge in their seriousness.

18    Further, the defendant retains another remedy, ie. asking the court to discharge
      the charge at committal proceedings. True, this is available in the case where
      the weak charge is the more serious, but the trauma argument would still be in
      play. This can be put in another way, will the defendant suffer prejudice as the
      result of non intervention?

19    The question then becomes, is partial intervention necessary in the interest of
      fairness? In this context, necessary really means essential.

20    Taking all factors in account, the decision may be perceived to be finely
      balanced, with competing factors on both sides. That being the case, the
      decision ought to be exercised in favour of non intervention. Further, the
      Doody arguments lend considerable support to the view that the decision,
      unlike the Code test, must not be taken in isolation from other relevant and
      appropriate factors.

21    I understand that the view at this stage is that it is likely that the decision will
      remain in favour of non intervention. I hope that this minute may be helpful in
       exposing these arguments for use at a later stage in the event of a policy re­
      write.

22    George Croston has seen this minute and he agrees with the views expressed.




Chris Enzor
Branch Crown Prosecutor
Central Casework: York
14 December 1998
Tel:
FaxJ
DX: 65204 - YORK 6
Chris Newell
DCE
CPS HQ
DX 300850
LUDGATE EC4



CC    Dru Sharpling
      Robin Booth
      George Croston




RE:   HILLSBOROUGH -
      THE ATTEMPT PERVERT COURSE OF JUSTICE CHARGE


1     I have spent some time over the last couple of days thinking about the
      complex issue of whether to take over the attempt pervert course of justice
      charge alone, i.e. intervening in part in the Hillsborough prosecution. I have
      looked very carefully at your letter to Stephen Wooler and I hope you will not
      think it unhelpful of me to raise the issue again.

2     In your letter you set out a tentative conclusion that it is possible to take over
       part of a private prosecution in order to discontinue it and leave the remainder
       of the case to be run by the private prosecutor. This follows the arguments
       contained in George Croston’s review and I support those arguments.

3     Further support for this view may be derived from the argument that our
       policy on private prosecutions is in effect a duty, where a request has been
       made by either party that we take over “the case” for whatever reason. Our
       own policy states that where there is clearly no case to answer a prosecution
       commenced in such circumstances would be unfounded and would therefore
       be an abuse of the right to bring a prosecution.

4     Having discussed this briefly with Dru, she pointed out the case of Doody -v-
      Secretary o f State for the Home Department [1993] 3 All ER 92. At page 106,
      Lord Mustill summarises the principles to be applied in the exercise of
      statutory powers. The following principles can be summarised thus:
•    Statutory powers must be applied in a manner which is fair in all the
     circumstances
•    Standards of fairness are not immutable and may change over time
•    The principles of fairness are not to be applied by rote identically in
     every situation; the context must be taken into account
•    Fairness will often require the opportunity for a person affected to make
     representations either before or after the decision is taken
•    Fairness will often require that a person affected should know the gist of
     the case against him in order to make representations.

If the relative seriousness of the charges were reversed, i.e. a private
prosecution consisted of several charges, the most serious of which was so
weak that there is clearly no case to answer. In those circumstances, I suggest
we would conclude that we would have little choice but to intervene in the
most serious charge and discontinue it. Our position on the other charges
would depend on our assessment of the strength of the evidence. If, as in
Hillsborough, we concluded that the charges fell between clearly no case to
answer and realistic prospect, I suggest we would let the private prosecution
continue on those charges only.

The question I pose here is whether there is any logical distinction of
substance which can be made between that hypothetical situation and the
Hillsborough situation? In my view, there is not and I refer to paragraph 4.1
of the Code, “if the case does not pass the evidential test, it must not go ahead,
no matter how important or serious it may be”. The Code does not permit a
distinction to be made on the basis of the seriousness of the charge when
applying the evidential test.

I think there are other arguments which militate in favour of taking over the
attempt pervert course of justice charge and I thought it would be helpful if I
briefly rehearsed these as I think there are some dangers for us if we do not
act.

I argue that taking over the case in part is more readily justifiable than not
intervening at all. In developing these arguments, I am mindful that our policy
on private prosecutions has been exposed to both the prosecutor and
defendants. I am also aware that the defendants are funded by South
Yorkshire Police and further that they have each put together very powerful
defence teams. There is every reason to suppose that they will go for judicial
review whatever our decision.             There has already been a hint in
correspondence when the defence argued that they considered the code tests
ought to have been applied. To the best of my knowledge, there has not been
a challenge on our policy on private prosecutions and the defence may well
consider that this is potentially fertile ground for them.

Leaving aside judicial review, I think there is still a problem in justifying a
decision not to intervene in part on its merits. If asked about the attempt to
pervert the course of justice charge, we could fairly quickly be backed into a
comer on the basis that we considered we could intervene in part, we thought
there was clearly no case to answer but we were influenced by our decision on
      the other charges. It will be difficult to maintain justification. I appreciate
      that we could attempt to avoid the issue by declining to comment on an
      individual charge basis. (In any event we would have to be extremely careful
      in what we say to the press as the case will still be sub judice, of course). Here
      it is appropriate to note the distinction between justifying our decision to the
      parties and justifying it more widely to the press.

10    I agree that it would be difficult to explain a decision to intervene in part,
      given the tight limits on our ability to explain a decision in relation to a case
      which continues before the courts. It ought not to be impossible, however, and
      the decision would be capable of being justified to the parties on the basis of a
      proper application of our policy on a charge by charge basis. I suggest also
      that we would be in a much stronger position should judicial review
      proceedings be commenced. We would then be able to demonstrate with ease
      to the court that we had considered our policy, we felt it should be applied on
      a charge by charge basis and we had applied it accordingly.

11    The converse argument is that we might find it difficult to sustain the non
      intervention line before the Divisional Court as we would immediately have to
      concede that we had not applied our own policy. This could even taint, in the
      eyes of the Court, a decision in relation to the other charges. The defendants
      would have a much better chance of persuading the court that the whole
      decision was wrong if they were able to point to part of it and criticise it with
      some certainty. I pose the question whether this could in itself put the entire
      policy on private prosecutions at risk?

12    I appreciate that my points of view may well be unattractive. I hope they are
       usefiil, if not in this case, then in any wider debate which may take place.




Chris Enzor
Branch Crown Prosecutor
Central Casework: York
14 December, 1998
Tel:
Fax:
DX: 65204 - YORK 6
From:       Chris Enzor
To:         Dru,Robin
Date:       8 December 1998 2:10pm
Subject:    Hiilsborough

Some prelim thoughts on the points:
1. what law to be applied
2. does counsel's opinion correctly predict Adomako
Dru Sharpling
CCP - Central Casework


cc     Robin Booth


                                                                     My Ref:
                                                                     Your Ref:




HILLSBOROUGH

1.   I have been considering the point about whether Adomako should be applied
     in this case and the extent to which the proper tests were applied by counsel in
     the 1990 advice when they went on to consider what was the appropriate test
     for involuntary manslaughter

2.   In his review, George briefly set out the applicable law in chapter 4. I have
     read and re-read Adomako this morning. The cases of Andrews and Bateman
     in 1925 and 1937 respectively indicated that gross negligence was then
     sufficient to found a conviction for manslaughter. The word ‘gross’ was not
     used on its own but was given as an example of the type of negligence under
     consideration.

3.   All would have been well had it not been for the case of Seymour in 1983
     where, in a driving case, the judge directed the jury in terms of recklessness,
     as defined in Lawrence. The House of Lords agreed that this was the correct
     approach.

4.   Despite this, Lord Mackay, in Adomako, said that Andrews was ‘the most
     authoritative statement of the present law’ and further that it was a decision
     which [had] not been departed from’. I find this a little hard to reconcile, but
     the conclusion I am driven to is that Adomako clarified the law in that Lard
     Mackay specifically described Bateman and Andrews as satisfactory as
     providing a proper basis for describing the crime of involuntary
     manslaughter’.

5.   I argue that Adomako did not change the law but clarified it.

6.   Thus, in my view, the appropriate test to be applied is the Adomako test, as set
      out by George in paragraph 4.2 of his review.

7.   The next question is whether counsel applied the correct test in 1990.
      Interestingly, one of the counsel who advised CPS in 1990 appeared for the
      appellant in AdomakoX
8.    Counsel’s advice was principally directed to ‘reckless’ manslaughter, ie.
      where a person causes the death of another intending to do an act which
      creates an obvious and serious risk of causing personal injury (a) not giving
      thought to the possibility of such risk or (b) having recognised there was some
      risk involved, nonetheless going on to take it. Clearly this is not good law
      now.

9.    Counsel went on to say (paragraph 59 of the joint opinion) ‘it may also be
      manslaughter if the person causing the death intends to do an act, or omits to
      do an act where there is a duty to do so, being grossly negligent whether death
      or serious personal injury results’. In my view this is an adequate enunciation
      of the principles now set out in Adomako.

10. Counsel went on to say that the law was uncertain, and made reference to
    Seymour and also Kong Cheuk Kwan. Counsel particularly noted that in the
    1986 case of Goodfellow, it was said of Kong Cheuk Kwan that the question
    was whether the defendant was ‘guilty of recklessness (or gross negligence)’.
    Counsel then went on to say that they considered that the gross negligence test
    was sufficient to establish the offence of manslaughter.

11. Unfortunately, the matter does not stop there. In the 1990 advice, counsel
    referred to the case of R v West London Coroner’s Court, ex p Gray. The
    Divisional Court held that a Coroner should direct the jury in the following
    terms where the death is alleged to have been caused by neglect by the police:

      11.1 That they had to be satisfied of four ingredients, namely (a) that the
           police were under a duty to have regard to the health and welfare of the
           deceased, (b) that in the circumstances there was a failure to do what
           should have been done for the health and welfare of the deceased, (c)
           that the failure amounted to a substantial cause of death, and (d) that the
           failure amounted to recklessness.

      11.2 That the test of ‘recklessness’ was whether a police officer, having
           regard to his duty, was indifferent to an obvious and serious risk to the
           health and welfare of the deceased or, recognising that the risk to be
           present, deliberately chose to run it by doing nothing about it

      11.3 That a failure to appreciate that there was such a risk was not itself
           sufficient to amount to recklessness and

       11.4 That the jury could only return a verdict of unlawful killing if they could
            attribute the unlawful conduct to a single police officer.

12.    It is clear from the 1990 advice, that counsel felt that these points had a direct
       bearing on their advice (para 65).
13. E xp Gray was cited in Adomako. Lord Mackay in approving of the use of the
    word ‘reckless’ in its ordinary sense in cases of involuntary manslaughter, said
    that ex p Gray was an example of a case where the word reckless had been
      used with complete accuracy. On the face of it, this is difficult to reconcile as
      the reference in paragraph 11.3 to recklessness appears to be something
      bordering on a Cunningham definition (note the reference to failure to
      appreciate that there was a risk not being sufficient to amount to recklessness).

14.   I found the use of the word ‘indifferent’ difficult to reconcile here. I note,
      however, that failure to appreciate that there was a risk was specifically ruled
      out by the court as a sufficient state of mind for recklessness in this context.
      Accordingly, this only leaves a narrow scope for ‘indifference’ which I think
      must mean that the officer, bearing in mind his duty, must have deliberately
      shut his mind to the presence of the risk.

15.   In my view, ex p Gray cannot stand against Adomako and it should not be
      regarded as good law. How then does this leave counsel’s advice, bearing in
      mind that ex p Gray was in the forefront of their minds?

16. At paragraph 81 of the 1990 opinion, counsel were considering the position of
    the police as an organisation in relation to a possible charge of corporate
    manslaughter. The say ‘...there seems to us to be no evidence that in making
    what were undoubtedly errors of judgment and practice, the police
    organisation, or any individual within it, acted recklessly or in a grossly
    negligent manner’. This is highly significant because, even if counsel applied
    the recklessness test in ex p Gray, they also clearly considered gross
    negligence as a separate head. It must have been separate as gross negligence
    does not feature in exp Gray.
17. So far as Mr Duckenfield is concerned, the position is more difficult. The
    weight of the opinion in paragraphs 83 to 89 is towards recklessness. At
    paragraph 88, counsel opine that the omissions to act did not create a risk
    which was obvious at the time.

18. Paragraph 89 says, and I quote in full: ‘We conclude, therefore, that there is
    insufficient evidence on which to found a charge of recklessness against Mr
    Duckenfield. Nor is there evidence that he was grossly negligent in failing to
    act as mentioned above. We bear in mind particularly the judgment of the
    Divisional Court in the West London Coroner’s Court case, the requirements
    of which are not in our view satisfied’.

19. Given that gross negligence and recklessness as defined in ex p Gray are
    substantially different, I am of the view that the reference in paragraph 89 to
    ex p Gray must be read as referring back to recklessness only and not to gross
    negligence. I recognise that this is a rather technical interpretation of
    paragraph 89 but I suggest it is nevertheless correct. After all, counsel quite
    properly directed themselves in the main to the current case law as understood
    by most people at the time (ie. recklessness was the test) and only added gross
    negligence out of a desire for completeness, bearing in mind their own views
    on the state of the law. It is a tribute to them that they were so accurate.
20.   If that is right, and I suggest that logically it must be, then counsel’s opinion
      can be said to have considered gross negligence manslaughter in the terms set
      out in Adomako.



Chris Enzor
Central Casework York Branch
DX 65204 York 6
81
Fa?____________
09 December 1998
