J MERVYN JONES M Sc                                               FU RN IVAL HOUSE
ASSISTANT CMinr CONSTABLE                                         r-urnival Gate
     1SBOROUGH INQUIRY TfcAM                                      Sheffield S1 4QN
                                                                  Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 3 1 5 4 6
                                                                  Fax:         0742 731483
WEST M ID L A N D S POLICE HQ
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                            M edico Legal Centre
Colmore Circus Queensway                                          Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 6 1 0 5
Birmingham B4 6NQ                                                 Fax:       0742 726247
Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5000, extn. 2 0 2 5
                                                                  Your Ref:
NECHELLS GREEN POLICE ST A T IO N
Fowler Street
                                                                  Our Ref:      JMJ/DH
Birmingham B7 5DA
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2
                                                                                26 October 1989



       Hammond Suddards
       Solicitors
       Empire House
       10 Piccadilly
       Bradford
       BD1 3LR




       Dear Sirs

       HILLSBOROUGH - CRUSH BARRIERS

       I refer to your letter of 20 October and my reply of 23 in respect of
       Hillsborough and your request for samples of the barrier 124a.

       Since my writing to you there have been further developments and I have
       now received an undertaking from the Director of Public Prosecutions
       that he has no objection to the release of the barrier and for samples
       to be made available to interested parties for further tests subject to
       three conditions which he lays down. I understand that he has written a
       letter to you stating what these conditions are.

       However, you will appreciate that the Director of Public Prosecutions is
       not the only one who has an interest in the barrier. Lord Justice
       Taylor, on whose behalf I originally seized the barrier, has an
       interest, as does H.M. Coroner at Sheffield. I have also received a
       letter from Davies Arnold Cooper, who as you know represent Sheffield
       Wednesday Football Club and who also want access to the barrier and who
       make it quite clear in their letter that their clients are ultimately
       the owners of the property. Because of these various interests the
       purpose of this letter is to inform you how I intend to proceed.

       The situation at present is that the Director of Public Prosecutions
       does not see any further need to retain the barrier subject to receiving
       assurances from the Health and Safety Executive, in writing, that they
       have no further use for the barrier and that the Director of Public
       Prosecutions has the opportunity of having a representative present at
       the time of future tests, that the opportunity will exist to take
       photographs and all reports and data are made available to the Director
       of Public Prosecutions/Crown Prosecution Service.




   PLEASE REPLY T O TH E OFFICE A T           Ll°y.d. House, Birmingham
                                   -   2   -




However, as you know the interest in the barrier is not restricted to
the Director of Public Prosecutions, or myself on his behalf.  Lord
Justice Taylor has an interest and once I have received the letter from
Dr Nicholson at the Health and Safety Executive declaring they no longer
have interest then I will write to him to seek his approval.  Furthermore,
HM Coroner at Sheffield will also want to give similar approval once
Dr Nicholson has issued his letter.

All this might seem a little bit bureaucratic but given that the barrier
could be an important part of any subsequent proceedings then I wish to
be assured that all parties I relate to have had every opportunity to
examine and carry out tests.  Having said that, I do hope that it will
not be long before I can release the barrier and certainly in plenty of
time for you to carry out what work you wish in good time for the
commencement of the civil case.

I trust this letter is of assistance to you.  Please rest assured that I
will not delay the release of the barrier without good cause.
