                                                                                            C */          ^ r\ 7 cTv
                                              d-vo




                     F a x T r a n s m is s io n                                                            (L\x.        V
                                 T rea su r y S o l ic it o r ' s D e p a r t m e n t
                                             Oueen A n n a ’s Cham b e r s
                                                  2 8 Broadway
                                                       London
                                                    S W IH » J S


                                             4
   0                                     0     J k j o C ^ u v h J o tfle * '
  To: C l o u s       f\k x u d ill                        Date .9/
                                                                 “ /     s |^
  Fax Nr.:                                                 Pages: J^q (including this cover sheet).
  From:         SUE ROSS
  S u b ject:                S ^ C je J jL ^ O T A          jW        CXH M M A         j   Z M M




 COM M ENTS;                  RECEIVED
                               09 MAR 1999
                               DIRECTOR
                             (CASEWORK)
                                                                                                Cjs>*+~

                                                                             0-V-           ^             rT ^^^-

                                                                                                   W-     P L T l i j9




                                                                                                     L    l
                                                                                                                ' h




This fax transmission is intended only for the use of the recipient named above. It contains
confidential information which is legally privileged. If you are not the intended recipient,
you are hereby notified that you have received this document in error and that any copying,
disclosure or distribution or other use of the information contained in this fax is strictly
prohibited. If you have received this fax in error please notify us immediately by telephone
so that we can make arrangements for the return of the documents to us. Your co-operation is
appreciated.

I l y o y do nflt rfirelYf this fax co m p le tely, please telep h o n e th e ab ove num ber.
                                                                                   CO/856/99
m THE HIGH COURT OP JUSTIflF

QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION


BETWEEN:


                                       REGINA

                                           -v-

                    DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
                                                                                Respondent
                                  Ex parte
                        DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELD
                                    and
                          BERNARD DEAN MURRAY
                                                                                 A pplicants




              SKELETON ARGUMENT OF THE DPP



     Tbe Applicants seek leave to apply for Judicial Review of the decision of the DPP

     and/or CPS not to take over the conduct of criminal proceedings commenced against

    them by Ann Adlington on behalf of the Hillsborough Family Support Group in July

     1998 with a view to discontinuing those proceedings. The application for leave is

     opposed on the grounds summarised in this Skeleton Argument.



    The proper approach

    For the purposes of this leave application it fo accepted that the Court has jurisdiction




                             so xooaavas xnasog                              xva   a s ;it   ««.
       judicially to review a decision of the DPP not to take over a private prosecution. The

        Divisional Court has already held that it should exercise the povyer to review a decision

        of the DPP not to prosccute sparingly (see, for example, R v DPP, Ex parte C (7/22)).

       It is submitted that the power of review should be exercised even more sparingly

       where, as here:

       (a)     criminal proceedings have already begun: die civil courts should, in principle,

               be very slow to interfere with the criminal process;

       (b)    the decision sought to be challenged is not the decision of the DPP not to

               prosecute but the decision not to take over a private prosecution (which has

               been lawfully commenced) with a view to terminating it;

       (O     taking over a private prosecution with a view 10 terminating it would involve

               interfering with the well-recognised fundamental right of every citizen to bring

               a private prosecution and with criminal proceedings which have been lawflilly

               commenced;

       (d)    the Applicants have alternative remedies available to them (see below);

       (e)    the consequences of granting leave (i.e. interfering with the criminal process)

              will be seriously to delay the criminal proceedings.



       The alternative remedies available to the Applicants arc as follows:

       (1)    challenge the issue of the Summons (this has not been done since it has,

              presumably, been accepted that the proceedings have been lawfully

              commenced);

       (2)    resist committal upon the grounds that the evidence to support the charges is


                                              2




coo®                            36 sooggvas xsaso*                              r v i i S :IT 66.   CO/SO
                 insufficient (if that be the case) and/or that the proceedings are an abuse of
                 process.

                 It is to be noted chat committal proceedings have already been fixed for 19 April
                 1999.

         (3)    make similar submissions to die Crown Court if committed.

        It cannot be said that these alternative remedies are inadequate; on the contrary, they

        provide the same protection as is provided to any accused person.




        Three grounds are relied upon. It is submitted that none is arguable.
        The first, ftrn^nH

        The decision was based on an unlawfulpolicy.

        This ground is misconceived. The Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 (the Act) does nor

        stipulate what should be the DPP's policy as to taking over private prosecutions with

       a view to discontinuing diem. Indeed, the Act does not stipulate what should be his

       policy as to the taking over of police prosecutions already instituted (as he is obliged

       to do by Section 3(2)(a)) or as to the institution of proceedings himself. On the

       contrary, the formulation and content of such a policy has been expressly left by

       Parliament to the DPP. He has formulated a policy in relation to the taking over of

       private prosecutions with a view to terminating them in the terms set out in Mr

       Newell's letter of 1 February 1999 (4/4). That policy is neither unlawful under the

       provisions of the Act nor is it inconsistent with them. It is different from his policy in

       relation to the taking over of all police prosecutions and the institution of proceedings


                                              3




too®                             3b sooaavas xaaaoa                              XVd SSiTT 66. CO/SO
 himself but that fact cannot make the policy unlawfiil, Nor can the fact that (if it be

 correct which is not accepted) the policy differs is any respect from the views

 expressed by cither the PMgjps Report or the Consultation Paper and Report of the Law
                           r
 Commission, make his policy unlawftl.



 The second ground

 The DPP has failed to act in accordance with his published Code.

This ground is also misconceived. The Director’s published Code (5/14) sets out the

DPP’s policy with regard to taking over police prosecutions (as the Director is obliged

to do under the Act). It does not set out the Director’s policy with regard to the fairing

over of private prosecutions with a view to terminating them. That policy is set out in

Mr Newell s letter of 1 February 1999 (4/4) and is a different policy (as is

acknowledged by the Applicant). The Director’s duty is to act in accordance with th^f

policy. He has done so.



The Applicant also contends that Section 10 of the Act obliges the Director to issue a

Code which gives guidance on general principles to be applied not only in relation to

the institution of proceedings by the Director and his review of proceedings already

instituted by the police but also with regard to the discontinuance of private

prosecutions. Such a construction of Section 10 is eiTOneous, Properly construed,

together with Sections 3 and 6, Section 10 (only) obliges the Director to issue a Code

giving guidance on general principles to be applied in relation to proceedings jmtitntfirf

by him and proceedings ipsded by the police which, under the Act, he is obliged to take


                                        4




                          30 X0033V3S xuaaoa              (                XVi 9 S ‘IT 66.
           over. But even if the construction contended for by the Applicant were sound, it is

           nothing to the poinr: the consequence would be that the Director has failed to comply

           with his obligation under Section 10 to issue a Code giving guidance in relation to the

           taking over of private prosecutions with a view to terminating them; the consequence

           couid not be that the Director had failed to act in accordance with his policy.



           The third groni^

           The decision is perverse.

          It is submitted that this contention is bound to foil. True it is that the Director has

          concluded on previous occasions that, applying the principles which apply to the

          institution of proceedings by the police or by him (as set out in his Code), the Applicant

          should not be prosecuted. However, as acknowledged by the Applicant, the Director

          does not apply the same policy to the question whether he should take over a private

          prosecution with a view to terminating it. Nor is a private prosecutor obliged to apply

          the Code before instituting a private prosecution nor is the Magistrates7 Court obliged

          to follow it when deciding whether to issue a Summons. This reflects the importance

          of the right of every citizen to bring a private prosecution (explained by the Law

          Commission as follows: "... For some members of our society - those, for example,

          »ho have doubts about the impartiality of the prosecuting authorities, or who believe

          that an official prosecutor has misjudged the evidence in a case - the right o fprivate

          prosecution provides an important safeguard against abuse.") and what the Law

          Commission described as the fundamental principle * that che right of private

          prosecution should be unrestricted unless some very good reason to the contrary exists


                                                 5




000   ®                            3D Hoouavas itfsaoa                             XVJ 8S:iT 66, CO/SO
       (6/10). For the Director to intervene in this private prosecution because it failed to

       meet his two stage test for Police and his own prosecutions would be to usurp or

       seriously restrict the scope of the right to private prosecution. The Director’s policy

       with regard to taking over private prosecutions with a view to terminating them is

       lawful and rational and his application of that policy to the facts of this case cannot be

       said to have been perverse.



       H ie Grounds relied upon bv the Second Annlicam (Murray

       Three grounds are relied upon. It is submitted that none is arguable.
       The first gmnnd

       The Respondent's poltcy as to when he will take over and discontinue a private

       prosecution is “Wong and unlawful*

       This ground is misconceived for the reasons set out at paragraph 4 above. As to the

       specific contentions relied upon:

       (1)    The thrust of the Second Applicant’s case seems to be (see paras. 3,4 and 3.6

              of his application) that in all cases of undoubted importance and difficulty where

              the Director has decided not to prosecute, he is under a duty to take over and

              discontinue a private prosecution since to do otherwise would amount to "an

              abdication of responsibility* This contention is unsustainable. Had Parliament

              intended that the Director should be under such a duty, it would have so

              provided in the 1985 Act. In any event, it is precisely when the Director has

              decided not to prosecute that a private prosecution is likely to be brought. The

              right to private prosecution would be emasculated were the duty contended for


                                              6




£00®                            DO H00OTV3S 1U3303                              XYi 8S:IT 66, C0/80
                       to arise.

               (2)    The Applicant contends that the ‘clearly no case to answer" test imposes an

                      unwarranted fetter on the Director's power to take over and continue a private

                      prosecution. It does not such thing. The Director is entitled to have a policy

                      as to the circumstances in which he will take over and discontinue a private

                      prosecution. True it is that the test under the policy is different from the test

                      under his Code but this does not make it unlawful, let alone "wrong" (whatever

                      that is supposed to mean in public law terms).



         9.   The second ground

              77m?Director s policy is wrong and unlawful because it does not take proper account

              o f the material public interest considerations.

              On analysis, this is a complaint not about the Director’s policy but about the application

              of that policy to the circumstances of this ease (see paragraphs 6.1 - 6,5 of the

              application). True it is that Mr Newell did not identify the public interest factors either

              in favour of or against a prosecution in this case but;

              (a)    the Director is under no obligation to give reasons, let alone detailed reasons,

                     for his decisions;

              (b)    in feet, a3 he explained in Ms letter of l February 1999, Mr Newell considered

                     it "appropriate to explain thefactors taken into account in more detail than was

                     contained in the Service’s letter dated 18 December 1998*;

              (c)    he stopped short of identifying any of the public interest factors in play but self-

                     evidently a vecy important public interest factor in favour of prosecution will


                                                      7




fiooiQ                                 3b H00H3V35 103803                                XVi 6S:iT 68, EO/80
                      have been the seriousness of the offences.



         10   The third ground

              The decision way perverse.

              For the reasons set out in paragraph 7 above, it is submitted that this contention is
              bound to fail.



         11   Discretiffp

              Even if any of the grounds relied upon are arguable it is submitted that as a matter of

              discretion leave should be refused for die reasons set out in paragraphs 2 and 3 above.




                                                                            PHILIP HAVERS QC




                                                   *




600121                                   xooaavas xnagoa                             xvd es;Ti ee. co/so
                                                               CO/856/99
                       M THF. HIGH COURT OF JUSTTPF

                      QUEEN'S BfiNCH DIVISION


                      BETWEEN;


                                        REGINA

                                           •t-

                       DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
                                               R espond^
                                    Ex parte
                         DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELD
                                                               Applicant




                           SKELETON ARGUMENT OF
                                  THE DPP




                                  Treasury Solicitor
                               Queen Anne's Chambers
                                    28 Broadway
                                 London SW1H 9JS

                              Ref. L98/8265K/SJR/D I

                              Counsel's ref. C.6424110.




0T0®   so Moonavas xxmox       (                 X Y d OQ -Zt 66 I BO/fiO
