Amanda Illing




cc.   Anne Lotter




RE: HILLSBOROUGH

1.    Further to our conference with the Director yesterday, I attach for information copies
      of yesterday’s correspondence from the Hillsborough Family Support Group
      commenting on the South Yorkshire Police News Release, together with draft replies
      which are being sent out this afternoon. The detail they provide confirms me in the
      view that we need to be in a position to do a line by line refutation.

2.    I have spoken with the Home Office. A submission went to the Home Secretary
      recently recommending that there should not be a further public enquiry. The Home
      Secretary’s Private Office have indicated that he will not deal with this before the
      election. I have agreed to let the Home Office see the latest submissions from HFSG.
      Should the Home Secretary decide to make an announcement prior to the election we
      would be advised in good time. I indicated that it would be sensible if our decision
      was the first to be announced. The Home Office took this point.

3.    I have agreed with Anne Lotter the following line to take with the Press:

             We had hoped to be in a position to reply within 14 days. However, we have
             now received some further information from the HFSG and we wish to
             consider this before making a final decision. We will make that decision as
             soon as practicable.

4.    Stephen Wooler is not in this afternoon but I will advise him tomorrow.




J S Ringguth
ACCP
CPS Central Casework
8 April 1997
x 1236
        08/04        '97    14:48                                      CPS 4th floor                                            @004


                                                                                          TO: l                          PR6 E : 0 2
07-0 4 -9 7     15:33       F R O M : SOLICITORS   BUS UNIT   01512252356
                                                                                                                Page 01
     07/04/1997 17:2S                0


                                                                                                            ORo{
                           0(/.



                                                                                                         5BP?^
                                          Hillsborough Family Support Group
                                                                                                  Liverpool, L17 6BX

               CPS Central Casew ork
               50 Ludgate Hill
               London, EC4M 9EX
                                                                                                      7th A pril 1997

               Dear M r Pearson,

               Further to our telephone conversation earlier today please find enclosed a copy of the
               news release issued by South Yorkshire Police. Families are anxious that I respond to the
               same.

               I w ould d r a w your attention to the following matters:

               1) TheJMbsinjg Tape
               South Yorkshire Police state that "The tape in question. . . has never been m issing and it
               was m ade available in full to both Lord Justice Taylor's inquiry and to the Coroners
                in q u e st."

               It is the families case that footage from camera 5 did indeed go m issing and theiefore
               could not be show n to the inquest jury. PC Bichard in his evidence confirm s th at shots
               from cam era 5 w ould have been recorded prior to 15.02. He could not explain w hy the
               relevant footage could not be found (P 318 Annex D2).

                Families are concerned at this stage to hear that South Yorkshire Police them selves w ere
                in a position to "select" evidence for admission to either the Taylor Inquiry o r the
                inquest. It has alw ays been their understanding that the responsibility for gathering
                evidence lay w ith the W est Midlands Police who of course were also charged w ith the
                task of preparing a report for submission to the DPP in relation to the conduct of South
                Yorkshire Police on the day of the disaster.

                2) Cam era 5
                It is now stated that "The camera which took the pictures was indeed in w orking order".
                This is contrary to evidence given by Officers Bichard, Ryan and G oddard w ho all
                disparaged the capability of camera 5 (see In particular pages 316 and 318 Annex D2).
                Video evidence recently subm itted to you shows clarity of image and dem onstrates that
                the cam era could pan, lilt and zoom and produce pictures of sufficient quality and detail
                to identify facial features (Trevor Hicks statem ent refers).

              CHAIKMAW                                        VICE-CHAIRMAN / SECRKTAKf                tr e a su r e r
              T. HteV*                                        P. Huninond                              Mb . J. Travnor
   08/04    '97      14:50      ©                             CPS 4th floor

07-04-97 1 5 : 3 4      F R O M : SOLICITORS   BUS UNIT   01512252356         TO:                         R
    07/04/1997        17:28      0
                                                                                                 PAGE     6




        % \ Quality of Transm ission

        For the first tim e South Yorkshire Police appear to be alleging that there was no fault
        with the cam era h u t rather the quality of the transmission via the m onitors in the police
        ro n trd room. They now presum e that this interference w as due to the television
        equipm ent being used a t the location.
        This has been discussed w ith the video technician, Roger H ouldsw orth, w ho has assured
        families that this claim is totally unfounded. One of the m onitors in the Sheffield
        W ednesday control room was linked to the Police CCTV system(P73 Annex C). There
        could not be interference on one system and not on the other. The m onitor in the club
        control room show ed clear and uninterrupted pictures without interference.

        Further, in his statem ent Chief Inspector McRobbie describes how PC Bichard operated
        the 200 m facility which he thought was "a super facility for spotting troublem akers in
        the ground". He also states that he was watching the screens and was aw are that the
        area in Leppings Lane behind die goal was filling up (P446 Annex D2). He states th at he
        looked on the left m onitor and was aware of a build up of supporters. A t no tim e does
        McRobbie m ention interference on the monitors. However, unfortunately Chief
        Inspector McRobbie was not called at the inquest.

        4) The Tapes Stolen From The Club Control Room
        Whilst it is accepted that the tapes stolen from the club control, room show ed nothing of
        a probative value, the fact remains that they were stolen from a locked cupboard in a
        locked room which w a s alarmed. There was a massive police presence at the ground
        that night as effectively a m urder investigation was m ounted. It is inconceivable that
        such security could have been breached by a 9tranger. It is sim ply not satisfactory for
        .South Yorkshire Police to dismiss this m atter so lightly. Clearly the thief thought h e /sh e
        was stealing som ething of value.

        I trust you will take the above comments into account before m aking your decision.
        Finally, I should be grateful if you would telephone me on 0151 225 2975 before m aking
        any announcem ent to the media.

        1 am anxious to ensure that families are warned in advance of any public announcem ent.
        With the 8th anniversary just a few days away this is a particularly stressful time for
        families.

        In anticipation of y o u r co-operation.
        Yours sincerely,


        /jruy        f/latrf-
        A nn M arie Adlingfcon (Solicitor)
1 OPR ’ 97   1 0 :4 7           FROM P AND PRD                            TO 171329S377              PAGE.002




              S o u t h Yorkshire

              POLICE
              JU 3T IC E       will      COURAGE


                                                               c S Y ^

 PR no. 24                                                                                 1 April

                          Response to Daily Mirror report on Hillsboroug i

 Responding to a report in (today’s Daily Mirror, about the HHIsboroug i tragedy, Assistant
.Chief Constable Ian Dain^s said:

 '‘Reports about this particular video tape continue to add confu sion to an already
  coimpfex 'set of circumstances. The Chief Constable has always said that any new
  evidence surrounding thejdisaster wiil be examined in detail. There s no new evidence
■ in-the, article published, in the Daily Mirrof today.

       tape-in question - from a closed circuit television camera s owing the disaster
'onfoid on the- Leppings |_ane terraces - Has never been 'missing and it was made
 available* in full to both ijord Justice Taylor’s inquiry and to the c< roner's inquest, its
 existence has never been) in doubt.

/^tw cam iifa '^ cft:tb o k tfti pictures was indeed in working order, otherwise there would
 have bean no tape to’subf t as evidence.

  'W hat officers^ have previously explained is that the live transmissior of the pictures into
  the-police control: point at the tfriie was of poor quality This meant lat they had to rely
. on.tfie vlew from the polioe control room window and on infbmnation From officers on the
  ground;, Ithps always been assumed that the interference on their screen was caused
; by                           .peing used to transmit live coverage of th< FA cup semi-final,
  .\^iUi. was^^rl6t ,a.factor #l^ri the equipment was tested earlier in the Jay.

:^A^'Jhis-been explained sfore, the confusion over ‘missing1 tapes eems to ar ise from
 the1fact that .two other fc ?es recorded at the ground on the day c f the disaster were
 sfoien overnight from,.Sheffield Wednesday Football Club’s recordii g suite in a locked
 room in "the stadiuril Orje would have shown a disused area of tl e complex and the
•othe'r: would have . shown turnstiles. Neither tape would have bfen relevant to the
 tragedy and the mbtive for the theft has never been established.

 “We understand that enquiries are being conducted by the Crown ’rosecution Service
 but have not yet been concluded."




              P r o t t & P u b lic R e la tio n s D e p t.,     F OB F U R T H E R ^ F O R M A T I O N CONTACT
               P o lic e H e a d q u a r te r s .
              S n i g H i l l . S h e j f f t e l d S 3 SLY.       Gillian Radcliffe, lead of Pres* and PR
              T e U p U n . : 0 7 jl 2 7 G S 5 2 2               TELEPHONE
                                                                               ext! 1S0


                                                                                             TOTAL PAGE.002
      08/04   '97   10:03
                               ^                         CPS 4th floor                                    21001
06-04-97 09:55      FROPI: SOLICITORS BUS UNIT   0151225235S           TQ:[                       PAGE:




              HPSO response to i-

                     South Yorkshire Police Statement - let April 1997

                    •Response to the Daily mirror report on Hillsborough


          Para 2 -          no new evidence in the mrtlelm....
                            Tb« tape/s have never been seen before, by the
                            families, our lawyer*/ or by the Inquest jury. Only
                            o&e email section ( *a couple of minutes Cron 3. QZpm*
                            aaya Coroner)

                            it ptovas the scoreboard camera/CCTV systein wee
                            working and police eontrol could see the terraces in
                            detail.

                            xt contradicts polioe evidence                                    '
                            and fully supports Souldsworth's stateneat.

                            It shows aany eequancefl from camera 5 - so many that
                            it Is impossible for them to be missed when the
                            compilation tape was produced by tfest Midlands police.

                            If this taps footage          is   not      "new*   then   it   was
                            suppressed as evidence.


          Para 3 *          tape (from earnera 5) bam nmv&x been Biasing....

                            As above. - why was it not shown to the jury despite
                            three requests for snore footage etc.

                            Coroner hisiself (p31BI) says to Bichard "If I tell you
                            ve cannot find it would that sake any difference to
                            your answer«"    ' & € facto the tape wae missing or the
                            Coroner aisled the jury*I I

                            If not lost why did the West Midlands Polioe (aating
                            as Coroners Officers and Investigating Officers for
                            Taylor and DP* I} not reveal that otber footage was
                            available-  They   or  flouth Yorkshire  must   have
                            suppressed it III

          Par*, 3 •         axd it v«s mado available in full to X>o-rd Justice
                            T&ylor'a Inquiry sad to the Coroner's Inqpiest....

                            Transcripts show both Taylor Inquiry and the Inquest
                            vere aisled regarding capability of system and quality
                            and quantity of pictures. (9iah.a.rd, Ryan./ Qoddard)

                            Coroner hi»self refers to missing tape.


                                                               f Ao
                                                               J © t4 M
                                                                     +v. i       OTH *
                                                                                   n.<&-
     08/04    '97   10:03
                                                              CPS 4th floor
08-04-97 09:55      FROM:SOLICITORS BUS UNIT           01512252356                                        @002
                                                                            TO:                       PAGE:03




             Pax-a 3   -    Xfca axiatmnea has o « v * r bmajj in d o u b t . . . .

                             As above.
                             Mr Isaacs (representing Duekanfield) eaid (Day ?3 p65)
                             “there is no evidence that the risk, the obvious risk,
                             was apparent to anybody is that control room, I rely
                             upon the evidence of Jfurray/Ooddard/Bichard etc. etc.
                             * 9



                             Why did the Coroner say it was missing

                             why was it omitted from the compilation cape prepared
                             £«r Taylor ate. - Kissing or suppressed


             Para 4 -        The    earner*     that    too*   the   pictures     was   indeed   in
                             vosrJci.isg o r d e r ......

                             Prior to this statement the South Yorkshire Police
                             position has always bean that the scoreboard camera
                             was faulty. (transcripts confirm this.)

                             South Yorks Police tried to discredit Houldsworth (who
                             etated that he had repaired the camera) as recent as
                             December 1996.


             Para 5 -        ....live transmission of the pictures into the police
                             control point at the time iras of poor quality....
             Para. 5 -       It has alvay8 bean assumed that the interference on
                             their screen was caused by television equipment being
                             used to transmit live coverage of the FA Cup aemi-
                             £iual, which was not a factor when the equipment was
                             tea tad earlier i® the day....


                             CCTV syscene are hard wired with screened co-axial
                             oafele *nd pictures Iroa the camera are £ed to the box
                             down these cables and not atransmitted”

                            Thousands of TV outside broadcasts take place every
                            week at soccer stadium (and other locations) Vere CCTV
                            is in use. Interference has not been a««n to w e u x awX
                            it would render crowd control at all these events
                            unsafe hence it would have surfaced before now.

                             In a f»c«nt conversation with the BBC in Leeds they
                             confirmed ao knowledge of this "problem*. Houldeworth
                             and Hicks have no knowledge of such problems.
                            ^he Transcripts shew that polioe evidence was that
                            other cameras were satisfactory. T h e y use the sane
                            cables and terminate in the police box - why did the
                            previously unknown interference not affect them.
    08/04 '97   10:04     O                       CPS 4th floor
                                                                                       1^1003
3-04-97 09:56   FROM:SOLICITORS BUS UNIT   01S1225S356          TO                 PAGE:04




                        Tapes   came  from the police control box video
                        recorders. They show what was on the screens/ Police
                        could see, if interference was present it would appear
                        on the tapes.

                        Also in addition to the permanent TV screen/monitor on
                        each camera a second t v monitor shows what is being
                        fed to each of the two v c r machines. Both screens
                        would have to be faulty for vision impairment:.

                        The monitors are the camera operators "eyes” when he
                        operates the cameras remotely (pan, tilt, zoom etc.)
                        and thay siust have been working for Bichard to perform
                        these tasks. Tapes show auch operations ware carried
                        out many tines - including with the scoreboard camera.

                        Houldawarth and ve Quest (now- deceased^ both saw
                        pictures from the polioe CCTv system (via video link
                        to the club eontrol room) and they make no reference
                        to interference / claim good pictures.
         Para 6 -       .... confusion o v r 'Miatlng' tapes seams CO arise from
                        the fact that two other tapes recorded at eh* ground
                        on the day of the disaster vers stolen overnight from
                        Sheffield Wednesday Football Clubs recording suite in
                        a locked reoa in the stadium....

                        Key issue is that tapes were "stolen" from a locked
                        cupboard, in a locked and alarmed room which wag a
                        critical area in the middle of a major fatal injury
                        inquiry area UNDER POLICE CONTROL.

                        Only the police could benefit from the tapes loss and
                        the suppression of the new tapes and the loss of club
                        tapes are a very suspicious coincidence indeed.

                        Kouldsworth states that his numbering of the VCRs in
                        the control room was unusual and the "thief" may have
                        intended to take tapes from dirterent cameras to those
                        actually taken.




        Trevor Sicks
        Chairman
        7th April 1997
08/04    '97    14:47      ®(                         CPS 4th floor                                     @002




        Trevor Hicks,
        Chairman
        Hillsborough Family Support Group




                                                                                     8th April 1997



                                                DRAFT


        Dear Mr. Hicks,

        I am writing to acknowledge receipt of your fax of today with your response to the South
        Yorkshire Police Statement of 1st April 1997.

        A substantive reply will be provided as soon as this document and the previously sent reports
        of 4th March have been fully considered. I regret this means that we shall no longer be able
        to give you a full response within 14 days of my previous acknowledgement. However the
        matter is receiving our immediate consideration.




        Yours sincerely,




        MMS/202.97
08/04    ’97   14:47                                  CPS 4th floor                                    @001




        Ann Marie Adlington
        Solicitor
        Hillsborough Family Support Group
        21 Rosemont Road
        Aigburth
        LIVERPOOL L17 6BX




                                                                                    8th April 1997

        Dear Ms Adlington,

                                                   DRAFT


        I am writing to acknowledge receipt of your faxed letter of 7th April 1997concerning the
        press release issued by South Yorkshire Police.

        A substantive reply will be provided as soon as your representations and the previously sent
        reports of 4th March have been fully considered.

        I regret that this means that we shall no longer be able to give you a full report within 14
        days of my earlier acknowledgement.        However, the matter is receivingour immediate
        attention.




        Yours sincerely,


                                     p v o


                                        £ /r& G & 0 7 ^ .

                                               •            1   ^


        MMS/201.97
                                                                 DAILY MIRROR
                                                                     1/4/97




                                                     Mirror .EXCLUSIVE
                                              A POLICE video of the Hillsborough tragedy
                                              unfolding has been found by The Mirror.
                                                Cope claimed i t was lost — and th a t the camera
                                           - th a t took i t was n o t working properly anyway.
                                                Now the Crown Prosecution Service is reopening
                                             its investigation into police handling of the Sheffield
                                             tragedy th a t killed 96 Liverpool soccer fans.
W E F IN D H IL L S B O R O U G H T R A G ED Y TA PE H ID D E N F O R EIG H T Y EA R !




         M h T °r[
        EXCLUSIVE                               f
                                                    Vital video from                                 "
        By BRIAN READE and JEREMY ARMSTRONG
        THESE are the pictures that
        show police were wrong
        over the Hillsborough
                                                    camera cops said
        disaster.
         . They come from the video tape
        th a t cops claimed w ent m issing —
        taken by the camera they said was
        n ot working properly.
           The police video, now in the
        hands of The M irror, shows the
        cam era could, pan, t i l t and zoom
        and the pictures were clear enough             R o g e r H o u ld s w o rth , who       When asked why there was no
        to identify individual fans' faces.         installed the entire closed circuit      film before 3pm — when the crush
           It supports allegations — made           TV system, has given a sworn             was a t its worst — coroner Dr
        in la st y ear’s G ranada TV dram a         statem ent confirming the images         Stefan Popper was told the tape
        Hillsborough—th a t police covered          came from Camera Five, a t the           had “gone missing”.
        up th eir incom petent handling of          scoreboard end of the ground.               Yorkshire TV, Granada TV, the
        the disaster by claim ing th ey                He had worked on a problem            families’ spokesman Trevor Hicks
        could not see what was happening.           w ith the cam era 24 hours earlier       and Mr Houldsworth have a ll
           The Crown Prosecution Service            and was always adam ant th a t it        watched the film.
        said the “n atu re and volum e” of          was working properly on the day.            Mr Hicks said yesterday: “I t
        the new evidence has forced i t to             B ut South Yorks Police told the      blows the police story out of the
        reopen the inquiry into the crush           T aylor inquiry and the inquest it       w ater and opens up a huge can of
        th a t killed 96 Liverpool fans.    ,       was faulty and th e pictures were        worms. This tape proves there was
           And lawyers for the victim s             “very poor q uality”.                    no reason why th ey couldn’t see
        fam ilies said th e re is “stro n g           • Led by Chief Supt David Duck-        everything th a t was going on.”
        evidence of perjury and suppres­            enfield, in charge of crowd control,        He added: “The chain of events
        sion of evidence” by police to              they said they did not have a clear      you would need of senior people
        pervert the course of justice.              view of the overcrowding. PC             not to know about th e existence
                                                    Trevor Bichard, in charge of video       of this tape is ju st beyond belief.”
                    Images                          surveillance, told Taylor: “The             M r H ouldsw orth said: “T his
                                                    cam era was m ost definitely not         vindicates w hat I have said all
          The tape was found lying in                                                        along — th a t the cam era was
        Yorkshire TV’s archives — handed            good enough to give you a close-
                                                    up view for identification purposes      working properly.
        to them by police a fter the 1989           and i t would not give a view of            "It is clear from these pictures
        tragedy to help in a documentary.                                                     th a t the whole tru th has never
          It shows pictures of the Leppings          overcrowding."
                                                        The inquest jury asked to see         been told. These fam ilies deserve
        Lane terrace which were beamed               the video from the camera —- but         to know the tru e story of w hat
        in to th e police c o n tro l room           were told the only film th a t police    happened to th eir loved ones.”
        between noon and 5.22pm.                                                                The families' QC Alun Jones
                                                     had showed events after 3.02pm
                                                     and was of too poor quality to be        said: "It indicates th a t pictures of
                                                     of any significance.                     all the relevant areas of tlr
                                                                                              ground were clear, detailed ar.
                                                                                               uninterrupted, contrary to police
                                                                           14
^KL\a

U        CO- U f - l    t> h - u Z o .
             u                       «f < S '*



    C^J ( L .           fr CAaJU* «fe«
    i-      ^          c H          ^            •
U M ^           ^       JLUXKC^           CM
itM cm ^ f o ^ J L ' ^ ^ «
                           DAILY MIRROR
                                   1/ 4/97

 evidence.” He added th a t there was
 now “strong' evidence of perjury by
 individual police officers a t the
 inquest — and suppression of evi­
 dence organised successfully to
 pervert the course of justice a t the
                                         Timetable
                                         ol death
 inquest.”
    Fam ily Support Group chief
 Philip Hammond, whose 14-year-
 old son Philip died, said: "We have
 seen w hat we were told we could
 n o t see. T his evidence should
 have been shown to a jury.”
    Chief S u p t D uckenfield was
 allowed to re tire early after the
.Taylor inquiry found he “froze” a t
 a crucial stage before th e deaths.
    Confronted a t his bungalow in
                                         revealed
                                         OUR pictures are taken
 Bournem outh, Dorset, he said: “I       from film up to half an
 have no com m ent to m ake what­        hour before kick-off.
 soever, thank you very much,” and         They show that the
 sh u t the door in our faces.           camera was not only
               Glad                      working normally but
                                         could even zoom into an
   H r Bichard — now a detective         area where there might be
sergeant in Rotherham — said: “I         overcrowding.
have nothing to hide and if there          At 1.47pm, more than an
is any further inquiry I would give      hour before the tragedy,
the same evidence.                       the Leppings Lane end
   “As far as I am concerned th a t      was filling up.
p articu lar cam era was n o t work­       By 2pm youngsters are
ing properly. If there is any new        standing on barriers or
evidence I would like to see it."        sittin g on their dads’
   Coroner Dr Popper, now 64 and         shoulders in Leppings
retired, said: “I’m glad to hear          Lane.
w hat you have to te ll me because
I knew nothing about th a t and i t             Worried
is really interesting to me.
   “I cannot comm ent w ithout the         Two police officers are
relevant -papers and statem en ts        seen peering over from
w ith me. There is nothing I can         the stand above, appar­
say w ithout seeing the footage.”        ently worried and point­
   S outh Y orks police said onlyr       ing out the overcrowding
“We w ill be very interested to seS,1    on the terraces.
your a rticle.”                            Twenty., minutes later
                                         Camera Five zooms in on
                                         a small group of people in
                                         a pen right next to the
                                         spot where the crush was
                                         to kill 96 fans.
                                            It also focuses on a
                                         woman so that she is
                                         clearly identifiable.
                                            This is despite claims at
                                          the inq u est that the
                                         camera was “faulty” and
                                          unable to do zoom in or
                                          provide pictures good
                                          enough to identify i n d i­
                                          vidual fans.




                                  15
p


                                                                            DAILY MIRROR
                                                                                1/ 4/97




12.05       Kids relax on empty terraces, waiting for the fateful game to
            kick off. The video cam era appears to be working perfectly               13.03          Ground starts to fill tw o hours before kick-off. Still no sign of
                                                                                                     any problems from the camera th at was said to be faulty




111 A   A   KMs stand on barrier or sit on shoulders to get view. Cops     IA          Group of fans. Camera zooms to girt despite daims it was
*           in stand appear worried a t overcrowding on the terraces       I           unable to do so and provide pictures of reasonable quality




               r
IE      After disaster, crowd rush forward. Expert testified picture was
                                                                           Ilf       first ambulance arrives as panic-stricken fans scramble for their
        so good you can see comer flag at point furthest from camera
                                                                                 V   l'ves to get on to the pitch. Every tragic detail is dearly visible




                                                                                 16
