J Mervyn Jones Esq
Assistant Chief Constable
Hillsborough Inquiry Team
Nechells Green Police Station
Fowler Street
BIRMINGHAM
B7 5DA




                        PGK/3341/89          18 September 1989



Dear Mr Jones
I write to thank you for your letters of 31                and
Chris Newell and myself enclosing copies    ^he stateme
other material gathered to date. I look
the updated edition of your interim report in due cours
 in the meantime I have prepared a draft letter to help in your
 approach to the Police Complaints Authority      ^he
 availability of evidence produced    . ^ e crimina
 investigation. I am sure that you will recall raising
 rather Sensitive topic during our meeting with Gareth
 Williams. I do hope that the draft proves to be of some
 assistance.
 Should you wish to discuss the draft or any aspect of the case
 please do not hesitate to telephone me.

 Yours sincerely




 C J CLEUGH
 HEAD OF POLICE COMPLAINTS DIVISION
                     D R A F T    L E T T E R



From J M Jones Esq to Capt Taylor P.C.A.



I write following our introductory meeting on 25th August,
which I found helpful.   You will appreciate that matters have

progressed and Mr Geoffrey Dear has now been formally
appointed as the Investigating Officer after the request made
by the Director of Public Prosecutions to Mr Wright for a full
criminal enquiry.



The investigation is well under way and it is obvious that
there will be a very large number of statements and other
evidence produced.   This has prompted me to consider the
question of the future availability of the evidence, in
particular, for the Coroner for the purpose of the inquest and
for Mr Wright for the purpose of disciplinary or civil
proceedings.



When the enquiry is complete, in the usual way, copies of the

investigating officer's report together with statements and

other evidence will be sent to you as the supervising member

of the Police Complaints Authority and to Mr Wright for
transmission to the Director.    I take the view that it would

be of benefit to me and also to the Coroner and Mr Wright if

at this early stage you would concur with my opinion that

there should be no objection to the Coroner and Mr Wright

having access to the evidence for the purposes I have referred
to above.   I say this having regard to the unusual nature of

the investigation which is looking not only at the potential
criminal responsibilities of those police officers involved
but also the possibility of criminal proceedings being issued
against the other bodies and persons whom we mentioned during
the meeting on 25th August.   Obviously this evidence could

only be made available after the Director had concluded any

criminal proceedings or decided that no such proceedings were

to be issued.


I am sure that this course can be adopted in the special
circumstances of this unusual investigation and that by taking

this decision at an early stage there can be considerable
savings for the public purse without any prejudice to the

criminal enquiry or subsequent proceedings.


I have discussed this matter with Mr Newell and Mr Cleugh of
the Crown Prosecution Service who agree that this course of

action could properly be adopted and to whom I have sent a

copy of this letter.


I look forward to hearing from you on this matter, however, if

in the meantime I can be of any assistance please do not

hesitate to contact me.


Yours faithfully




J Mervyn Jones
