                       CROWN PROSECUTION SERVICE

                                     Central Casework
                                      United House
                                        Piccadilly
                                           York
                                        YOl 9PQ

                                 Facsimile     __
                                   DX: 65204 York 6


Attention of        R B MANNING
Fax No
From               GEORGE CROSTON
Tel                \
Date & Time        12/01/99 11:14
No. of Pages       2


MESSAGE
ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY




  This fax must not be read, copied, disclosed or used by any person other than the addressee
                              Unauthorised use may be unlawful
                                                        I
                                 THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
                         Queen Anne’s Chambers, 28 Broadway, London SW1H 9JS

     DX 123242 St James’s Park        Direct Fax: (I                 Switchboard 0171 210 3000 (GTN 210)

                                           Direct Line:

Mr George Croston                                           Please quote:               L98/8265K/SJR/D1
Central Casework
Crown Prosecution Service                                   Your reference:
DX: 65204 YORK 6
                                                            Date:                        6 January 1999



Dear Sir,

POSSIBLE JUDICIAL REVIEW - HILLSBOROUGH

Thank you for your instructions.

I will be dealing with this matter under the above reference. Please quote this reference in all
future communications.

It is important that you complete and return to our Business Support Section as soon as possible
the details requested below, so that bills issued for work on this case will clearly identify the file
reference and the name of the instructing contact. If you have any difficulty in recognising this
matter, please do not hesitate to contact me. For the purposes of billing you should please advise
the relevant budget-holder that you have instructed us.



                                                                                                                    -!
Yours faithfully,


  J Ross (Miss)            ^                                                                                        «
for the Treasury Solicitor


                  BILLING INFORMATION - PLEASE DO NOT DETACH
                  PLEASE RETURN TO BUSINESS SUPPORT SECTION

1.       Case Details:

Your file reference (up to 35 characters)..            ^F7Gc/33^i/5? ......................
Name of your Case Officer... ..... ^       60*6*            f c ..C J t c » S l S N I ...........................
2.       Finance Details:

Address/budget to which the bill is to be sent:................... ................................
f*   ■%




          WALKER MORRIS
          SOLICITORS
          Kings Court
          DX: 12051 LEEDS 24                                                      |

                                                                                  3341/98
                                                                                  RBM/BQW/MURRAY

                                                                                  12 January 1999


          Dear Sirs

          ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

          Thank you for your letter of 8 January 1999.

          I look forward to meeting with you at 0930 on 14 January for consideration of our voluntary
          disclosure.

          The letter of 5 January sent to me by Ann Adlington asked me to give ‘guidance’ to the
          police on the costs of disclosure. As you can see from my reply I was not able to do so.

          I note your concern on the matter of our response to your request of 18 December 1998 that
          we provide you with full details of, what is in effect, our decision making process. My file
          note of our telephone conversation on 21 December confirms that I stated that I had drafted a
          letter in reply but that any decision on your request was to be taken in London. I have no
          record that I gave any assurance that you would receive a substantive answer by 24
          December only that we would respond by that date.

          My letter to you of 22 December 1998 explained that whilst the CPS was considering your
          request a substantive response could not be made before January 1999. Your letter of 5
          January 1999 in reply, appears to accept that we would not give a response to your request for
          the reasons in not intervening in this private prosecution until January. My further letter of 6
          January explained that your request was still being considered and would be given to you
          when it was known.

          I do not believe that I have stated or intimated anything more than that your request was
          being considered. That I had prepared a draft reply does not lead to any inference about the
          content of that letter, only that your correspondence was under active consideration.

          In our telephone conversation of 7 January I did no more than attempt to correct your
          misconception that you were to receive detailed reasons of our decision not to intervene. I
explained that the decision on your request was being made in London. I also explained that
in my opinion it would not be usual for such detailed reasons to be given. That opinion must
surely coincide with your own experience of the CPS decision making process. Where an
application for leave to move for judicial review of a CPS decision has been made, I
understand that the Divisional Court will always adjourn proceedings for oral argument mid
will invite the CPS to respond.

I regret that my attempts to assist you in the course of our telephone conversations have
resulted in any misconceptions. In future it may be better if I confine my remarks to formal
correspondence.

Please let me know if I can be of any further assistance.


Yours faithfully




George R Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
