                                                                                              RECEIVED
From :             George Croston                                                               24 FEB 1999
To:                CPSHQL.DCE.NEWELLC, CPSHQL.CCU.BoothR, ENZORC
Date:              24 February 1999 3:47pm                                                      DIRECTOR            |
Subject:           Hillsborough update                                                        (CASEWORK)


Ann Adlington o f the HFSG has informed me that the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has been given leave
to apply for judicial review of the South Yorkshire Police Authority decision to suspend the legal funding of the
two defendants.

The hearing dates are 13 to 15 April 1999 inclusive.

George

CC:                 CPSHQL.DCE.longmana, CPSHQL.CCU.LennonC
From :             Chris Newell
To:                CPSHQY.CCU.CROSTONG
Date:              24 February 1999 3:57pm
Subject:           Hillsborough update -Reply

Thank you. Is the HFSG going to JR the decision of the CC South Yorks to JR the decision of his Police
Authority to frustrate the intention of the defendants to JR our decision not to intervene?

When, or where, is this increasingly ridiculous saga going to end?! (Please do not try to answer.)

CWPN

CC:                 CCU.BoothR, CPSHQY.CCU.ENZORC, longmana, CCU.Lenno.
03/03   99 WED 12:29 FAX                                                                                     @001
                                                                   er\^o >*—
                                                                           -^U
                                                                                         RECEIVED
                                                                                           03 MAR 1999
                                                                                          DIRECTOR
                                  THE TREASURY SOLICITOR                                (CASEWORK)
                          Queen Anne’s Chambers, 28 B r o a d ly , London SW1B 9JS
                                                                    Switchboard 0171 210 3000 (GTN 210)
          DX 123242 St James’s Park Direct Fax
                                           Direct Line:

                                                                                  L 98/8265K /S JR /D 1
        Chris Newell                                      Please quote:
        Crown Prosecution Service
        DX: 300850 LUDGATE EC4                            Yout reference:

                                                           Date:                   2 March 1999




                       G X O v -A A ,     j


         R v DPP EX PARTE DUCKENFIELD
         I enclose by fax a copy o f the Form 86A now lodged in respect o f t o application for leave to
         challenge the decision not to intervene in the private prosecutions.

         Since the application represents a wholesale challenge to the                 ^ ^ C o d e Sid the
         prosecution policy and makes many references to the dut,es
         law voumav feel that it would be bencficial to Philip Havers QC to have                   ivrarrh
                                applicant, is .0 be made by way o f an inter partes heanng on 8 M arch
         1999.
         I am copying this letter (but not the enclosure) to ChrU Bnzor, who has been sent the fall papers
         by the Applicant’s solicitors in any event.


            iCruLK^A-




          Miss S. J. Ross
          for the Treasury Solicitor
03/03 ’99 WED 12:35 FAX                                                                 ©004




      IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE                                CO   2 S (*    199

      QUEEN’S BENCH DIVISION

      CROWN OFFICE LIST

         IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO APPLY FOR JUDICIAL
         -----------          " : "REV IEW

      BETWEEN:

                                               THE QUEEN


                                                  and


                                 DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
                                                                          Respondent

                                               EX-PARTE

                                      DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELD
                                                                            Applicant




                                NOTICE OF APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO
                                    APPLY FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW




       P:\2433 2M\d0005.0P;\24J32\]\d0005.0)
/03 '99 WED 12:35 FAX                                                                                   © 005




    IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE                                             CO                   /99

    QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION

    CROWN OFFICE LIST

       IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO APPLY FOR JUDICIAL
                                   REVIEW

    BETWEEN:
                                           THE QUEEN


                                                and


                           DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
                                                                                         Respondent

                                            EX PARTE

                                  DAVID GODFREY DUCKENF1ELD
                                                                                           Applicant




                            NOTICE OF APPLICATION FOR LEAVE
                          TO APPLY FQR JUDICIAL REVIEW (053, r3)



    This form must be read together with Notes for Guidance obtainable from the Crown Office.


    TO THE MASTER OF THE CROWN OFFICE, Royal Courts of Justice, Strand, London
    WC2A 2LL.


    Name, address and                 David Godfrey Duckenfield,
     description of A pplicant                                                          Retired Chief
                                      Superintendent South Yorkshire Police


     Judgm ent, O rder, decision or The decision of the Director o f Public Prosecution and/or
     other proceeding in respect      the Crown Prosecution Service not to take over the conduct
     of w hich relief is sought       of   criminal       proceedings    commenced      against    Mr
                                      D uckenfield        by   Ann   Adlington    on   behalf o f the

     P:\24332\I\D0003.0                               1
03/03 '99 WED 12:35 FAX                                                                                     © 006




                                              Hillsborough Family Support Group in July 1998, for the
                                              purpose of discontinuing those proceedings, as contained in
                                              a letter from the Crown Prosecution Service dated 18
                                              December 1998 and press release No 156/98 of the same
                                              date.


                                                      Relief Sought


      (0       An Order of Certiorari to remove to the Queen’s Bench Division o f the High Court
               of Justice and to quash the said decision


      (ii)/     An Order of Mandamus requiring (a) the Respondent to reconsider its decision in
               — ~                      *-       —


                accordance with the law ^gc^b) to withdraw its current policy pertaining to private
               prosecutions, specifically relating to the taking over o f such a prosecution with a
           I   view to terminating it.


      (iii)    Further or alternatively a declaration that the Respondent’s aforesaid policy
               regarding private prosecutions is unlawful and/or irrational.
                     .-‘■in         '


      C*v)      An Order for Expedition (if leave to move is granted) and consequential directions
                as to the abridgement of time for the service of the proposed Respondent’s evidence.


      (v)       Interim relief in the form of a stay o f the criminal proceedings.


      The Applicant requests an oral application for leave in view of the interim relief sought.


      Name and address of                    Winckworth Sherwood, 35 Great Peter Street, Westminster,

      solicitors                             London SW1P 3LR, tel: 0171-593 5161, ref; SBE/24332/1




      Signed


      Dated this q£


       P:\24332M\D0003.0                                    2
3/03 '99 WED 12:30 FAX                                                                                 @ 002




                           GROUNDS ON WHICH RELIEF IS SOUGHT


                                               THE FACTS



     1.   The Applicant, now aged 54, is a retired Chief Superintendent of Police, formerly
          employed by the South Yorkshire Police Force. On 15 April 1989 he was in charge of
          police operations at the Hillsborough Football Ground, Sheffield, for the FA Cup semi*
          final between Liverpool Football Club and Nottingham Forest Football Club. 6 minutes
          into the game play was stopped, when it became apparent that spectators on the terraces
           behind the Liverpool goal had been severely crushed. As a result o f the events of that
          day 96 people died.


     2.   Mr Duckenfield carried out his duties primarily from a control box in a comer o f the
           ground, with the assistance o f a number of other officers.


     3.   In April 1989 Lord Justice Taylor was appointed by the Government to carry out an
          Inquiry into the events of 15 April 1989 and make recommendations about the needs of
          crowd control and safety at sports events.         In August 1989 Lord Justice Taylor
          published his interim report. Lord Justice Taylor found that the immediate cause of
           gross overcrowding was the failure, when a particular gate, Gate C, was open, to cut off
           access to the central pens behind the goal which were already overfull. He ascribed a
           number of contributing factors in relation to the condition o f the ground, police
           planning, police operations on the day, and the interaction o f those parties responsible
           for safety issues. Later that month the Director o f Public Prosecutions invited the West
           Midlands Police to undertake a full criminal investigation.


     4.   In January 1990 Lord Justice Taylor’s final report was published. In March 1990 the
           West Midlands Police report was submitted to the Director o f Public Prosecutions, and
           in August 1990 the Director of Public Prosecutions concluded that there was insufficient
           evidence upon which a prosecution for manslaughter, or any other criminal offence,
           could be brought against any officer in the South Yorkshire Police or any other person.




                                                      *
      P:\24332U\D0003.0
03/03    99 WED 12:30 FAX (                                                                                   @003




        5.   From November 1990 to March 1991 HM Coroner for South Yorkshire heard evidence
             at the inquest into 95 deaths at the Hillsborough disaster. 230 witnesses give evidence
             and the jury returned a verdict of accidental death-


        6.   On 10 November 1991 Chief Superintendent Duckenfield retired from the Force on
             medical grounds.


        7.   On 5 November 1993 the Divisional Court declined to


             (a) grant an Order of Certiorari to quash the various decisions o f Her Majesty’s Coroner
                 for South Yorkshire in the course of the inquest, and the verdict of the Coroner's
                 jury that the deaths o f 6 named persons plus 89 others at Hillsborough were cases of
                 accidental death; and


             (b) where appropriate order fresh inquests, as sought by the Hillsborough Family
                 Support Group,


        8.   McCowan L J, having found that there was no good reason for ordering a new inquest
             or quashing the existing verdicts, went on to consider, even in the event he had found
             such reasons, what matters would have weighed with him in the exercise of his
             discretion:


             "What would be the purpose o f fresh inquests? To get a verdict criticising the police?
             Such criticism has already been firm ly levelled by the Taylor Report. The police have
             admitted fault and paid compensation.           To get a verdict criticising the emergency
             services? 1 see no evidence to justify such criticism, and in any event it would be
              irrelevant i f all six were brain dead by 3.15 pm. To obtain further examination o f the
              last minutes o f their lives?   J doubt that anything more would be learned, but the
             process would be a very harrowing one involving large numbers o f witnesses and
              lasting i f not fo r 96 days, fo r not fa r short. Moreover, irrespective o f whose fault, if
              anyone's, it is, the fa ct is that four and a half years have already passed since the
              tragedy occurred. As to the alternative suggestion o f a mere quashing o f the existing
              verdicts leaving nothing in their place, I would regard that as absolutely valueless.




        P:\24332M\D0003.0                                4
03/03    99 WED 12:30 FAX                                                                                  @004




             Mr Jones says that the fam ilies are pursuing this matter because they have a deep
             instinct to know the circumstances in which their relatives died. 1 am perfectly prepared
             to accept that that is their motive and 1 respect it, but I hope they, fo r their part, can
             understand that I have to take an objective view and I have to consider the interests o f
             all concerned including those o f all the witnesses who would have to come along five
             years later and try to cast their minds back to events that they must have been trying to
             forget.     Taking that objective view, an d considering the interests o f all concerned, J
             would in my discretion conclude that this was not a case in which it will be right to
             order fresh inquests."


        9.   On 5 December 1996 a drama documentary, “Hillsborough", was broadcast on ITV,


        10. Between March and May 1997 the Crown Prosecution Service carried out a further
             independent review into allegations broadcast in the television programme.


        11. On 30 June 1997 the Home Secretary announced there would be a scrutiny to establish
             whether there was any fresh evidence in relation to the Hillsborough disaster, to be
             conducted by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. The terms of reference of the scrutiny were as
              follows:


              "To ascertain whether any evidence exists relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough
              Stadium on 15 April 1989 which was not available:


              a) to the Inquiry conducted by Lord Taylor; or


              b) to the Director o f Public Prosecutions or the Attorney General fo r the-purpose o f
                  discharging their respective statutory responsibilities; or


              c) to the C hief Officer o f South Yorkshire Police in relation to police disciplinary

                  matters; and


              d) in relation to (a) to advise whether any evidence not previously available is o f such
                  significance as to justify establishment by the Secretary o f State fo r the Home
                   Department o f a further public inquiry; and


         P:\24332\I\D0003.0                              5
03/03   99 WED 12:31 FAX                                                                                  @005




             e) in relation to (b) and (c) to draw to their attention any evidence not previously
                 considered by them which may be relevant to their respective duties and to advise
                 whether there is any other action which should be taken in the public interest."


        12. In February 1998 Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report was published. The Lord Justice
             concluded, in part:


             [Chapter 7, summary]


             "4.1 realise that my report and advice will come as a disappointment to them [the
                 families and friends], especially since they had had their hopes raised that
                 something more could be done.        But I cannot allow compassion to cloud my
                 judgment. J have had to look dispassionately and objectively at what is said to be
                 fresh evidence, in the light o f the evidence which had previously been considered.


             5. Having done so, fo r the reasons J have set out, I have come to the clear conclusion
                 that there is no basis upon which there should be a further judicial inquiry or a re­
                 opening o f Lord Taylor's inquiry. There is no basis fo r a renewed application to the
                 Divisional Court or fo r the Attorney General to exercise his powers under the
                 Coroners Act 1988. J do not consider that there is any material which should be put
                 before the Director o f Public Prosecutions or the Police Complaints Authority which
                 might cause them to reconsider the decisions they have already taken..


        13. On 18 February 1998 the Secretary of State for the Home Department, Mr Jack Straw,
             made a statement to the House of Commons in regard to the scrutiny. He said in part:


             ;7. the Attorney General and the Director o f Public Prosecutions have considered Lord
             Justice Stuart-Smith’s report very carefully.        We have no reason to doubt his
             conclusions. That will, 1 know, be deeply disappointing fo r the families o f those who
             died at Hillsborough and fo r many who have campaigned on their behalf


        14. On 26 June 1998 informations were laid before a Justice of the Peace in the Petty
             Sessional Division of South Sefton by Ann Adlington, Solicitor, acting on behalf of the




        P:\243j2U'.DQ0Q3.0                              6
03/03   99 WED 12:31 FAX (                                                                                   @006




              Hillsborough Family Support Group, that the Applicant had on 15 April 1989 at
              Hillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield:


              14.1. unlawfully killed John Alfred Anderson (contrary to common law);


              14.2. unlawfully killed James Gary Aspinall (contrary to common law);


              14.3. wilfully neglected to perform a public duty (contrary to common law);


              14.4. with intent to pervert the course of justice, did an act which had a tendency to
                      pervert the course o f justice in that he lied about the circumstances in which Gate
                      C at the football stadium became open (contrary to common law).


        15. The Applicant was summoned to appear subsequently at the Court.


        16. As a result of objections made on behalf of the Applicant, to the informant and the
              South Sefton Magistrates Court, the information was not proceeded with, and on 10 July
              1998 the Magistrates Court made a consequential Order for Defendant’s costs pursuant
              to Section 16 of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985.


        17.   On 13 July 1998, informations, identical in all relevant respects, were laid by the same
              informant before the Leeds Petty Sessional Division, and a Summons was issued by Mr
              Nigel Cadbury, Stipendiary Magistrate.       Those proceedings continue and a date for
              hearing of the committal proceedings has been fixed by the Court f o r j 9 April 1999
              with a 4 wee k j'tfiTnate. The next hearing date fixed is 1 March 1999 (mention only)
              and thereafter 22 March 1999 at 9.45 am.


        18. Upon receipt o f the original Summons relating to the South Sefton proceedings, the
               Applicant’s solicitors wrote to the Director of Public Prosecutions on 1 July 1998
               requesting that the Director take over the conduct of the proceedings pursuant to Section
               6(2) of the Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985, and then discontinue the proceedings
               under Section 23(3) of the same Act.


         19. A similar request was made on behalf o f the Co-defendant, Mr Murray, and
               subsequently extensive correspondence followed with the CPS as well as the

         P-.\24332' I\D0003.0                             7
03/03 '99 WED 12:31 FAX]                                                                        @007




           Hillsborough Family Support Group (“HFSG”) in respect of the request made of the
           Director. In the course of such correspondence, inter alia, HFSG once again submitted
           that it had discovered further “new evidence” of witnesses that had not been before the
           Taylor Inquiry, the DPP, the Coroner, or Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. The Applicant
           contended that an objective analysis of such “new evidence” revealed that there was
           nothing material to any o f the issues in such statements.


      20. On 27 July 1998 the CPS wrote to the then legal adviser to the HFSG, Keva Coombes,
           which in part read as follows:


           “It may help if you are acquainted with our policy in cases o f this type. The Code fo r
           Crown Prosecutors contains the principles that apply to the CPS review o f criminal
           proceedings started by the Police. There are two stages in the decision to prosecute.
            The first being the evidential test. I f the case does not pass that test, it must not go
           ahead, no matter how important or serious it may be.               I f the case does pass the
           evidential test then a crown prosecutor must decide i f a prosecution is needed in the
           public interest. The second stage is the public interest test which I shall come to later.


            The evidential test is an objective one and a crown prosecutor must be satisfied that
            there is enough evidence to provide a "realistic prospect o f conviction" against each
            defendant on each charge. In other words, a jury or bench o f magistrates, properly
            directed in accordance with the law, is more likely than not to convict a defendant o f the
            offence charged.


            Where there is enough evidence to provide a realistic prospect o f conviction the public
            interest must be considered.       Crown prosecutors must balance the factors fo r and
            against prosecution carefully and fairly.


            The policy where proceedings have been commenced by a private prosecutor builds on
            that contained in the Code o f Crown Prosecutors.              The right to bring a private
            prosecution is preserved by Section 6(1) o f the Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985 subject
            to the power under Section 6(2). The CPS will take over a private prosecution where
            there is a particular need fo r it to do so on behalf o f the public.



       P:\24332\l\D0003.0                                8
03/03 '99 WED 12:32 FAX                                                                                  @008




            In the instant case where we have been asked by the defendant to take over the
           prosecution in order to discontinue it, we will do so i f one (or more) o f the following
            circumstances apply;


            • There is clearly no case to answer.          A private prosecution commenced in these
                circumstances would be unfounded and would therefore be an abuse o f the right to
                bring a prosecution.


           • The public interest factors tending against prosecution clearly outweigh those
               factors tending in favour.


           •   The prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests o f justice.


           The CPS would then regard itself as having to act in accordance with our policy.


           I f none o f the above apply there would be no need fo r the CPS to become involved and
           mc? would not interfere with the private prosecution.


           Clearly there is a distinction between the “realistic prospect o f conviction " test in the
           Code and the "clearly no case to answer” test mentioned above.               Accordingly we
           recognise that there will be some cases which do not meet the CPS code test where
           nevertheless we will not intervene. It has been considered that to apply the code test to
           private prosecution would unfairly limit the right o f individuals to bring their own
         , cases.


      21, In the light of subsequent submissions, including those from the Hillsborough Family
           Support Group, and the CPS policy letter of 27 July 1998, a further detailed letter of
           submissions was sent to the CPS by the Applicant’s solicitors on 9 October 1998.


      22. By letter dated 18 November 1998, and received 22 December 1998, Christopher H
           Enzor, Branch Crown Prosecutor, advised that:




      P,\24332U\D0003.O                                9
03/03 '99 WED 12:32 FAX                                                                                    @009




            "W'e have considered the evidence, the representations made by the parties and all the
            surrounding circumstances o f the case.          We have concluded that we should not
            intervene to take over any o f the charges


      23. By facsimile letter dated 23 December 1998 the Applicant’s solicitors wrote to Mr
            En20 r seeking full and detailed reasons for the decision taken and specific confirmation
            as to the evidentiary test applied by the CPS-


      24. By letter dated 1 February 1999, Mr C W P Newell, Director Casework o f the CPS,
          r—      •                                          ~                       -   —


           replied, and that letter, in part, reads:


            "As you know the Code fo r Crown Prosecutors sets out the general principles applied
            by the Service when (inter alia) deciding whether to continue a prosecution it has taken
            over; or whether to institute proceedings, or to advise the Police whether to do so. It is
            correct that the CPS decided in 1997 that the evidence at that time was not sufficient, in
            its view, to provide a realistic prospect o f the conviction o f either your client or Mr
            Murray fo r any offence.     However, the decision whether to intervene in a private
           prosecution with a view to terminating it calls fo r different considerations to apply. It is
           quite possible fo r a private prosecution to continue, notwithstanding that the CPS is not
           satisfied, on the basis o f its own assessment o f the strength o f the evidence, that the
           evidence would pass the evidential sufficiency test in the Code (that there should be a
            "realistic prospect o f a conviction").



           In broad terms, the reason fo r this is that Section 6(1) o f the Prosecution o f Offences
           Act 1985, the Act which established the service's powers and duties, specifically
           preserved the right o f private individuals and prosecuting authorities or bodies other
            than the CPS to bring criminal proceedings.          This right is subject (among other
            limitations) to the limitation in Section 6(2) that the CPS may nevertheless take over the
           proceedings with a view either to conducting or to terminating those proceedings.



            Private prosecutors are not bound to apply the Code fo r Crown Prosecutors when
            deciding whether to institute proceedings, nor do the Courts apply the evidentiary
            sufficiency test in the Code when deciding whether there is a case to answer.           The

      P:\24332\1\D0003.0                              10
03/03 '99 WED 12:32 FAX [                                                                                 @010




            Service therefore recognises that it is not appropriate to intervene to terminate a private
            prosecution without good reason. That general principle has recently been endorsed by
            the Law Commission in its consultation paper No 149 "Consents to Prosecution " (see
            paragraph 6.3 and 6.4).



            The Service s policy is that it will not take over a private prosecution with a view to
            terminating it unless one or more o f the following apply:



            (i) There is clearly no case to answer.          A private prosecution started in these
                circumstances would be unfounded and ought not to be perm itted to continue; or



           (ii) The public interest factors tending against prosecution clearly outweigh those in
               favour (examples might be where the prosecution is malicious, or vexatious; or the
               offence is one fo r which the Defendant should clearly have been cautioned; or where
               although the offence may be serious, the Defendant is terminally ill); or



           (Hi) The prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests o f justice.



           In this case 1 took the decision not to intervene, After careful consideration I concluded
           in respect o f the charges o f manslaughter and wilful neglect to perform a public duty
           (which, fo r the avoidance o f doubt, were considered against each individual separately)
           that 1 could not say there is clearly no case to answer. It was not right, therefore, fo r
           the Service to take over the proceedings with a view to terminating them.



          Against that background, and after specifically considering the appropriate course to
           take in these circumstances, 1 concluded further that it would not be right to intervene in
           respect o f the one remaining charge against Mr Duckenfield, o f attempting to pervert
           the course o f justice, albeit f had form ed the view that there was clearly no case to
           answer on that charge alone. The charge o f attempting to pervert the course ofjustice
           is a serious one, particularly when levelled against someone who was, at the relevant
           time, a serving senior police officer. Nevertheless, in the context o f the case as a whole

     P:\24333\1\D0003.0                               11
03/03   99 WED 12:33 FAX                                                                                   @011




              that charge is not the gravamen o f the criminality alleged against Mr Duckenfield and I
              concluded that my approach to that charge should be led by my conclusions on the
              charges o f manslaughter and wilful neglect to perform a public duty.



              I also considered whether, nevertheless, there were overriding public interest factors
              that should lead to the Service intervening with a view to discontinuance but 1 came to
              the conclusion that any public interest factors tending against prosecution did not
              clearly outweigh those in favour. Nor did 1 consider that the prosecution is clearly
              likely to damage the interests o f justice."



        25. By letter dated 13 January 1999 the South Yorkshire Police Authority advised the
              Applicant's solicitors, largely as a result of representations received from the
              Hillsborough Family Support Group, that the Authority was to reconsider the issue of
              financial assistance, previously given to the applicant in regard to the criminal
              proceedings and to review decisions taken to that time. The letter advised, in terms,
              that:



              25.1. no further payments in respect of legal costs regarding the defence were
                      authorised;



              25.2. no decision had been taken to fund any judicial review proceedings, including as
                      against the Crown Prosecution Service, and that no costs were to be incurred
                      unless the applicant had other sources o f funding;



              25.3. the Authority be provided with a full assessment of the applicant’s eligibility for
                      legal aid. to allow the Authority to consider the matter of future funding.



        26f. As a result o f further written and oral submissions, at a meeting of the South Yorkshire
              Police Authority on 5 February 1999. the Authority resolved that, on balance, it did not
              have legal power to provide financial assistance to the applicant, either in regard to the
              defence of the private prosecution brought by HFSG. or in regard to the costs of any

        P:\24332‘.1\D0003.0                              12
03/03    99 WED 12:33 FAX                                                                                     @012




                 judicial review proceedings, including proceedings against the Crown Prosecution
                 Service, and accordingly the applicant’s application for financial assistance in regard to
                 such proceedings was rejected, and the previous decision o f the Authority to make such
                 assistance available in regard to the criminal prosecution was rendered null and void,



          27. The Authority further resolved that in recognition o f the fact that legal advice provided
                to it was to the effect that the power o f the Authority to provide the assistance “remains
                arguable , the Clerk and Treasurer was delegated to consult with the Chief Constable
                and xo take such action as considered appropriate to have the decision reviewed by the
                High Court, with expedition, with a view to clarifying the Authority’s power.



                By letter dated 11 February 1999 South Yorkshire Police confirmed that the Chief
                Constable's legal advice was to the effect that the Authority did have the power to
                provide the financial assistance in question, and that proceedings had begun in the High
                Court to ask for judicial review of the Authority’s decision, with a request for the Hich
               Court to deal with the application promptly because o f its impact both upon the
               particular case and because the matter is of national importance.



        29. On or about 11 February the aforesaid application for judicial review was lodged with
               the Court by Messrs Hammond Suddards, solicitors for South Yorkshire Police.



                                                    THE LAW



        30. The relevant sections of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 are as follows:



               "3 Functions o f the Director




        P:\2 433 2-I.D0003.Q                            13
03/03      99 WED 12:34 FAX                                                                                       @ 001




                   (2) It shall be the duty o f the Director f, subject to any provisions contained in the
                        Criminal Justice Act 1987] -



                        (a) to take over the conduct o f all criminal proceedings, other than specified
                            proceedings, instituted on behalf o f a police force (whether by a member o f that
                            force or by any other person);



                       (b) to institute and have the conduct o f criminal proceedings in any case where it
                            appears to him that -



                            (i) the importance or difficulty o f the case makes it appropriate that proceedings
                                 should be instituted by him; or



                            fii) it is otherwise appropriate fo r proceedings to be instituted by him;




                6 Prosecutions instituted and conducted otherwise than by the service


                l b Subject to subsection (2) below, nothing in this Part shall preclude any person from
                      instituting any criminal proceedings or conducting any criminal proceedings to
                      which the Director's duty to take over the conduct o f proceedings does not apply.



                (2)     Where criminal proceedings are instituted in circumstances in which the Director is
                      not under a duty to take over their conduct, he may nevertheless do so at any stage.




               10 Guidelines fo r Crown Prosecutors

        P;\243 3 2 ,1'1)0003,0                                14
03/03    99 WED 12:34 FAX                                                                                   @ 002




             (!) The Director shall issue a Code fo r Crown Prosecutors giving guidance on general
                  principles to be applied by them -



                  (a) in determining, in any case -



                       (i) whether proceedings fo r an offence should be instituted or, where
                              proceedings have been instituted, whether they should be discontinued,




             23 Discontinuance o f proceedings in magistrates}courts


              (1) Where the Director o f Public Prosecutions has the conduct o f proceedings fo r an
                  offence, this section applies in relation to the preliminary stages o f those
                  proceedings.



              (2) In this section, ''preliminary stage " in relation to proceedings fo r an offence does
                  not include -



                  (a) in the case o f a summary offence, any stage o f the proceedings after the court
                       has begun to hear evidence fo r the prosecution at the trial;



                  (b) in the case o f an indictable offence, any stage o f the proceedings after -



                       (i) the accused has been committed fo r trial; or



                       (ii) the courts has begun to hear evidence fo r the prosecution at a summary trial
                              o f the offence.



        P:\24332\1\D 0003.0                                 15
03/03 '99 WED 12:35 FAX C                                                                                  @003




            (3) Where, at any time during the preliminary stages o f the proceedings, the Director
                  gives notice under this section to the clerk o f the court that he does not want the
                  proceedings to continue, they shall be discontinued with effect from the giving o f
                  that notice but may be revived by notice given by the accused under subsection (7) ,




      31, It appears to be common ground that the Director of Public Prosecutions has in the
            instant case, the discretion to intervene pursuant to Section 6(2) of the Prosecution of
  ^         Offences Act as the proceedings are of a nature such that those proceedings could have
            been instituted by the Director himself, although he was not under a duty to institute and
            conduct those proceedings (Section 3(2) o f the Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985).



      32. It is clear that the power under Section 6(2) is a discretionary power which is to be
            exercised properly in accordance with the law.



      33.   Section 10 of the Prosecution of Offences Act provides for guidelines to be applied in
            the circumstances specified.



      34. The Director has issued a code pursuant to Section 10, the most recent o f which was
            updated in June 1994. It provides, in part, as follows:



            "I. I          The decision to prosecute an individual is a serious step. Fair and effective
                           prosecution is essential to the maintenance o f law and order. But even in a
                           small case, a prosecution has serious implications fo r all involved — the
                           victim, a witness and a defendant. The Crown Prosecution Service applies
                           the Code fo r Crown Prosecutors so that it can make fa ir and consistent
                           decisions about prosecution.



            1.2            The Code contains information that is important to police officers, to others
                           who work in the criminal justice system and to the general public. It helps



      P:\24332\1\D0003.0                                  16
03/03 '99 WED 12:36 FAX                                                                                      @007




                            the Crown Prosecution Service to play its part in making sure that justice is
                            done.



            2. General principles



                2, 1          Each case is unique and must be considered on its own, but there are
                               general principles that apply in all cases.



                2.2           The duty o f the Crown Prosecution Service is to make sure that the right
                               person is prosecuted fo r the right offence and that all relevant facts are
                               given to the Court. .



      35. The Code then provides for two stages to be considered by the Crown Prosecution in
            deciding whether to prosecute a matter. The first stage is the evidential test, which
            provides that the Crown Prosecutor must be satisfied that there is enough evidence to
            provide a "realistic prospect of conviction” against each defendant on each charge. If
            the case does not pass this test, it must not go ahead, no matter how important or serious
            it may be. If it does pass the test, the Crown Prosecutor must decide if prosecution is
            needed in the public interest, and the Code provides guidance, with a non-exhaustive list
            of some common public interest factors both for and against prosecution-



      36. By Section 23 of the Prosecution of Offences Act, where the Director of Public
            Prosecutions has the conduct of proceedings for an offence, he may during the
            preliminary stage of proceedings give notice to the Clerk of Court that he does not want
            the proceedings to continue and they are thereby discontinued. In addition, the Director
            has the power to take over a case and offer no evidence {Turner -v- DPP [1979] 68 Cr
            App R70), as well as the pow er to take over and withdraw the proceedings {Cooke -v-
            DPP and Brent JJ f 19921156 JP 497).



       37. The decisions of a prosecutor, including the Director o f Public Prosecutions, not to
             prosecute are susceptible to judicial review (R -v- Director o f Public Prosecutions ex

       P:\24332\1\D0003.0                                17
03/03 '99 WED 12:36 FAX                                                                                         @008




                parte C f!9 9 5 J 1 Cr App RJ36, Metropolitan Police Commissioner ex parte Blackburn
                [196812 WLR 893, Selvgragan -v- Race Relations Board [197511 Weekly Law Reports
                1686.



      38- In the case o f R -v- Director o f Public Prosecutions ex parte C, the Divisional Court
                considered all the relevant authorities in regard to the review of prosecutors, and Lord
                Justice Kennedy said at page 141;



               “fro m all o f those decisions it seems to me that in the context o f the present case this
                Court can be persuaded to act i f and only i f it is demonstrated to us that the Director o f
               Public Prosecutions acting through the Crown Prosecution Service arrived at the
               decision not to prosecute:



                1) because o f some unlawful p o licy. . . . or



               2) because the Director o f Public Prosecutions failed to act in accordance with her
                      own settled policy as set out in the Code: or



               3} because the decision was perverse,             It was a decision at which no reasonable
                     prosecutor could have arrived.'''



     39. The right o f a private prosecutor to bring proceedings is expressly preserved by Section
               6(1) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985.            A private prosecutor may institute
               proceedings where, pursuant to the Prosecution of Offences Act, the Director is
               empowered, but not under a duty to bring such proceedings. However, the Director may
               take over those proceedings and having done so he may discontinue them under Section
               23 o f the Act if the evidence is insufficient or if the proceedings would be contrary to
               the public interest or to avoid duplication of proceedings or for any other good reason (R
               -v- Bow Street Stipendiary Magistrate and another, ex parte South Coast Shipping Co
               Ltd and others [1993] 1 AH ER 219).



      P :\2 4 3 3 2 il\D 0 0 0 3 .0                         18
03/03   99 WED 12:36 FAX                                                                                                 @009




                  It is submitted that the Director of Public Prosecutions in deciding whether or not to
                  exercise his powers under Section 6(2) o f the 1985 Act will look at the evidence
                  differently to the way in which a magistrate looks at the evidence when deciding to
                  issue the Summons, ie whether the essential ingredients of the offence are prima facie
                  present (R -v- Tower Bridge Metropolitan Stipendiary Magistrate, ex parte Chaudhry
                  f 1994] I All ER 44, R —v- West London Justices, ex parte Klahn [197912 All ER 221).



        41, It is submitted that the right o f an individual to commence a private prosecution is
                  subject to a number of procedural limitations, including the power o f the DPP to take
                  over the private prosecution and terminate it, whether by discontinuance, withdrawal or
                  offering no evidence (The Law Commission, Consultation Paper 149 “Criminal Law:
                  Consent to Prosecution” - para 230, Gouiret -v- Union o f Post Office Workers [1977] 1
                 All ER 70).



        42. The Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure chaired by Sir Cyril Phillips which
                 reported to Parliament in January 1981, considered amongst other things, the role of the
                 private prosecutor, and proposed a new prosecution system which subsequently was
                 given effect by the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 and the establishment of the
                 Crown Prosecution Service in 1986. The Commission also considered the appropriate
                 criteria for prosecution whether commenced privately or by a prosecution service and
                 comment at page 174:



                 "8.9                  Someone should not be put on trial i f it can be predicted, with some
                                       confidence, that he is more likely than not to be acquitted, since it is both
                                       unfair to the accused and a waste o f the restricted resources o f the criminal
                                       justice system. It does not follow that no case where the prosecutor has
                                       doubts about its strength should be prosecuted. We accept, as was o ften put
                                       to us, that in such doubtful cases the prosecutor should ''let the court
                                       decide", and in many instances the prosecutor does not know until the
                                       actual trial shows it that there was a doubt about the strength o f his case.
                                       But those where it is apparent to the prosecutor, that is the police at their
                                       stage in the process or the Crown prosecutor at his, that there is no

        P:.2 4 3 3 2 .|\D 0 0 0 3 ,0                                19
03/03 '99 WED 12:37 FAX (                                                                                           @ 010




                                  reasonable prnsnect o f conviction can hardly be described as doubtful. In
                                  such cases the prosecutor should take responsibility fo r deciding not to
                                  prosecute, as the Director does now.         We therefore suggest that the
                                  prosecutor should have to satisfy him self that there is a reasonable prospect
                                  o f conviction before going ahead with prosecution. The test applied to the
                                  Director's cases should be extended to all cases, and applied by all who
                                  make the decisions that bring a case to court. ”



      43, The Commission concluded;



               “9.10              There should be agreed and consistent criteria fo r the exercise o f the
                                  discretion to prosecute. The criteria cannot be exhaustively enumerated;
                                  they must take account o f varying circumstances.      We would recommend
                                  the adoption for all prosecutions o f the test at present applied by the
                                  Director o f Public Prosecutions,    The prosecutor should have to satisfy
                                  him self that there is a reasonable prospect o f conviction before going ahead
                                  with the prosecution: the existence o f a prima facie case would not o f itself
                                  be sufficient (8.9-10)”



      44,     The Law Commission in 1997 and 1998 examined the requirement o f consent of an
              appropriate law officer as a condition precedent to the institution of some criminal
              proceedings and in that context reviewed the role o f the Crown Prosecution Service and
              its interaction with private prosecutors. In its consultation paper No 149 CRIMINAL
              LAW: CONSENTS TO PROSECUTION, the Law Commission considered "the
             principles underlying a reformed consent regime by setting out this "fundamental
             principle ”, that the right o f a private prosecution should be unrestricted unless some
              very good reason to the contrary exists” (para 6-4).



      45. The Commission proceeded to consider the harm caused by an unfettered private
              prosecution, and the role of the Code of Prosecutors, and concluded that harm may
              result from an unfettered right of private prosecution (para 6.16)-


      P:\24332'.] \D 0 0 0 3 .0                               20
03/03 '99 WED 12:37 FAX C                                                                                    @ 011




      46. The Commission provisionally concluded:



             ’6.17          We have suggested that generally a private prosecution is likely to be
                            undesirable i f it fails either or both o f the tests in the Code fo r Crown
                            Prosecutors.    Where an undesirable prosecution is brought it should be
                            terminated as soon as possible but it would be better i f the prosecution
                            were not brought at a ll”



      47. The Law Commission in its final report “Consents to Prosecution” revisited the issue
            and confirmed its provisional view:



             '5.25 \\       In the consultation paper, we pointed out that a private prosecution is likely
                            to be undesirable i f it fails either or both o f the Code tests. We explained
                            that an undesirable prosecution should be terminated as soon as possible
                            but it would be better i f it was not brought at all.       We advocated a
                            prosecutorial control system       which prevented undesirable private
                            prosecutions being brought rather than a system which terminated
                            proceedings after they had been commenced.



            5.26            The reasoning behind this is that i f there was a consent provision the
                            defendant would not suffer the harm caused by an aborted prosecution and
                            the lesal and administrative costs would not be incurred. Again, it is a less
                            attractive option fo r the CPS to intervene after a private prosecutor has
                            gone to the trouble o f instituting proceedings rather than to prevent the
                            commencement o f proceedings at the outset.        In essence, the consents
                            provision acts as a pre-emptive measure preventing the institution o f
                            undesirable proceedings and is thus preferable to the other mechanisms o f
                            control, namely, the power o f the CPS to take over a prosecution and
                            terminate it or the power o f the Attorney-General to enter a nolle prosequi,
                            both o f which are retrospective, not p r e - e m p t i v e (Law Com No 255
                            October 1998)


       P:\24332\1\DU003.0                                21
     03/03 '99 WED 12:37 FAX                                                                                            @ 012




                                                              SUBM ISSION




           48. The Director s decision indicated by the letter of 18 December 1998 (erroneously dated
                       J8 November 1998) involves the exercise of discretion pursuant to the Prosecution of
                       Offences Act. That discretion must be exercised in accordance with proper principles
                       and the law. and is subject to judicial review.



           f9.         It is submitted that the decision, as indicated by the letter o f 27 July 1998, and the
                       further letter of 1 February 1999 was based upon an unlawful and improper policy as

                       felIov,:s:              g | L J,   A                             ft
                                                                    Ha*-                pvore-tc

                       49.1. The Director adopts a different test where proceedings have been commenced by
                               private prosecutors, to that contained in the Code for Crown Prosecutors, when
                               considering intervention and discontinuance (contrary to the provisions of the
                               Prosecution of Offences Act and the Code itself).



                       49.2. The CPS indicated (letter 27 July 1998) that it would only take over a private
                               prosecution “where there is a particular need for it to do so on behalf o f the
                               public". Whereas public interest requirements may be relevant, this cannot be the _
                         ^     sole criteria, and this statement suggests that the CPS have improperly limited
0 ^                            themselves in the exercise of this discretion (see R -v - Bow Street Stipendiary
                               Magistrate and another ex parte South Coast Shipping Co Ltd and others).



                       49.3.        To adopt the evidentiary standard to the effect that “there is clearly no case to
               ^               answer77 as the benchmark is inconsistent with the Director's duty pursuant to the
     V   ^ \                   Prosecution of Offences Act, and the Code issued thereunder. It is also totally
 (                 i     ^     inconsistent with the express findings and recommendations of both the Phillips
         t '0                \ Royal Commission and very recently, the Law Commission in this context.



                       49.4. The CPS comment that “it has been considered that to armlv the code test to
                                                       e .
                             private prosecutions would unfairly limit the right of individuals to bring their

            P :\24332\1\D 0003 0                                   22
03/03   99 WED 12:38 FAX                                                                                            0013




                           own cases” reflects a misunderstanding by the CPS of its role and duties pursuant
                           to the Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985. The right o f individuals to bring such


        n                  cases is enshrined in the Act, and the duty of the Director (the CPS) is to exercise
                           his discretion, also afforded by the provisions of the Act, properly in accordance
                           with the statutory framework, and the guidelines issued thereunder. It is wrong
                           o f the Director to formulate a policy on the basis of what he (or the CPS)
                           considers to be “fair” in the interests of individuals bringing private prosecutions -



                49.5. The CPS (letter 1 February 1999) “recognises that it is not appropriate to
                           intervene to terminate a private prosecution without good reason. That general
                           principle has recently been endorsed by the Law Commission in its consultation
                           paper No 149 “Consents to Prosecution” (see paragraph 6.3 and 6.4)”. It follows
                           that the Director has, in part, taken account of the Law Commission review.
                           However, no express reference has been made to the ultimate conclusions and
                           recommendations of the Law Commission expressed in both the consultation
                           paper and the final report to the effect that undesirable prosecutions, that is to say
                           those that fail either or both of the Code tests, should be terminated as soon as
               K           possible. The Law Commission has itself answered the question o f what might
                rl         constitute “good reason1’ by reference expressly to the two code tests.         It is
                     I     submitted that the Director, in failing to appreciate and take into account the full
                           extent of the Law Commission’s observations and recommendations, has failed to
                           consider all relevant matters, as a result of which he has formulated and applied
                           an unlawful policy.



                49.6. The CPS (letter 1 February 1999) observed that “private prosecutors are not
                           bound to apply the Code for Crown Prosecutors when deciding whether to
                            institute proceedings, nor do the Courts apply the evidential sufficiency test in the
                            Code when deciding whether there is a case to answer”. It is submitted that the
                            Director has misled himself in formulating his policy, in concluding that to allow
                            a private prosecution to continue, there must clearly be no case to answer. In
                            considering whether to intervene pursuant to Section 6(2) o f the Prosecution of
                            Offences Act the Director ought to look at the evidence differently to the
                            approach of the magistrate reflecting the fact that their roles and functions are

        P:\24 33 2 \1 \D 0 0 03 .0                             23
03/03 '99 WED 12:38 FAX                                                                                           @014




                     different (R -v- Tower Bridge Metropolitan Stipendiary Magistrate ex part
                                                 -                          1            """     11   1
                     Chaudry). The Director has accordingly misunderstood his duties pursuant to the
                     <!      .in   ^

                     Prosecution o f Offences Act and has allowed himself to be misled by
                     consideration of the private prosecutor’s position and the standard to be applied
                     by the Court in looking at whether there is a case to answer.



      50. The Director o f Public Prosecutions failed to act in accordance with the Code as

            required.                                .                W * ' -’ n*                         v-    f '* * '



            5^*lv>fhe Prosecution of Offences Act Section 10 requires the Director to apply the
                     Code “in all cases” where the question o f discontinuance is being considered. It
            ?        does not sp e c if that the Director should have conduct o f any such case. It does
                     not limit the application of the Code in terms related to the type o f prosecution,
                     private or otherwise. Accordingly, where the Director, in pursuance o f any o f his
                     powers such as under Section 6(2) exercises discretion with a view specifically to
         -Ur" • ^lSCOnt*nue proceedings, j as in this case, and takes a decision relating to a
 ^                   prosecution, he must do so in accordance with the Act, which by Section 10
                     requires him to apply the Code. It is self-evident from the correspondence that in
                     this case the Director has not applied the evidential test set out in the Code, which
                     requires the application of the realistic prospect of conviction standard.           The
                     adoption of a lower standard “that there be clearly no case to answer” is
                     fundamental to the CPS decision, contrary to the Code, and renders of itself the
                     decision not to intervene fatally flawed.



            50.2. In any event, and irrespective of any statutory requirement for the Director to
                     apply the Code, it is clear in the exercise of his discretion in this case, the
                     Director turned his mind to the specific circumstances, that is, in what situation
                     he may intervene to take over the conduct o f proceedings with a view to
                     discontinuing those proceedings, (emphasis added).



            50.3, In the letter of 27 July 1998 the CPS made clear the importance of the Code of
                     Crown Prosecutors in terms o f police prosecutions, and set out the two tests

      P :\24332\1\D 0003.0                               24
03/03   99 WED 12:38 FAX I                                                                                      @015




                         applicable thereunder-       The letter further states that “the policy where
                         proceedings have been commenced by a private prosecutor builds on that
                         contained in the Code for Crown Prosecutors”. In considering the exercise of
                         discretion as to whether to intervene under Section 6(2), particularly when the
                         purpose o f intervention was specifically to discontinue the proceedings, it was
                         incumbent upon the Director to take account of the Code tests because proper
                         exercise of discretion required him to consider in what circumstances he could
                         discontinue the proceedings were he to intervene. In this context, it is evident
                         that had the Director intervened, the only criteria for discontinuance, as for any
                         other form of conduct of the proceedings, would be the Code. The Director
                         therefore misdirected himself as to the proper context of the Code, and indeed his
                         ability to vary the Code if he were to take over the case. For example, had the
                         Director intervened, he could not have applied the lower test (no case to answer)
                         in discharging any of his duties pursuant to Section 10 of the Prosecution of
                         Offences Act. Accordingly, it is submitted that for the Director to consider that
                         lower test as the appropriate standard, in exercising his discretion whether to
                         intervene for this purpose, he was wrong in law, as a failure to take proper
                         account of the Code, and his obligation to apply it. It is important to note that at
                         no time did the Director consider taking over the conduct of the case to prosecute
                         the criminal proceedings. His attention at all times was directed to potential
                         discontinuance o f the proceedings and the factors such as the Code, relevant to
                         the exercise o f discretion, must be considered in that light.



        51. Given the history of this matter, and the previous decision by the Crown Prosecution
               Service not to institute criminal proceedings, the decision not to intervene and
               discontinue was perverse and unreasonable.



               51.1. The letter of 27 July 1998 briefly outlines the relevant history in this regard. It
                         states that an original CPS review decision, applying the Code, was made in
                          August 1990 following which joint advice was received from two leading
                          Counsel to the effect that there was “no sufficient evidence to support criminal
                          proceedings of any kind against those mentioned in the West Midlands report”.


        P :\2 4 3 j 2\1\D0003.U                              25
03/03   99 WED 12:39 FAX                                                                                  @016




              51.2. Following the showing of the diama documentary “Hillsborough” in December
                      1996, the CPS commenced a further review o f what was said to be “new
                      evidence” and the conclusion reached was that there were no grounds for re­
                      opening the police investigation into the Hillsborough disaster.



              51.3. The subsequent scrutiny by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith similarly concluded that
                     there was not any material that should be put before the DPP which might cause
                     him to reconsider the previous decisions taken. It was decided that there was
                     insufficient evidence for a realistic prospect o f conviction.



             51.4. The Home Secretary, in the light of the findings at the previous public inquiry
                     conducted by Lord Justice Taylor, the inquest (which finding we emphasise was
                     confirmed upon review), the various reviews by the Crown Prosecution Service
                     and the scrutiny by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, confirmed that no further action
                     should be taken by the Crown Prosecution Service.



             51.5. This case is perhaps unique in terms o f criminal prosecutions in this country,
                     given the wealth of previous investigation, inquiry, findings, and consideration
                     over the past decade.        In the light of all the available evidence, and
                     notwithstanding a variety o f examinations, the Crown Prosecution Service
                     resolved on three separate occasions to take no criminal action against the
                     Applicant.



             51.6. In the light of the conclusion that there is no new evidence to justify a change in
                     the previous decision made not to prosecute, and in the light o f the request made
                     by the Applicant to intervene in the private prosecution, it is submitted that the
                     only reasonable decision that the Director could make, was to so intervene and
                      discontinue those proceedings.     Historically the Director has enjoyed a wide
                      discretion in terms of his conduct (Raymond -v- Attorney General [1982] 2 All
                      ER 487), however the exercise of any discretion has to be considered now against
                      the background of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985, which established the
                      Crown Prosecution Service following the Phillips Commission. That legislative

        P:\24332\J\D0003.0                               26
03/03 '99 WED 12:39 FAX                                                                                             @017




                             framework provides the opportunity for the Director to consider private
                             prosecutions and to discontinue them in circumstances which are appropriate.
                             With respect, we submit that this case is the clearest example of a private
                             prosecution which ought not to proceed, both in regard to evidentiary matters and
                             in relation to public interest considerations, and that any reasonable Director
                             would so conclude and act accordingly.



                51.7. The CPS (letter 1 February 1999) confirmed that it reached the conclusion that
                             “any public interest tending against prosecution did not clearly outweigh those in
                            favour; nor did I consider that the prosecution is clearly likely to damage the
                             interests o f justice



                51.8. The letter dated 9 October 1998 from the Applicant’s solicitors to the CPS,
                             contained a detailed commentary o f the public interest factors set out in the Code,
                             The CPS have not rejected those considerations expressly or indeed commented
                             at length upon them. It is submitted that on any reasonable assessment of those
                             factors, the Director ought to have concluded that the public interest factors
                             tending against prosecution clearly outweighed those tending in favour.



                51-9. In any event, it seems that the Director has not appreciated that the guidance
                             given (paragraph 6(2) o f Code) is in the following terms:



                             "In cases o f any seriousness, a prosecution will usually take place unless there
                             are public interest factors tending against prosecution which clearly outweigh
                             those tending in f a v o u r (emphasis added)



                51.10. Accordingly, the Director, erroneously, seems to have concluded that in this
                             serious case, a prosecution must take place where public interest factors tending
                             against prosecution are not considered to clearly outweigh those tending in
                             favour. Even if the Director were to properly conclude this, he would not be
                             bound to allow the prosecution to proceed. To so conclude misunderstands the


       P :\2 4 3 3 2 \l\D 0 0 0 3 .0                            27
03/03   99 WED 12:39 FAX                                                                                      @018




                      Code, and in all the circumstances of this case, represents a further flaw in the
                      CPS consideration o f the public interest factors and the appropriate manner in
                      which the Code ought to be applied.



              51.11. In the letter of 1 February 1999 the CPS advised:



                      "Against that background, and after specifically considering the appropriate
                      course to take in these circumstances, I concluded further that it -would not be
                      right to intervene in respect o f one remaining charge against Mr Duckenfield, o f
                     attempting to pervert the course ofjustice, albeit I had form ed the view that there
                      M'fls clearly no case to answer on that charge alone. The charge o f attempting to
                     pervert the course o f justice is a serious one, particularly when levelled against
                     someone who wuj at the relevant time a serving, senior police officer.
                     Nevertheless in the context o f the case as a whole that charge is not that
                     gravamen o f the criminality alleged against Mr Duckenfield and I concluded that
                     my approach to that charge should be led by my conclusions on the charges o f
                     manslaughter and wilful neglect to perform a public duty ”



             51.12. The CPS has, therefore, even when applying what is submitted to be an erroneous
                    • test, concluded that the standard was not met.         They have clearly said in
                     correspondence that they would intervene to discontinue the proceedings if the
                1    lower standard was not met. The failure to so intervene, in respect of this specific
                     charge, cannot be justified on any basis, including that argued for in the
               I,    correspondence- The letter expressly acknowledges that this charge is one of
                I    seriousness, particularly for the present context, whilst failing to conclude that the
                     Director ought to intervene and deal with what is essentially a discrete issue. The
                      fact that the Director has concluded that he should not act, even when applying
                      his expressed though erroneous policy, manifests a complete failure on behalf of
                     the Director to appreciate his duty and responsibilities. This failure alone must
                      cast the Director’s overall consideration of this matter in a very qualified light
                      and emphasises the real problems that can arise when a private prosecutor
                      commences proceedings, raising a number of potential charges.              What the


        P:\24332f\D 0003.0                               28
  03/03       99 WED 12:40 FAX                                                                                            @019




                                    Director has effectively said is that although on any basis, one o f the charges
                                    faccd by the Applicant ought not to proceed, because there are a number of
                                    separate charges, arguably more serious, the Director will not act according to his
  f\
              n’                             The *mP{icat^ons f°r *he Applicant, in this particular case, and for other
                                 ( defendants in private prosecutions o f this approach are immense. It is submitted
Q o )j    '      ^                  that the Court ought properly declare in the clearest terms the role and
    U                               responsibility o f the Director, when dealing with a private prosecution, in order
                                    that he may properly carry out his role pursuant to the Prosecution o f Offences
                                    Act and guidelines issued thereunder.



                      MISCELLANEOUS MATTERS OF WHICH THE COURT SHOULD BE AWARE



              52. It might be suggested there is an alternative remedy open to the Applicants in this case,
                       by way of application for abuse of process to either the Magistrates Court, or in the
                       event o f the criminal prosecution proceeding with the Defendant being committed to
                       trial, defending the changes at the Crown Court.



              53. It is important for the Court to recognise that entirely different factors are applicable to
                       the consideration o f the decision by the Director of Public Prosecutions, as set out
                       herein, to any potential application for abuse o f process in the criminal proceedings.
                       Such an application is not like in kind, and to require the Defendant to take part in the
                       ongoing criminal proceedings, notwithstanding a fundamentally flawed decision by the
                       Director in failing to intervene at an early stage, will unfairly prejudice the Defendant,
                       and cause irreparable harm. It will be self-evident that any potential abuse of process
                       application will not be as convenient nor effective as an application for judicial review.
                       If the present application is soundly founded, it will be appropriate for the Director to
                       reconsider matters, and the expense, inconvenience and injustice o f the ongoing
                       criminal proceedings may well be averted.



              54. The Applicant contends that in any event the Court’s jurisdiction is unaffected by the
                       existence o f any potential alternative remedy and that at most a Court might take its
                       existence into account in its discretion whether to grant a remedy to the Applicant.

              P :^ 4 3 3 2 M \D 0 0 0 3 .0                             29
03/03   99 WED 12:40 FAX                                                                                      @ 020




                                                    INTERIM RELIEF



        55. The Court will note that the criminal proceedings remain live, and that the committal
               proceedings have been fixed for 19 April 1999. A further hearing has been fixed for 22
                March 1999 at 9.45 am with all parties to attend. The Applicant’s solicitors understand
               that the prosecutors continue with their investigations, particularly accessing
                documentation held by the Crown Prosecution Service, and the South Yorkshire Police,
                with a view to progressing the prosecution, and potentially serving further material in
                relation to the committal. Mr Nigel Cadbury, Stipendiary Magistrate for all appearances
                in regard to the committal proceedings, has been made aware o f the Applicant s
                intention to make an application for judicial review o f the DPP decision and has asked
                informally, that the question of a stay o f the criminal proceedings be raised for
                consideration of the Court, It will be clearly evident to the Court that the Defendant will
                be significantly prejudiced, and put to significant expense with respect to the committal
                proceedings if the criminal proceedings are not stayed.         In the circumstance, the
                Applicant asks for an interim injunction or a stay o f the criminal proceedings pursuant
                to the rules of the Supreme Court A ct

                                                                                 W inckw orth Sherwood


                                       day o f February 1999.




         P :\2 4 33 2 M \D 0 00 3 .0                            30
03/03   99 WED 12:40 FAX                                                     @ 021




                                                     CO             (99
                                        IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE
                                        QUEEN'S BENCH DIVISION
                                        CROWN OFFICE LIST

                                             IN THE MATTER OF AN
                                          APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO
                                          APPLY FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                        BETWEEN:

                                                    THE QUEEN


                                                         and


                                              DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC
                                                 PROSECUTIONS
                                                                Respondent

                                                     EXPARTE

                                        DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELD
                                                                 Applicant




                                         NOTICE OF APPLICATION FOR
                                        LEAVE TO APPLY FOR JUDICIAL
                                              REVIEW (053, r3)




                                        Winckworth Sherwood
                                        35 Great Peter Street
                                        Westminster
                                        London SW1P 3LR
                                        Tel: 0171-593 5000
                                        Fax: 0171-593 5099
                                        Ref: SBE/24332/1


        P :\2 4 3 3 2 U \D 0 0 0 3 .0
