                                                                                            RECEIVED
From :              George Croston                                                            22 JAN 1999
To:                 CPSHQL.DCE.NEWELLC, CPSHQL.CCU.BOOTHR                                    DIRECTOR
Date:               22 January 1999 9:57am
                                                                                           (C A S E W O R K )
Subject:            Hillsborough

Sue Ross of the Treasury Solicitors Dept expects to send me a draft letter today as the reply to the defence
solicitors' requests for our detailed reasons for not intervening in the private prosecution.

She informed me in our telephone conversation late yesterday that her advice will be to run it past Philip Havers
QC before sending it out.
On receipt o f this draft I shall fax it to addressees of this e mail for your consideration.

I understand that her position will be that we should give more detailed reasons than we would normally do so.

The latest information from the HFSG is that their representations to the Souith Yorkshire Police Authority re
the legality of the funding for the two defendants are to heard at a meeting with the Chief Constable present. In
the meantime I'm informed that the Authority has stopped funding for any judicial review application pending a
final decision. A newspaper report o f 20.1 shows that the Authority members are concerned about the seemingly
open ended funding. The district auditor has also been asked to look at the legality o f the Authority's decision.

George Croston

CC:                 ENZORC, CPSHQL.DCE.longmana, CPSHQL.CCU.LENNONC
                 F a x T r a n sm issio n
                            T rea sur y S o l ic it o r ’s D epartm ent
                                     O u E e n A n n e 's C h a m b e r s
                                             28 Broadw ay
                                                 London                                       RECEIVED
                                              S W I H ©JS
                                                                                                22 JAN 1999
                                                                                                DIRECTOR
                                                                                              (C A S E W O R K )
                                                      Date:
 Fax Nr.                                              Pages; |        q     (including this cover sheet).
 From:       SUE ROSS
 Subject:




COMMENTS:




This fax transmission is intended only for the use of the recipient named above. It contains
confidential information which, is legally privileged. If you are not the intended recipient,
you are hereby notified that you have received this document in error and that any copying,
disclosure or distribution or other use of the information contained in this fax is strictly
prohibited. If you have received this fax in error please notify us immediately by telephone
so that we can make arrangements for the return of the documents to us. Your co-operation is
appreciated.

If ynu do not receive this fax completely, please telephone the ahove number.
                            THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
                     Queen Anne’s Chambers, 28 Broadway, London SW1H 9JS
   DX 123242 St James’s Park   Direct Fax; (                 Switchboard 0171 210 3000 (OTN 210)
                                    Direct Line;

George Croston
                                                   Please quote:           L98/8265K/SJR/D1
Central Casework
Crown Prosecution Service
                                                   Your reference:
DX: 65204 YORK 6
                                                   Date:                      January 1999




HILLSBOROUGH: RE ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

Thank you for your letter dated 22 December, which I received on return from my Christmas
break on 5 January 1999.

I have considered the papers and note that you now prefer to have written advice rather than to
have a conference to discuss the issues raised by the letter addressed to the CPS from Walker
Morris dated 18 December 1998, You do not say that you wish to seek advice from counsel, but
you will no doubt wish to consider that option after reading this letter. Because of the nature of
this case I suggest that you should consider doing so - Philip Havers QC seems to have been:
involved at an earlier stage in advising Mr Newell and I would be able to get the papers to him
today or Monday (depending on timing). I am sure you are right to ensure that your reply is
drafted with an eye to the possibility of proceedings for judicial review being brought against you
in respect of the decision not to intervene.

Giving reasons for decisions
The CPS does not have a common law obligation to give detailed reasons for its decisions. Its
decisions do not fall within the category identified by the courts in which fairness requires
reasons to be given : CPS decisions are not judicial in the sense of being adjudications. That was
accepted by the Divisional Court in ex parte Treadaway 31 July 1997 and it also follows from
the decision in R v Civil Service Board ex parte Cunningham [1991] 4 All ER.

The CPS is not obliged to give detailed reasons for its decision not to intervene, despite the
detailed questions posed by the solicitors for the defendants in their letter dated 18 December
1998.

But where proceedings for judicial review are in prospect, a key practical consideration in
framing decision tetters with a view to avoiding proceedings being brought or, if that fails,
persuading the Court not to grant leave (notwithstanding that detailed reasons have not been
provided), is to ensure Uiai the prospective applicants do not have a misleading impression of the
approach adopted by the CPS to its decision, such that the CPS might be vulnerable to leave
being granted. If the decision letter is put before a Court (as it surely would be) the CPS's
position is spelled out succinctly and persuasively, especially anticipating points likely to be
argued by the intending applicants.

Secondly, given that the events of Hillsborough and the nature of the decisions already taken
have been exhaustively reviewed and/or litigated publicly, I would suggest that - so long as the
CPS does not stray into matters that, if published, might tend to prejudice magistrates or a jury -
there is good reason for the CPS to treat this case as a special one which, in the public interest,
ought to attract more details as to the reasoning than is contained in the letter of 18 December
1998.

What has been said so far

The original decision letter dated 18 December 1998 signed by Chris Enzor states :

        "We have considered the evidence, the representations made by the parties and all the
       surrounding circumstances o f the case. We have concluded that we should not intervene
       to take over any o f the charges".

A press notice was enclosed that contained factual information only. I should say that that letter
was written against the background of a letter sent by you in July 1998 setting out in brief terms
the nature of the CPS's policy in respect of intervening in private prosecutions.

The reply from Walker Morris, of the same date, does not ask for detailed reasons except on two
points:

       what factual matters persuaded the CPS to come to this decision, identifying the factual
       elements on which the CPS relied in deciding not to intervene, and further identifying
       which of that evidence is "new" since the last time that the DPP considered this case.

       the way in which the CPS applied its discretion under the Code.

They go on to say "unless we hear,...with fu ll details as requested, we will assume that you have
applied the discretion in the way set out in correspondence, and that you have not regarded any
evidence that you have considered relevant as "new"....."

It can be inferred from this line of questioning that Walker Morris believe that as a matter of law
the ordinary principles of the Code for Crown Prosecutors must be applied when taking the
decision to intervene. Given that the CPS has taken the decision not to prosecute, it would
follow that they should take over and discontinue the private prosecution unless some new
evidence has emerged that is capable of providing a realistic prospect of a conviction. As there
is nothing new, the Director should have taken this case over and discontinued it.

Bearing this in mind, I set out below some thoughts as to whether such an argument could be
mounted on the basis that the DPP's policy on private prosecutions is unlawful, but I proceed on
the assumption that the CPS has already formed a view on the law and that I should focus on the
points to be covered in the letter.

The first key point that we must meet head on is the suggestion that the CPS was obliged by law,
or otherwise, to apply the Code tests.

The second is to outline the factors bearing on the actual decision. That would require expansion
of the letter of 18 December from Chris Enzor. I recognise that the letter o f 27 July gives an
outline of the policy considerations, but I suggest that instead of referring back to it it would be
as well to explain the relevant factors in the one letter,

I also think that we need to expose the different basis for the decision in respect of the charge of
attempt pervert and why different considerations were applied than would otherwise have been
dictated by the policy. The reasons for this advice are twofold. First, we need to avoid being
misleading; and secondly, we need to head off any application for judicial review that might be
brought on the basis that this decision - implicitly taken because the Director could not say that
there was clearly no case to answer - was irrational (at least on that charge) because in fact there
is clearly no case to answer. If they could mount a case on that basis they could argue that the
decisions in respect of the other two charges must also be tainted.

The disadvantage is of course that exposing the point might hand further ammunition to Walker
Morris, but on balance I think it better to be up front. It would be hard to argue that Chris
Newell’s approach was irrational. All guidelines need to be departed from sometimes to meet
the special circumstances of an individual case.

All this means that we need to be clear about the basis for the different decisions and how the
policy was applied. I have drafted a suggested reply, which I attach herewith and which can be
put before counsel for his consideration. I have taken Chris Newell's letter to LSLO dated 3
December 1998 as setting out the basis for the decision, as he was the decision maker.

Is the policy unlawful?

The basis on which the CPS decision may be being considered for judicial review is that the
policy set out in the letter of 27 July 1998 is unlawful, or at least irrational or otherwise plain
wrong. The legal argument might run as follows: the Director is required by Section 10 of the
Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 to apply the Code for Crown Prosecutors when considering
(I) whether proceedings should be instituted or, where they have been instituted, (ii) whether they
should be discontinued. On that basis the Director's policy of not applying the evidential test
to a private prosecution with a view to taking it over and discontinuing it could be said to be
unlawful.

I work on the assumption that in drawing up its policy on private prosecutions the CPS has
already formed a view that it is not required by Section 10 to apply the Code tests to private
prosecutions. Section 10 is not expressly limited to cases which the Director has a duty to
institute or take over. But that is the general context in which it appears in the statute. It does
not lay down any particular test. Nor is the Code required under Section 10 to do anything more
than lay down general principles.

The CPS has departed from these general principles in a carefully considered policy designed to
recognise the right of private prosecutors, which is preserved by Section 6(1), to pursue criminal
proceedings without the intervention of the Director other than for good reason. I note that this
is the general approach adopted by the Law Commission on page 14 of its Consultation Paper
No 149 on Consents to Prosecution. In paragraph 6.4 on page 55 they say:

       "............ f 0r some members o f our society - those, fo r example, who have doubts about
       the impartiality o f the prosecuting authorities, or who b e lie v e that. o ffS H n l p rn s e e 'titn r
       has misjudged the evidence in a case - the right <?fprivate prosecution is an important
          safeguard against abuse"

  They do go on to say in paragraph 6.17 that "a private prosecution is likely to be undesirable if
  itfails either or both o f the tests in the Code fo r Crown Prosecutors" provisionally concluding
  that if measures are needed to avoid harm to innocent defendants or the public interest, the most
  effective would be an offence based system of consents. Nevertheless, this supports the view
  that the law does not require the Director to intervene on the basis of the Code tests. Private
  prosecutors are not themselves bound by the Code, nor are the Code tests applied by the Court
  when deciding whether there is a case to answer. No doubt these were factors in the Director's
  policy.

  I have looked at R v Bow Street Stipendiary Magistrate and Another ex parte South Coast
  Shipping Co. Ltd. And Others (1993) 96 CAR 405 and the well known Turner case. Neither say
  anything that contradict the Director's approach.

  I cannot see that Walker Morris could successfully argue that the CPS policy is unlawful or
  irrational.


  Recommendation

  If you wish to run the draft letter past Philip Havers Q CI can arrange that quickly, subject to any
  amendments you or Chris Newell might have.

  I am copying this letter and enclosures to Chris Newell.

^ jb   W U -




  Sue Ross
  for the Treasury Solicitor
Criminal Law

CONSENTS TO PROSECUTION

A Consultation Paper




LAW COMMISSION
CONSULTATION PAPER No 149
         T h e FUNDAMENTAL p r in c ip l e
 6.3    Lord Simon of Glaisdale spoke of the constitutional principle underlying the right
        to private prosecution as the “principle of individual liberty based on the rule of
        law”. And in the House of Lords case of Gouriet,' both Lord Diplock and Lord
        Wilberforce emphasised that, although resort was rarely had to instituting a
        private prosecution, the right to bring a private prosecution provided a
        constitutional safeguard against “capricious, corrupt or biased failure or refusal”5
        by the authorities to prosecute, and “inertia or partiality on the part of the
        authority”

 6.4 We respectfully agree. Indeed, we expressed a similar view in our recent report on
      involuntary manslaughter,7 in which we said of that right that it was “an important
      one which should not be lightly set aside”.* We acknowledge that the right of
      private prosecution cannot be easily exercised; it can prove expensive, and private
      individuals do not have the expertise or resources which are available to the police
     and CPS. However, for some members of our society- those, for example, who
     have doubts about the impartiality of die prosecuting authorities, or who believe
     that an official prosecutor has misjudged the evidence in a case- the right of
     private prosecution provides an important safeguard against abuse. We therefore
     begin our consideration of the principles underlying a reformed consent regime by
     setting out this “fundamental principle”: that the right of private prosecution
     should be unrestricted unless some very good reason to the contrary exists.

       T h e Ha r m c a u s e d b y a n u n f e t t e r e d r ig h t o f p r iv a t e p r o s e c u t io n
6.5    Arguably, the proper objective of a prosecution system is to prosecute all those
       who have committed a crime and to avoid prosecuting those who have not. This
       formulation, however, makes no allowance for the fact that the outcome of a trial
       is very uncertain and that it is wholly unrealistic to expect proceedings to be
       instituted only in those cases in which there is a guaranteed prospect of conviction
       and no risk of acquittal, It also fails to take into account the fact that there are
       circumstances in which, despite the strength of evidence against a defendant, it
       might not be in the public interest for that defendant to be prosecuted.

6.6    The Code for Crown Prosecutors,* on the other hand, takes into account both
       these matters: the evidential sufficiency test (requiring there to be a “realistic
       prospect of conviction” if the case is to continue) marks what might be regarded
       as the acceptable risk of acquittal and the public interest test provides the
       prosecutor with a discretion not to continue a prosecution despite evidential,
       sufficiency.



         See para 5.4 above.
         GowUt v Union of Post Offiet VfbrMers [1978] AC 435.
         Ibid, at p 498B, per Lord Diplock.
         Ibid, at p 477C,      Lord Wilberforce,
         Legislating the Criminal Code: Involuntary Manslaughter (1996) Law Com No 237.
         Ibid, para 8.66.
         Set out in Appendix C.

                                                55
                                   THE TREASURY SOLICITOR
                                   ijAnne’s Chambers, 28 Broadway, London SW1H 9JS
    D X 123242 St Jamtjsi’s Park! ' Direct Fax: (                    Switchboard 0171 210 3000 (GTN 210)
                     iir.   1Ht;           Direct Line; (

Walker M ojH s/                                             Please quote: L98/8265/SJR/D1
S      o    W
DX-m5l%El                                                   Your reference:RBM/M T /MURRAY

                                                            Date:                   21 January 1999




ADLINGTON v                 )UCKENFIELD AND MURRAY


You wrote to the Crown Prosecution Service on 18 December 1998 following the receipt of a
letter from the CPS, also dated 18 December 1998, informing you of the Service’s decision not
to exercise its power under Section 6(2) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 to take over the
criminal proceedings against your clients with a view to discontinuing them.


You ask for further information, (1) as to the factual matters on which the CPS relied and
identifying which parts of the evidence is "new" since the Crown Prosecution Service last
considered the case; and (2) as to the way the Service applied the Code for Crown Prosecutors
in deciding whether to intervene.


These questions indicate that you misunderstand the factors the Crown Prosecution Service
considers when deciding whether to take over a private prosecution at the request of a defendant
with a view to discontinuance, It may help if I set out again in broad terms the approach the
Service adopts to these decisions.


As you know, the Code for Crown Prosecutors indeed sets out the general principles applied by
the Service when (inter alia) deciding whether to continue a prosecution it has taken over; or
whether to institute proceedings or to advise the police whether to do so. It is correct that the
Crown Prosecution Service decided in 1997 that the evidence available at that time was not
sufficient, in its view, to provide a realistic prospect of the conviction o f either of your clients
for an offence.       However, it does not follow that, when considering the evidence and
 representations submitted by the private prosecutor, and by yourselves on behalf of your clients,
the CPS should seek m |||ly to identify whether there is now any new evidence sufficient to
                                   ill"
                    .r
provide a realistic (^      ?sp
                     i («;>.sp
                            crii i e c ^ S f a conviction. The decision whether to intervene in a private
prosecution wit|j|;$;: yie$ to terminating it calls for altogether different considerations to be
       i •    t   *   d^''   t   ^> l i 1 M * ' »
applied. It lu u x e possible for a private prosecution to continue notwithstanding that the CPS
is n#;.sstra|edf*lii)n the basis of its own assessment of the strength of the evidence, that the
             '““■jto
                 Id pass the evidential sufficiency test in the Code (that there should be a "realistic
pptospec^'of a conviction").


In broad terms, the reason for this is that Section 6^t) of the Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985,
which established the Service's powers and duties, specifically preserved the right of private
individuals and prosecuting authorities or bodies other than the CPS to bring criminal
proceedings. This right is subject (among other limitations) to the limitation^that the CPS may
nevertheless take over the proceedings with a view either to conducting or to terminating those
proceedings. The Service takes the view that it should not exercise that power unless there is a
particular need to do so on behalf of the public.


Private prosecutors are not bound to apply the Code for Crown Prosecutors when deciding
whether to institute proceedings, nor do the courts apply the evidential sufficiency test in the
Code when deciding whether there is a case to answer. The Service therefore recognises that
it is not appropriate to intervene to terminate a private prosecution without good reason. That
general principle has recently been endorsed by the Law Commission in its Consultation Paper
No. 149 "Consents to Prosecution" (see paragraphs 6.3 and 6.4).


Generally, the Service will not take over a private prosecution with a view to terniinating it
unless one or more of the following applies:


(I)          there is clearly no case to answer. A private prosecution started in these circumstances
             would be unfounded and ought not to be permitted to continue.


(ii)          the public interest factors tending against prosecution clearly outweigh those in favour
                                                                                       IUa       ** *w*'
             (examples might be where the prosecution is malicious or vexatious or qfi offence|for
             which the defendant should clearly have been cautioned, or w here the defendant is
             terminally ill and the offence is serious).
(iii)   the prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests of justice.

                    jjt‘ / % ! , ji/'
In this case the decl^ph not to intervene was considered at a very senior level within the Service,
by the Director^C asew ork Evaluation. After careful consideration, he concluded in respect
of the      p k m lt i sl a u g h te r and wilful neglect to perform a public duty (which, for the
              dfflfb^were each considered against each individual separately) that he could not
              is clearly no case to answer. It was not right therefore for the Service to take over
  I proceedings with a view to terminating them.
 lift# 1.

Against that background, and after specifically considering the appropriate course to take in these
circumstances, he concluded that it would not be right to intervene in respect of the one
remaining charge against Mr Duckenfield of attempting to pervert the course of justice, albeit
he had formed the view that there was clearly no case to answer on that charge alone. The charge
of attempting to pervert the course of justice is a serious one, particularly when levelled against
one who was, at the relevant time, a serving, senior police officer, Nevertheless, in the context
of the disaster as a whole that charge is not the gravamen of the criminality alleged against Mr
Duckenfield and he concluded that his approach to that charge should be led by his conclusions
on the charge o f manslaughter.


He considered whether, nevertheless, there were overriding public interest factors that should
lead to the Service intervening with a view to discontinuance but came to the conclusion that
[any] public interest factors tending against prosecution did not clearly outweigh those in favour.
Nor did he consider that the prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests of justice.




I should point out that the Crown Prosecution Service is not obliged in law to provide detailed
reasons for its decisions and we do not in any event consider it appropriate in this case to provide
an analysis of the evidence. However, in all the circumstances of this particular case and against
the background of its history, we did consider it appropriate to explain the factors taken into
account in more detail than was contained in the Service's letter dated 18 December 1998.


Miss S. J. Ross
for the Treasury Solicitor
