24/11   9«    11:36                                   CPS 4tli floor                                  i^iuui




                                I

             George Croston


             cc



             HILLSBOROUGH
                 Robin Booth is here today and we have both had a chance to look at the
                 amended sections of your report. There are a couple of points which occur to
                 us which we think could usefully be reflected in some further amendment, just
                 in case there is a judicial review.

             2.   Paragraph 16.6. Tn the line, the phrase “Following my review in 1997, our
                  decision...’ This might be better as, “Following my review in 1997, the
                  conclusion was that

             3.   Paragraph 16.8. It might be worth emphasising that the current review was a
                  fresh one, in die sense that it considered the case from a different angle to the
                  previous reviews.

             4.   Paragraph 16.12. The use of the word “equated” might cause problems later.
                  Can I suggest we say that the clearly no case to answer test “can be said to be
                  broadly similar in its application to the Galbraith test”.

             5.   Paragraph 16.17. It seems unne<yssar)l jq use the word ‘incontrovertible’.
                  Why not, ‘In my view there is fa£acj&fidlsncc that these two officers were
                  negligent. There is not, however, sufficient evidence of gross negligence for a
                  realistic prospect of conviction SGr a charge of manslaughter,’ It seems
                  unnecessary to include the commem about civil liability.

                  Paragraph 16.18. Both Robin and I are uneasy at the way in which the case
                  against Duckenfield and Murray is placed together. The first bullet point, for
                  example, does not apply with the same force in relation to each man. The
                  same is true also of some of the other bullet points, eg. the fourth one
                  (Murray’s greater experience must tell more against him here). We suggest
                  that this part of the review should be split True, the same points can be made
                  in exactly the same way for some of the points, eg. point three. It is important
                  ta demonstrate that we have considered each man’s case independently.
                   cU
             Chris Enzor
                        •




             Central Casework York Branch
             DX 65204 York 6

             Fa* . ... .__ __ __
             24 November 1998
