From:              Chris Newell
To:                CCU.BOOTHR, CPSHQY.CCU.ENZORC, CCU.LENNONC, DCOS.S...
Date:              15 December 1998 1:12pm
Subject:           Hills - draft press notice & Q&A -Reply -Reply

I have seai the flurry of E-mail messages of earlier. I must emphasise the point about timing that Chris
Enzor has already made. Assuming that we hear from the Law Officers this week (and I am reasonably
confident that we shall), we must inform the parties of our decision by close on Friday.

As far as the press notice is concerned, I suggest that the second sentence should read: "After a careful
review" - not re-review - "of all the evidence, and having taken account of all the representations made to
the CPS by the defendants and the private prosecutor, the CPS has decided not to take over the conduct
of these proceedings."

I agree that the Director does not need to be consulted about this, or involved in the drafting exercise, but I
think that he should be kept informed of the timetable and have advance sight of what is going to be said.

What do you have in mind, Lyn, when you refer to a fact sheet on private prosecutions? Are you thinking of
a summary of our Service policy in relation to private prosecutions? If so, this raises difficult questions, in
which others will have an interest - principally, Garry Patten. I am not sure where we are now on publication
of, for example, the Prosecution Manual, but there are implications for that issue, if it is still live.

The difficulty that we are facing is that any public discussion of our policy will lead directly to a discussion
of its application to the evidence in this particular case, thereby creating the prejudicial debate that we want to
avoid (and which we must not be seen - or even thought - to have fuelled).

I appreciate that the parties know what our policy is and that one side or another, for one reason or another,
may broadcast it. If that happens and we are questioned about it, we shall probably have no option but to
confirm that we have a policy and to indicate in general terms what it is. I think that we must then decline to
answer any questions about the application of the policy to this case, as any such comment from us might
prejudice the ongoing proceedings. I also think that it would probably be unwise to offer any information to
journalists about our policy, unless asked, because to do so would be to invite the further questions that we
do not want to answer.

I should welcome any comments on these thoughts.

CWPN

CC:                 longmana
DRAFT

CPS STATEMENT

HILLSBOROUGH CASE - ADLINGTON V DUCKENFIELD, ADLINGTON V
MURRAY


In early July 1998, solicitors acting for Chief Superintendent David Godfrey
DUCKENFIELD, (retired) and Superintendent Bernard Dean MURRAY (retired) asked the
Crown Prosecution Service to take over and discontinue the proceedings against their clients
which have been started by Ann Adlington on behalf of the Hillsborough Family Support
Group.

After a careful review of all of the evidence, and having taken account of all the
representations made to the CPS by the defendants and the private prosecutor, the CPS has
decided not to take over the conduct of these proceedings. This means that the private
prosecution will continue.



                                            -ENDS-


Notes to Editors:

1.     Mr. Duckenfield faces two charges of manslaughter, one of wilful neglect to perform
       a public duty and one of attempting to pervert the course of justice; Mr. Murray faces
       two charges of manslaughter and one of wilful neglect to perform apublic duty.

2.     They are next due in Leeds Magistrates’ Court on 19 April 1999.

3.     As the case is continuing, it is still sub judice.
DRAFT QUESTION AND ANSWER

NB. The CPS will not comment in detail on this case at this stage as it is still sub judice.
We must not give any impression one way or the other about our view of the strength
of the evidence.


1.    What test has the CPS applied in deciding whether to take over these proceedings
      ?
A:    An answer to this question would be bound to lead to a conclusion about our view of
      the strength of the evidence. We can not comment.

2.    Why has the CPS not taken over the attempt to pervert the course of justice
      charge ?
A:    We have considered each of the charges in the context of the case as a whole and
      have decided that the appropriate course is not to intervene in the prosecution..

3.    Can the CPS take over only part of a case and discontinue it?
A:    We consider that we can, but we do not think it would be appropriate to do so in the
      circumstances of this case.

4.    What happens now?
A:    The case will continue. It will be up to the parties to decide what action to take next.

5:    Is Judicial Review likely?
A:    It is a matter for the parties whether they seek to commence proceedings by way of
       judicial review.

6:    Why won’t you take over manslaughter and discontinue when you wouldn’t
      prosecute it yourself?
A:    An answer to this question would be bound to lead to a conclusion about our view of
      the strength of the evidence. We can not comment.

7:    Why can’t you take it over and run it?
A:    An answer to this question would be bound to lead to a conclusion about ourview of
      the strength of the evidence. We can not comment.

8:    Isn’t this unfair on the individual who then has to foot the costs?
A:    The right for individuals to bring a private prosecution is established in legislation.
       We have not been asked to take over the case to prosecute it.

9:    How many private prosecutions are there every year?
A:    The CPS is not necessarily made aware of every private prosecution there is, and
       therefore we don’t compile any statistics.

10:   How many does CPS take over and run or discontinue in a year?
A:    We do not compile these statistics.
11:   What happens if there is a conviction at the end of the day, does this mean the
      CPS was wrong not to bring it, and will you refund the private prosecutors’
      costs?
A:    This is hypothetical; but it doesn’t mean the CPS was wrong. We can not comment
      any further as to do so would lead to a conclusion about our view of the strength of
      the evidence. Costs will be a matter for the court to determine at the end of the case.

12:   Who made the decision?
A:    The decision was taken by Mr Newell, Director of Casework Evaluation.

13:   Was the new Director involved?
A:    He has been kept informed of key developments.
14:   Why hasn’t he made the decision in this case?
A:    Before he became DPP he advised one of the parties. Therefore he has not made any
      decisions in this case.

15:   Why has it taken you so long, the private prosecution started in July 1998?
A:    A thorough review of the case was undertaken. This involved consideration of
      representations made by the private prosecutor and the defendants. Some of these
      were received as recently as October 1998.

16:   Has the Attorney General been involved?
A:    The Attorney General has been kept informed.

17:   What happens if the case is thrown out at half time (e.g. like the Lawrence
      case)?
A:    That is a matter for the private prosecutors. However the same rules of court apply
      in a private prosecution e.g. you cannot be tried for the same offence twice.
General Line on Private Prosecutions:

The CPS has a policy by which private prosecutions, which are brought to our attention, are
reviewed. We have three options after a review of the evidence is carried out:-

•       To take over the case and discontinue it

•       To allow the private prosecution to continue

•       To take over the case and prosecute it

The policy is different to that of the Code for CrownProsecutors, which states that we can
only bring cases where there is sufficient evidence fora realisticprospect of conviction and
that the public interest requires a prosecution.

The policy in considering private prosecutions enshrines the individual’s right to bring a
private prosecution, which is contained within Section 6(1) of the Prosecution of Offences
Act 1985. It recognises that there will always be some circumstances where although the
CPS will not take over and run a prosecution, it is right that the private prosecutor be
allowed to continue with their prosecution.
          HILLSBOROUGH - BRIEFING FOR DIRECTOR

ISSUE

1.1   Handling the decision in the Hillsborough case.
ACTION REQUIRED

2.1   For information only.
TIMING

3.1   We have agreed that the decision will be notified to the parties and the court by
      no later than 18 December 1998.
3.2   Papers are currently with the Attorney General.
BACKGROUND

4.1   The background to the case is well known and is only set out here in outline.
4.2   In 1990, the CPS decided that there should be no criminal proceedings rising out
      of the Hillsborough disaster.
4.3   That decision was confirmed in 1997 following receipt of representations and
      what was claimed to be new evidence received from the Hillsborough Family
      Support Group (HFSG).
4.4   Earlier this year, HFSG commenced a private prosecution against retired Chief
      Superintendent Mr Duckenfield and retired Superintendent Murray. The charges
      are:
      •    Manslaughter - against both
      •    Manslaughter - against both
      •    Wilful neglect to perform a public duty - against both
      •    Attempt pervert course of justice - against Mr Duckenfield only.
4.5   In July 1998 the solicitors for the defendants formally requested that the CPS take
      over the conduct of the proceedings and discontinue them.
4.6   Following preparation of a detailed report by George Croston of Central
      Casework York, Mr Newell, Director of Casework Evaluation, has considered the
      case. He concluded that we should not intervene in relation to the manslaughter
      and wilful neglect charges as we are unable to say that there is clearly no case to
      answer.
4.7   As for the attempt pervert course of justice charge, it is arguable that there is
      clearly no case to answer. However, Mr Newell’s view is that as the Service s
      policy does not cater for taking over only part of a prosecution and as this is not
      the main charge against Mr Duckenfield, the charge should not be the subject of
      intervention.
4.8   The Attorney General is currently being consulted.
5.   KEY CONSIDERATIONS

     5.1   The decision is a sensitive one and will require careful handling.
     5.2   The attached table shows a list of those who need to be informed, together with a
           note of proposed action.
     5.3   Timing is critical. HFSG have made good use of the press in the past and there is
           every reason to suppose that they will ensure the press are notified immediately.
           Accordingly a press notice should be issued by CPS at the same time as letters are
           faxed informing the parties and others of the decision. (This is in hand).
     5.4   The decision is bound to be unpopular with the defendants. A challenge by way
           of judicial review is possible. They may argue that we should be applying the
           realistic prospect of conviction test.
6.   RECOMMENDATIONS

     6.1   Note the above and the plan attached..

C H Enzor
14 December 1998
Person or body to be informed    Action proposed                        Date
Director                         None - save receipt of this briefing   Immediate.
Attorney General                 To be sent a copy of this briefing,    Immediately, once
                                 including this table, via Private      approved.
                                 Office.
Home Secretary                   To be sent a copy of this briefing     After the Attorney
                                 and this table, via CPS Private        General’s briefing has
                                 Office, subject to strict              been sent.
                                 confidentiality.
Solicitors for defendants        Letter setting out decision, to be     Fax on or before 18
                                 approved by Mr Newell.                 December 1998.
Solicitors for prosecutor        Letter setting out decision, to be     Fax on or before 1.8
(HFSG)                           approved by Mr Newell.                 December 1998 but on
                                                                        same date as above.
Leeds Magistrates’ Court         Letter setting out decision, to be     Fax on or before 18
                                 approved by Mr Newell.                 December 1998 but on
                                                                        same date as above.
Lord Justice Stuart-Smith        Letter for his information informing   Faxon or before 18
                                 him of the decision.                   December 1998 but on
                                                                        same date as above.
Chief Constable South            Letter for his information informing   Fax on or before 18
Yorkshire                        him of the decision.                   December 1998 but on
                                                                        same date as above.
Chief Constable West Midlands    Letter for his information informing   Fax on or before 18
                                 him of the decision.                   December 1998 but on
                                                                        same date as above.
Chief Constable Merseyside       Letter for his information informing   Fax on or before 18
                                 him of the decision.                   December 1998 but on
                                                                        same date as above.
Coroner for South Yorkshire      Letter for his information informing   Faxon or before 18
                                 him of the decision.                   December 1998 but on
                                                                        same date as above.
Assistant Chief Constable        Letter for his information informing   Fax on or before 18
Daines, South Yorkshire Police   him of the decision.                   December 1998 but on
                                                                        same date as above.
Hammond Suddards, solicitors     Letter for their information           Fax on or before 18
for S Yorks Police               informing of the decision.             December 1998 but on
                                                                        same date as above.
The Press                        Press notice                           Release on same day as
                                                                        above.
