. 2 4 /,2 2 /S .3          1 2 : 16                                                                                    NO.141     001




                                             The Rl   H on J o h n M o m s Q C MP

                                                                                               9 Bu c k i n g h a m      gate



                                          sUr ?<4 U                                                  IO N O O N S W 1£ 6 J P



                                      (o i z b - tAl o <£WV
                                                                                                         M /'     H i-oO lLft1-
           The Rt Hon J a c k Straw MP     P                                                I € ✓.
           Secretary of State for the Home Department                                       M r          lb ^ /
           Home Office
           50 Q ueen Anne’s Gate                                                            jf\A/
           LONDON SW1H9AT
                                                                                            Ms Cliflv'-cX
           12 February 1998
                                                                                            /vA/              J c/ A A ^
                                                                                             y / Ju -C ^


                                                                          'H r £ c ^ f t v |t R E C £ i V £

                                                                                                         12 F E B 1 9 9 8
                                                                                                         L.
                                           EQWEsrob                                 24>.£
          H ILLSB O RO U G H

          T hank you for your letter of 9 February 998 about the Report by Lord Justice
          S tu art-S m ith following his review of the evidence relating to the Hillsborough
          D isaster. You invited me to agree the droposed handling.

          TTie Report Is impressive and will. I bi lie ye command respect even though the
          families of the Hillsborough victims are )ound to be disappointed. The Report
          clearly confirms that there is no basis for an application to the High Court
          u n d er Section 13 of the Coroners Act 1!>88 and I am content th at you should
          say th a t on my behalf whilst reeognisirij; that I would have an ongoing duty to
          consider any fresh and cogent evidence which might, later emerge. The same
          goes for the DPP in relation to her dec! 4lon on prosecution.

          The proposal to place in the Library aL e House of Commons the legal advice
          received by the DPP does, however, give rise to difficulty. Such advice attracts
          legal professional privilege and It is the firm policy of the DPP not to publish
          su ch detailed docum entation relating tci the merits of individual cases which
          have not been before the courts. There are cogent reasons for not doing so
          which were recognised by the Philips Roi ’al Commission on criminal procedure
          - not the least being the potential unfair i ess to those In respect of whom there
          h as been a decision not to prosecute.

          So for as the remaining points in your Utter are concerned. I can see no basis
          for disagreeing with the view expressed t y Lord Ju stice Stuart-Sm ith about the
          preparation of evidence by the South Yorkshire police and would certain
          endorse the v i e w that there is no basis for revisiting the question of
          disciplinary proceedings or considering prosecution. 1 am content too with
          w hat you propose to say about ac.tioi, to eliminate
          A C / i lUU/'J

                                                                                              ’! C J 11
                                                                                                '    '

                                                                                              Q3A1333>1
                                                                                  Kin-141    am
/
'/98          12:16
                                                                                    NO.141    Q02




        between public Inquiries and inquas ts; you have already signalled your
        Intention to tackle die abuse by pollcc officers who take advantage of medical
        retirem ent to avoid disciplinery proceidings.

        My officials will be happy to discuss           yours exactly what should be said
        ab o u t th e reasons for not publishing t i e CPS docum ents referred to above. I
        should be grateful to see your pro]dosed statem ent in draft and for the
        opportunity to comment.

       The DPP h as seen this letter in drafl and asks that it be treated as a response
       on h er behalf also.




                                                    V- c   ^


                                               ArORRIS




       a c /u can
