 ISSUES FOR DISCUSSION - HILLSBOROUGH

 Normal use of nolle - tends to be confined to illness of defendant after committal.
 Why? - prosecution could, in theory, be re-started if defendant makes recovery.

 Use of nolle in other types of circumstance?

 The issue is about evidence - has a nolle been used on evidential grounds before?

 At least two alternatives:
       • CPS could still take over the charges in question, and offer no evidence
       • Court has powers - eg abuse of process.

 Should we wait until court has ruledl on abuse of process?

 We have never considered a count of misconduct for the ‘dreadful lie’ - we only
 considered attempt pervert.

 This is a unique case. Perhaps it is right to use nolle in unique circumstances



(jc Mr (W                          - 0^ Wi-      .


  (V^iU-CCUiJri teitor




    O i-




      IUm GmM     t-     OUflvd-

     TW
                                                                      M    b .    \ o s r q q



                                                                           2 2 OCT 1999

                                                                            R E C E IV E D

Mr Enzor


HILLSBOROUGH

I mentioned on Tuesday of this week that this was on its way. Once you (and I) have had a
preliminary read of the papers, let us speak to discuss how to approach our response.




C W P NEWELL
Director, Casework
21 October 1999
Tel. No. 0207 796 8554
Fax: 0207 796 8680
DX: 300850 Ludgate EC4
                                                                                            m
C W P Newell
Director, Casework
                                                                                            CPS
                                                                                            Headquarters
                                                                                            50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                            London EC4M 7EX

                                                                             Direct Line:   0207 796 8553
                                                                             Switchboard;   0207 796 8000
 r                                                                             Facsimile:   0207 796 8680
     Stephen Parkinson Esq                                                       d x No:    300850 Ludgate EC4
     Deputy Legal Secretary
     The Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers
     Attorney General’s Chambers
     9 Buckingham Gate
     London SW1E 6JP
                                                                               21 October 1999
 L                                                J




     HILLSBOROUGH PRIVATE PROSECUTION
     ADLINGTON v DU CKENFIELD

     Thank you for your letter of 19 October 1999 and the attached file of papers. I am copying
     this material to Chris Enzor and he and I will work on a response as soon as possible. Subject
     to the timing of any further submissions, your response deadline of 13 December seems very
     generous and I would hope to be able to meet it comfortably.

     For your information, our current information is that an abuse of process argument is listed
     for hearing on 4 January 2000; and a trial date has been fixed for 6 June 2000. I understand
     that there is also to be a three day hearing on 20-22 December of this year, to consider
     questions of admissibility of evidence and other defence submissions.




     C W P NEWELL
                                                     THE LEGAL SECRETARIAT TO THE LAW OFFICERS

                                                                  ATTORNEY GENERAL'S CHAMBERS

                                                                               9 BUCKINGHAM GATE
                                    RECEIVED
                                                                                 LONDON SW1E 6 J P
General enquiries 0171-271 2400      2 0 OCT 1999
Direct line         0171-[
                    0171-
          Fax No:   0171-
                                     DIRECTOR,
                                     CASEWORK

          C Newell Esq
          D irector, C asew ork
          Crown Prosecution Service
          50 Ludgate Hill
          London EC4M 7 EX
                                                                          19 O ctober 1999




          HILLSBOROUGH PRIVATE PROSECUTION
          ADLINGTON V DUCKENFIELD

          I a tta c h for y our inform ation a copy of a letter d ated 13 O ctober, b u t
          received on 18 October, a n d enclosures, received from Mr D uckenfield’s
          solicitors. You will see from th is th a t the solicitors have m ade an
          application to th e Law Officers for a nolle prosequi in resp ect of C o u n ts 4
          a n d 5 of the in dictm ent th a t h a s been preferred a g ain st Mr Duckenfield.

          You are, of course, wholly fam iliar w ith th is case, a n d received assista n c e
          earlier in the year from George C roston. The decision on th is application
          will be for the Solicitor G eneral (the A ttorney is precluded b ecau se of his
          involvem ent a s counsel advising the th e n DPP in 1990) b u t I w ould be
          m ost grateful if you could supply your observations on the application.
          Any observations th a t you are able to m ake will be p u t before the Law
          Officers a n d m ay, if appropriate, be disclosed to bo th the prosecution
          a n d defence solicitors in th is case. In particular, it w ould be helpful if
          you w ould com m ent on th e assertio n th a t co u n ts 4 a n d 5 effectively
          negate the decision of the D irector to discontinue; a n d on the
          ap p ro p riaten ess, in th e view of the CPS, of a nolle p rosequi being entered
          in th e se circum stances.

          We have received notification from the prosecutor th a t sh e will w ish to
          m ake rep resen tatio n s herself. I a tta c h a copy of Ms A dlington’s letter of
          18 O ctober a n d m y reply. You will see from the letter from W inkw orths
          th a t they in tu rn will w ish to have a n opportunity to respond. I will of
          course send to you an y fu rth e r correspondence th a t I receive.

          The letter from the Defence Solicitors does not specify th e d ate w hen the
          trial in th is case is to tak e place b u t you m entioned today th a t you think
                                                                        190CT99.HILLSB0R0UGH.CN
th a t the trial will take place next year. You will see from my reply to Ms
Adlington th a t I have set o u t a tim etable w hich should enable a decision
to be reached by the end of th e year. On the b asis of th is, can we work
tow ards a reply from you by 13 D ecember?




STEPHEN PARKINSON




                                                           190CT99.HILLSB0R0UGH.CN
P O y . I6 w : q 8




     y suppo^
                                                                                              su ppd?*
                               Hillsborough Family Support Group
                                                                                        ^    _Q   F
                                                                  009.323
                                                                                            19 OCT 1999
                                                                                                          "T<
                                                                                                         •V* ' /
   Lord Williams of Mostyn QC
   The Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers
   Attorney General’s Chambers
   9 Buckingham Gate
   London SW1E 6JP

   18 October 1999


   Dear Sir

   Hillsborough Disaster
   R v Duckenfield

   I am in receipt of a letter sent to you on 13th October by Winckworth Sherwood who
   represent Mr Duckenfield in the above matter.

   I have instructed Alun Jones QC to settle representations in response to Winckworth’s
   application. I should be grateful if you would indicate your timetable for receipt and
   consideration of such submissions.

   Finally, I note that Winckworths have forwarded copy representations made by each of the
   parties to the Director. Could you please confirm that you have in fact received the Annexes
   referred to in HFSG submissions dated 24* September and supplementary submissions dated
   2nd October.

   Yours faithfully



   f{ $                    %

   Ann Adlington
   Solicitor




               ™ 0ne ° ' SI 23f ' 919' F“ 0151 236      E MaH info@hfeg.org
              1 Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
                                                          THE LEGAL SECRETARIAT TO THE LAW OFFICERS

                                                                       ATTORNEY GENERAL'S CHAMBERS

                                                                                    9 BUCKINGHAM GATE

                                                                                      LONDON SW1E 6 JP
G eneral enquiries 0171-271 2400
Direct line             0171-
              Fax No:   0171-




              MS Ann Adlington
              H illsborough Family S u p p o rt G roup
              1st Floor C entral Buildings
              41 North J o h n S treet
              Liverpool L2 6RR
                                                                               19 O ctober 1999




          HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
          R V DUCKENFIELD

          T h an k you for y our letter of 18 O ctober a d d ressed to the A ttorney
          G eneral. I have been ask ed to reply.

          I have n o t been provided w ith the date of the forthcom ing trial, b u t I
          u n d e rs ta n d th a t it is n o t to tak e place before the end of th is year. In
          those circu m stan ces I su g g est th e following tim etable for receipt an d
          consideration of y our su b m issio n s an d th e reply of those rep resen tin g Mr
          Duckenfield:

              1.        Your S ubm issions to be s e n t by 16 November;

              2.        The reply of Mr D uckenfield’s representatives to be s e n t by 30
                        November.

              I hope th a t th is tim etable will enable a 'd e c isio n to be ta k e n before the
              close of the year, or early in J a n u a ry .

              W ith-regard to y our final p ara g ra p h , th e A ttorney h a s received from Mr
              D uckenfield’s solicitors rep re se n ta tio n s dated 24 S eptem ber 1998, 2
              O ctober 1998 a n d 9 O ctober 1998, b u t no a n n ex es to those
              rep resen tatio n s.




                                                                             190CT99.HILLSB0R0UGH.AA
I am copying y our letter a n d th is reply to Mr D uckenfield’s solicitors.




STEPHEN PARKINSON




                                                             190CT99.HILLSB0R0UGH.AA
                                                     THE LEGAL SECRETARIAT TO THE LAW OFFICERS

                                                                  ATTORNEY GENERAL'S CHAMBERS

                                                                                9 BUCKINGHAM GATE

                                                                                  LONDON SW1E 6 J P
General enquiries* 0171-271 2400
Direct line           0171|
          Fax No:      0171-




          M essers W inkw orth Sherw ood
          Solicitors a n d P arliam en tary Agents
          35 G reat Peter S treet
          W estm inister
          London SW1P 3LR
                                                                          19 O ctober 1999




               L 'i/ s /




          HILLSBOROUGH PRIVATE PROSECUTION
          ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD

          T hank you for y o u r letter of 13 O ctober w hich w as received in this
          d e p a rtm e n t on 18 O ctober. The A ttorney G eneral received on 18 October
          a letter from Ms Adlington, a solicitor for the HFSG, w hich I enclose,
          together w ith a copy of m y reply. You will see th a t I se t o u t a tim etable
          for the receipt of fu rth e r subm issions.

          The decision in th is in sta n c e will be tak en by th e Solicitor G eneral w hen
          all re p re sen tatio n s have been received.




          STEPHEN PARKINSON




                                                                        190CT99.HILLSB0R0UGH. WS
 W IN C K W O R T H to E R W O O D                                                                         r        335 Great
                                                                                                                      5 G r e a t Peter
                                                                                                                                  P e t e r Street
                                                                                                                                            Sti

  SOLICITORS          A                                                                                             Westminster
                                                                                                                    London SW1P 3LR
Our ref:             S B E /24 33 2/k $                                                                             Telephone: 0207 593 5000
                                                                                                                    Fax: 0207 593 5099
                                                                                                                    DX: 2312 VICTO RIA
                   D EP^S
Lord Williams of Mostyn QC                                                                                          Direct Line:                      0 2 0 7 593 5107
                                                                                                                    Direct Fax:                       0 2 0 7 593 5044
The Legal Secretariat to the Law Officers
Attomey-Generals Chambers                                                                                           Email: sbeastwood@ winckworths.co.uk
9 Buckingham Gate
London SW1E6JP                                                                                                      13 October 1999




Dear Sir

HILLSBOROUGH PRIVATE PROSECUTION
ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD

We write with the benefit of Mr William Clegg QC’s advice, on behalf of David
Duckenfield to invite you to enter a nolle prosequi in relation to two counts of an indictment
he faces at the Crown Court sitting at Leeds.

The defendant was the senior police officer in charge of the Hillsborough Stadium at the
time of the disaster in April 1989 when 95 supporters died as the result of crushing. He has
been committed for trial on three counts by the Magistrates Court, two counts of
manslaughter and one of misfeasance in public office. We do not invite you to enter a nolle
prosequi in relation to these counts.

The remaining two counts of the indictment contain allegations of falsely telling persons
inquiring into the causes of the disaster, that the crush had been caused by spectators who
had broken down a gate, and of failure to correct the false belief relating to that cause,
induced by the alleged statements. Two counts are based on these allegations, firstly, a
charge of making statements tending and intended to pervert the course of justice, and
secondly, misconduct in public office. It is the history of these allegations that prompt this
invitation.

Originally the defendant was summoned on four charges, the three now represented by the
first three counts of the indictment and a fourth charge alleging that Duckenfield did an act
which had a tendency to pervert the course of justice.

On the 1st July 1998 we invited the Director of Public Prosecution to take over the conduct
of the proceedings under Section 6 of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 and to
discontinue them under Section 23. On the 18th December 1998 the Crown Prosecution
Service wrote indicating that they would not take over the proceedings and discontinue. We
sought further information in a letter of the 23rd December and received a reply on the 1st




PARTNERS                       S T E P H E N W1GGS           R O G E R FITTO N         T I M W A TT S               The firm is a m em ber o f E u R S S S S U .
NICHOLAS O W ST O N            HUGH MACDOUGALD               P A UL I R V I N G        JO H N HUDSON                an international network o f law yers.
O M A N IIO O I)               J O H N RE ES                 R O N A L D W AR RAN TS   R A N J E E V RA1            The firm is regulated by The Law Society
PAUI M O R R I S               P E T E R WILLIAMS            R O B E R T BO T K A l    CONSULTANTS                  in the conduct o f investment business.
M IC M Al 'L T H A T C H E R   ANDREW MURRAY                 SIM ON EASTW OOD          F R A N K R O B S O N OB E
AI.ISON G O R I O V            C H R I S T O P H E R VI NE   NAOMI GOODE               G E O R G E BULL*            *N o)t-soHciu>r ta x consultant
UU'W
Continued

February 1999 which stated, in reference to the allegations that Duckenfield had done an act
attempting to pervert the course of justice:-

        “I had formed the view that there was clearly no case to answer on that charge.”

There followed an application for judicial review before the High Court, judgment being
given on the 30th March 1999. Mr Newell writing on behalf of the Director swore an
affidavit that dealt with the position of partial intervention at paragraph 5 and 6. The Court
having considered the matter quashed the decision of the Director so far as it related to the
charge of attempting to pervert the course of justice.

Thereafter the Director reconsidered the question of intervention and discontinuance of that
charge and by letter dated the 12th April 1999 concluded:-

        “I have decided that the C.P.S. should take over that single charge in order to
        discontinue it... The reason is that there is clearly no case to answer on that charge”.

The committal then proceeded on the three remaining charges and Duckenfield was
committed for trial on the 20th July 1999. Thereafter an indictment was settled which
included the original charge discontinued by the Director and a further charge relating to the
same allegation.

It is against this background that the request is made for a nolle prosequi in relation to those
two counts.

The decision to discontinue the proceedings was made by the Director in the context of the
judicial review decision after hearing lengthy representations by both sides. It was not a
decision that was subject to any further application for judicial review, by the prosecutor.

If the only charge being faced by Duckenfield had been the charge discontinued by the
Director then clearly there could be no question of any indictment embracing those
allegations and the effect of the decision to discontinue would be to end the proceedings in
relation to that allegation. This, I anticipate, was the expectation of the Director.

To permit the prosecutor to reinstate those charges in the form of counts four and five in the
indictment would be to permit the prosecutor to effectively negate the decision of the
Director to discontinue. It is only the fact that in respect of other charges, not the subject of
this application, Duckenfield happened to be committed for trial independently of the
charges discontinued, that rendered this course of action possible. Clearly the ability to
indict a person ought not to be dependant upon circumstances such as those found in this
case.

We do not believe that there has ever been a case in the past where an indictment has been
drawn including charges previously the subject of a decision by the Director to discontinue.
It is submitted that the situation is unique and ought to be remedied by the entering of a
nolle prosequi in relation to counts 4 and 5 of the indictment. This would have the effect of
preserving the decision of the Director in relation to the allegations that are reflected in the




                                                2
L0198
Continued

charges that he discontinued while permitting a trial to proceed in relation to the three
remaining charges that were not discontinued by the Director.

Enclosed with this letter is a copy of the indictment, a copy of the representation made by
each of the parties to the Director, the first decision of the Director and his subsequent
reasoned decision, the Affidavit of Mr Newell, the judgment of the Divisional Court and the
subsequent decision of the Director pursuant to that ruling.

A copy of this letter is being sent personally to Ms A. Adlington the prosecutor. She has
not instructed solicitors in private practice to act for her but is herself an employed solicitor
with the Liverpool City Council. We ask for an opportunity to respond to any
representations she chooses to make as in the past representations by the prosecutor have
inadvertently contained factual inaccuracies.

Yours faithfully




WINCKWORTH SHERWOOD




                                                3
L0198
 f< U v A 'T &
                          \      X aJ^I C T M £O T
{‘( I c & .C .X T io d




                         2
                              gS -frfe€ S < £ '0 *M*Tift*.»S     T o & PP                  O/O
                                                   P (U > l£ C .t* s re 11                                       '




                              a**(n(lS      -
                                            t      2. ( i o ( n €    ;         °l (lot*) &________________



                              { l6 $ d & Z & O T A 'T to » $   7o
                         3
                                  tf>F b A V » &       bL A .C M ^*J H G ^ -0




                              /l& e(l£Z£*>TA7 ioAJ S                  To          h /V     On)

                         4        Cf^     & £-Q .tJA rQ .b
                                 3. f t o f °l &                *^~ t*»A


                         C                   6 d C f S / o /0            fff

                         O     o tM ^       t % l n h * 0 **~*                                    tzU *h & J



                              S o d fc tg g u ^ Q T             ftS * S o w Q fe &             frg g tS /Q A J
                         6       _ g f . _ M .r                                    t(z f a




                         7
                              A ff-t& 4 v > tT          <rF         c r i - c u s - r 0 i*t/<£&      n   & *> * u    u   .

                                                      2-2.



                         8
                              ^ c x Q ^ a i£ a jt                     f t/v J if o o A              c^v^g st

                                                            u    ( ■ & ( * » •*




                              S q -6 * £ ^ u & o T              A C c iS iq a j
                         9                                                                        i s & r
     A4JNMXHr*ro                P u 4 L * u M tT T o
                                  C tfv tft-T                                            42.




                         10
In the Crown Court at Leeds




                                       INDICTMENT


                                         REGINA

                                            -v -


       DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELD AND BERNARD DEAN MURRAY



who are charged as follows:

Count 1       Statement of Offence

              Manslaughter

              Particulars of Offence

              David Godfrey Duckenfield and Bernard Dean Murray, on 15th April 1989,
              unlawfully killed John Alfred Anderson by gross negligence, namely, by failing
              to prevent and relieve a crush in pen 4 of the west terraces at Hillsborough
              football ground, Sheffield, between 2.30pm and 3.06 pm.

Count 2       Statement of Offence

              Manslaughter

              Particulars of Offence

              David Godfrey Duckenfield and Bernard Dean Murray, on 15th April 1989,
              unlawfully killed James Gary Aspinall by gross negligence, namely, by failing to
              prevent and relieve a crush in pen 3 of the west terraces at Hillsborough
              football ground, Sheffield, between 2.30pm and 3.06 pm.
    Count 3   Statement of Offence

              Misconduct in public office

              Particulars of Offence

              David Godfrey Duckenfield and Bernard Dean Murray, on 15lh April 1989,
              wilfully neglected, as senior officers of the South Yorkshire police force, to
              ensure the safety of spectators entering the Hillsborough football ground,
              Sheffield, by failing to take steps to prevent and relieve a crush in pens 3 and 4
              of the west terraces of the ground.



    Count 4   Statement of Offence

%             Making statements tending and intended to pervert the course of justice

              Particulars of Offence

              David Godfrey Duckenfield, on 15th April 1989, made statements which had a
              tendency, and were intended, to pervert the course of justice by :

              (a) falsely telling persons inquiring into the causes of the fatal crush in the
              Hillsborough football ground, Sheffield, that the crush had been caused by
              spectators who had broken down a gate or gates in the course of entering the
              western end of the ground; and

              (b) failing, in the course of discussions about the fatal crush, to correct the
              false belief of other persons, induced by his own previous statements, that the
              crush had been caused by spectators who had broken down a gate or gates in
              the course of entering the western end of the ground.
*




                                              2
 X   '■>




           Count 5   Statement of Offence

                     Misconduct in public office

                     Particulars of Offence

                     David Godfrey Duckenfield, on 15* April 1989, wilfully neglected, as a senior
                     officer of the South Yorkshire police force, to perform his public duty by:

                     (a) falsely telling persons inquiring into the causes of the fatal crush in the
                     Hillsborough football ground, Sheffield, that the crush had been caused by
                     spectators who had broken down a gate or gates in the course of entering the
                     western end of the ground; and

                     (b) failing, in the course of discussions about the fatal crush, to correct the
P1                   false belief of other persons, induced by his own previous statements, that the
                     crush had been caused by spectators who had broken down a gate or gates in
                     the course of entering the western end of the ground.




                                                     3
                                                                       x tfin u n n i



                   Adlington v. MuTrav; Adlington v. Dneken field


Representations to the PirectoiLofJPublic Proseaitionson behalf oftheJErpsccuiion


                                            Introduction


  These representations arc made in opposition to the requests by the defendants to the
  CtoV/n Prosecution Service, asking that the prosecution of the defendants he taken
  over under section 6 (2) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985. lor the purpose of
                                     . % ; •.


  discontinuing it under scction 23 (3). These submissions reflect further reading of
  materials that have bccome available in.the last year, and are .still becoming available.
  They should be read in the light of the documents submitted previously, particularly
  the following;


  (i) informations of 10A July .1908, and supporting documents, laid before the Leeds
  Magistrates Court;


  (U) the letter from the HUlsboroUghiFaniily Support Oroup fMKSG") to die (Inivm
  Prosecution Service oF31* July 1998;


  <iii) the letter from the HFSC5 to MrCioston of24lhAugust 1998 and supporting
  documents.


  The HKSG is a non-poliiical organisation, and draws its members from many walks of
  life. The author o f these representations bad no involvement in the ease until Ik*was
  instructed in the case in the Judicial Review proceedings as leading counsel in about
  September 1993 for the six (amities. After the hearing, he took no part until the end of
  1996. when he was again asked to advise in the light of the new evidence dixcoYenhi.
  some of which was the subject o f the drama-documentary televised in December
  1990. lie then represented anti advised the Group before, during and alter the
  “Scrutiny* in 1997-8.

                                                        V    1




                                   . . . *.' • .v ,   .' .

                               '
                               ■                 ...5-^* (
It is regretted that this submission and supporting documents come at a laic stage of
the review. The Home Secretary said in Parliament in February 1995} that be would
make availahle all material in the House of Commons library considered by hint “save
when; there are overriding reasons for doing otherwise”. (Annex 4 . page 1988). The
attached correspondence {Annex 8 \ shows that this process is incomplete, and ihat
obvious omissions have not been made good by the South Yorkshire police. Since
July 1998. the Assistant Chief Constable of South Yorkshire has Liken it upon himself
to slop die provision even of documents that the Haroc Secretary ordered to be
disclosed. (Sec Tab 17, pages 202-7, file or24'b August 1998.)


                              'The right to prosecute


The right to prosecute."privately". This right was preserved specifically by scction 6
of ihe Prosecution o f Offences Act 1985. The provision \v4ic reviewed in R v. How
SteaLMadsttate^CQurL ex parte South Coast Shipping Company (1991) 96 Cr.
App. R. 405. This is not the occasion for a full rcview/of the right of private subjects
to prosccute. It is a right o f constitutional importance, and may properly be cxcrciscd'
where a "public" body, such as the Director o f Public Prosecutions, has dccl ined lo *
prcisecutc.


The tests that the Crown Prosecution Scrvicc adopts under its Code for Crown
Prosecutors were borne well in mind in the decision to prosecute in this case. On the
basis of the Taylor findings alone, supported by a proper basis o f witness statements,
there is a realistic prospect o f conviction tor the oftences o f manslaughter nnd
mis! casanctt m public office. Further, the prospect o f a conviction Tor manslaughter is
cnhancod by the decision o f the House of Lords in R v^Adomafo* [ 1995] 1 A.C. 151.
However, it is submitted that a "private" prosecutor would be entitled to apply a less
strict test in deciding to prosecute; he need ootfoilow the test imposed upon itself by
the CPS. The CPS should not approach a review of the present kind on the basis that
ii should apply its own tesL o f evidential sufficiency.

                                         2
Public interest and “interests of justice- factors arc reviewed below. The matters
raised by the defendants will probably form the basis of an application that the case be
stayed, or not coincnitted, because the prosecution, It will be said, is engaged in
abusing Ihe process of the court If the defendants do noi for tactical reaso n s present
such an argument, the prosecution may wc" decide lo raise this matter wish the
magistrates' court of its own motion, and may invite the court, i f it wjsbes. lo hear
evidence on the subject.


It is submitted that, except in the veiy plainest of eases, it would be a misuse of die
discretion given to the Crown Proseciiuon Service to take over a piosecuiion such as
this for the purposes of discontinuing i t Arguments about “abuse of process” involve
questions of fact and evidence. Matters such as the effect of press publicity and
alleged prejudice caused by del&y art evidential and they should be subject to
empirical tests, increasingly, witnesses are called before the tribunals which are
called upon to decide "abuse of process* arguments. Above aa, ail circumstances
should be balanced and weighed in determining whether to stay a ease, and they
 should be considered “in the round*. See Tan v. Cameron [19923 2 A                                     7.05,225F.
 CPC), per Lord MuStill.'-.


Previous                                                                1998 Home Office disclosura o f evidence.
                 '   . •• •            :i-;   -U y   . {■■: j , .             ..   .. ..

                       .      •:   '          -r.-.i;'*.            .



 There have been a number of inquiries: by Lord Justice Taylor; the Director of Public
 Prosecutions; the Coroner;-the Police Complaints Authority; and a “Scrutiny* by >^»Td
 Justice Stuait-Smith- Tbe West Midlands police collected evidence for the first four of
 these, and appear also lo have conducted a separate private inquiry fix- the South
 Yorkshire police* whichmay .be alleged to provide Ac justification lor the cxclusivc
 control of South Yorkshire police: over most of the documentation in this case.


 The defendants ask why another, criminal, trial of these events should take place, and,
 in the light of those earlier inquiries and their findings, they ask the Dtrocuw of Public
 Prosecutions to put anend to ’it? A mass of new evidence has beat made available in
the last year at the insistence of the Home Secretary, after the "Scrutiny", which was
•not previously in the public domain or known to the families of those who died, and
which has hitherto been conccaled ki the possession of those who have been held
liable for negligence, the Souch Yorkshire police.


The significance o f the witness statements disclosed m the course of the “Scrutiny",
and die hundreds of unsworn police statements, edited and unedited, disclosed by the
Home Secretary in 1998, is difficult to overstate. They disclose, prima fade, such a
thorough manipulation of the evidence to the past benefit of the defendants and South
Yorkshire police in general, that they cause all aspects of the investigation, all known
statements, indexes to evidence and correspondence, to be examined differently.


The documentation referred to below is relevant lo the defendants' rcliance on the
outcome of previous inquiries and investigations. In summary, it indicates the
following:


(a) the alleged independence of the West Midlands police throughout those enquiries
was a sham;                   . . o'    -


(b) the South Yorkshire police statements sent to the DPP by West Midlands police
were known by both forces uv include edited statements: the “undertaking” given by
                                                 *
Mr Mcrvyn Jones o f West Midlands Policc (“Scrutiny* report page 213) that he
would not release the unedited statements to the Taylor Inquiry discloses u principal-
agetu relationship inconsistent with independence;


(c) West Midlands police allowed full of at least wide aceess to the papers in the ease
lo South Yorkshire policc at the inquest, civil proceedings (and presumably the Taylor
Inquiry), while denying it to live IJyerpool families:


(d) the statements and documents sent to the DPP in 1990 were the result o fa
calculated selection, from which many statements of central importance were
         excluded, end which included edited statements of policc officers;


         (e) Hammond Suddards, solicitors to South Yorkshire policc, and in particular IVter
         Metcalf have acted undera serious conflict of interest in the course o f previous
         inquiries, and continue to deny access to the I .iverpooi families to the South Yorkshire
         archive. Wo protest is made at this by the defendants, whose defence, it is believed, is
         funded by the South Yorkshire Police Authority, and one of whom Mr Duckenficld.
         is represented hy solicitors who acted for the South Yorkshire police in the “Scrutiny".


                                      Sufficiency o f evidence


12       ]t has already been pointed out in previous submissions that the Taylor findings in
         themselves amount almost to a prima facie case of manslaughter hy gross negligence
         and of misfeasance. The decision to open the gates without taking steps to divert the
         oncoming spectators .was a “blunder of the first magnitude" and was ari immediate
         (and therefore substantial) cause of death. The decision was taken by Ducken field,
         with the agreement or acquiescence oi'Murray.


13       The witness statements already provided to the dcfcncc and DPP pmvide cogent
     .   evidential support for the manslaughter and misfeasance allegations, combined with
         admissions of fact-made by each defendant in his various staiemonus, and evidence to
         the Inquest and the Taylor Inquiry. Exhibitasuch as videos, photographs, plans etc, in
         support of the Taylor findings are not to hand, bccause the South Yorkshire police,
         with the encouragement of the Director p f Public Prosecutions, refuse to hand them
         over pending the outcome o f this review.


14       1n an offcnee in this spccies of involuntary manslaughter, following Adomako, the
         prosecution must prove: (a) a duty of care; (b) a breach of that duty; (o') that that
         breach was a substantial cause of death; (c) “The esscncc of the matter which is
         supremely a jury question, is whether having regard to the risk of death involved the
         conduct o f the defendant was so bad in all the circumstances as to amount in their

                                                  5
("   '



               judgmcii! to a criminal act or omission." per Lord Mackay l.C [JW5[ 1 A.C. J 87E.


         15     It is submitted that all elements but the last have never been seriously disputed. The
                remaining element is for the jury. Lord Taylor found, and it is inherent in the
                acceptance of liability by South Yorkshire policc in the various negligence enses. that
                the police were under a duly, and that there was a breach of the duty o f care.
               causative of death. See also Frosts. £hietConstable of the Somh Yorkshire Policc
                11997j I AI1.H.R. 540, 544tve, per Rose U :


                       “The immediate cause of the disaster wus a senior officer's decision lo open
                       the outer gate without cutting ou access lo the pens, l.iihiliiy for the deaths
                       and injuries of those spectators has been admitted by the three defendants. the
                       first of whom is the Plaintiffs Chief Constable.’*


         16     The statements o f the 35 spectator witnesses which have been served on the defence
                and DPP prove this negligence, taken together with the transcripis o f evidence given
                by the two defendants to the Taylor Inquiry and the inquest. The statements should be
                read in full. It is not intended here to set out the evidence as might be appropriate in
                an opening speech, nor to treat the CPS in this review as as examining magistrate. •
                considering whether a case to answer is made out on the papers.


         Some features o f (he evidence already served.


         1?     Some conspicuous features of the 35 witnesses are ss follows, with a few references.
                In 1988 police officers diverted spectatore away firoxa the tunnel leading to those pens
                (eg l lilion, page 5). Tbc unedited statements of White and Lang, submitted on 24"’ •
                August, prove the same, and suggest that it had been the practice of senior officers to
                ensure that the tunnel was closed when the pens were'foil, something that could be
                seen easily by White from the steps near the Control Box. Thi5 police evidence was
                suppressed until 1998.     In 1989, when the gate wus opened* a nish of people carried
                spectators straight into the tunnel, and it was impossible to turn back (Cook).

                                                          6
There was no obvious alternative to the tunnel (Harvey, Murray. fcllowes, Southern.)
'ilxere was no diversion away from this tunnel (Odger, Murphy, Langley). Spectators
had to go with the crowd, for fear o f felling underfoot. (Edwards). Spectators were
carricd by the surge of people inio.thc tunnel When. Gate C was opened. (Anderson,
Bums, Campbell.) The central pens in the termccs were pitcked at?.. 50 pm (Blayncy.
Mullcc). PC Guest said that at 2.40 h wax not going to be possible u> accommodate
die crowd outside the L-cppings Lane entrance in ihosc pens. (Sec file of 24thAugust
1998.) P.O. Walpole (see Annex />. produced below) says the overcrowding was
obvious m 2.55pm. P.C Brooks says the central pens were too lull at 2.50pm. (See
Anmx D)


Duckenfield and Murray were in die Control Box.;They could see the central pens.
Closed circuit television gave them an even better view of the pens. Vive minutes
after Superintendent Marshall had asked for help to relieve possibly life-lhrcalemng
pressure at the turnstiles in Leppings Lane, Duckenlleld, with the acquiescencc and
tacit support o f Murray, finally ordered the gate to be opened without closing off
access to the already crowded pens. Thousands surged in: the deaths of 96 people
were the immediate and direct consequence. Murray had been on duty at the semi­
final in 1088 in the Control Box. He culpably failed in I9S9 to give the proper and •
obvious advice. Duckenfield, in Lord Taylor’s words, “froze". Both defendants admit
their presence in the Control Box, and iXickenfield admits that he lied about matters
shortly afterwards, saying the Liverpool supporters broke open the gate.


The CCTV film, and footage held by the BBC, pholojpaphs and other videos of the
circumstances, disclose foil pens before the gate was opened, and a horrifying and
obvious overcrowding after the gates opened. Most of this evidence is in the hands
of the South Yorkshire police. The HKSG, and leading counsel, luwc seen some of the
video evidence.
"ihe basis o f the charges of misfeasance and attempting to pervert the course of justice
is dear from the Taylor interim report, and the informations and submissions lodged
at Leeds. 1116 HFSCr cannot obtain the important statement of Graham Kelly o f the
Football Association, because South Yorkshire police refuse to supply it, or even a
copy. It is intended that Kelly and two witnesses from Liverpool Football Club. Peter
Robinson, and H.H. Judge iinsor, will be called to say they heard Duckcn field's lie. It
                                    Mi ■ i'' ■
was said after deaths had been caused. It will be argued it was an obvious attempt to
impede inquiries, and to suppress the truih.


In leading counsel’s opinion, there is sufficient evidence on which to commit for irial
already. If, for the sake of argument, committal proceedings were to begin in a
week's time, without any. further disclosure by South Yorkshirc policc, the
prosecution would call the 35 spectator witnesses, the three police witnesses whose
evidence has been served (cxcept Guest, who is dead), other officers, and a number of
live witnesses, including Kellyvon the basis of transcripts of the evidence given.


Hie prosecution has already identified farther witnesses from tin: transcripts of
evidence given at the Taylor Inqtdry^and some from the Coroner's pmceedings. who
ft might call at committal: and police.officers who were at the ground, who lave made
contact with us. It is not necessary.to. identify their names at this stagc/Tlicre is no
reason to believe that a committing magistrate would take a different view of this
evidence from Lord Taylor. It has been agreed at'thc magistrates court that the old
prc-1997 committal rules govern the. case, because a police investigation took place
before l *1April 1997. The provisions of the Criminal Procedure and Investigations
Act 19% do not apply.

                              ir,   •.s.VVW-i            '. •
For the reasons that appear below, however, there can be little doubt that the archive
of statements and exhibits in the; possession o f the Sooth Yorkshire police will add
significantly to tho prosecution caae at conuniaal, and then ax trial. Assuming that the
South Yorkshire police continue to rrfuseito co-operate with the prosecution. witness
summonses will be sought imdCT‘s«xtioh 9 7 o f the Marnstrates Courts Act (alter a

                          . •. l - V ’     W   . ,




                                                     ‘     am-::’
      tied si on not to discontinue ihe case), requiring the Assistant Chief C onstablc of South
      Yorkshire policc to producc the documentary and technical cvidencc, and original
      witness statements.


 I'ublk LMercsLand 3nitte s ts.of justice "factors:. (ui the ovj^ipx. ofih£.wcscwj?cw \'ivtm s



-S    The following matters arc set out as “public interest* factors which it is suggested are
      relevant to the present review and to the arguments of the defendants.

                                    . . . .   ..iC 's

The absence o f detailed information until 1997-8


20    It has been an important part o f the prosecution’s approach to the Director’s current
       review, and of our justification for bringing criminal proceedings in 1998, that the
       lirSG has been deprived o f eriUwl intbii^tion. statements ami documents about the
       disaster tor nine years. At thc Taylor-Inquiry in 1980,‘a policy appears to have been
       followed of providing copies of the statement of an individual survivor or spectator U»
       the lawyers acting for hint. Attached ak'Annex C is a letter or Miss U.M. Sleel. a
       solicitor tor the “Hillsborough Steeriag Cojnmiuee* {now defunct), which records this
       practice, 'fhat practice was abandoned during or otter the I'aylor Inquiry. <itul certainly
       by the time the Director o f Public Prosecutions became involved fvn’ihully in August
       1989.


?.7    ll will be noted th^t Miss Steel did hot say tbut these statements bccamc generally
       available to the families collectively: only, in cach case, to a particular solicitor. The
       cxtent to which these statements were distributed is unclear. Few have remained
       available to the HKSG.


-K     ll appears (rum ihe Stuarr-Smith report that policc statements (arid, perhaps, others)
       were distributed to the press. (See Report. Appendix 8. page 2 13). (Where edited
       suitcments had been made, it was.of course the policy of South Yorkshire policc to
       distribute these, rather than the originals.) However, after the end o f the Taylor

                                                        9
    \r -

                  Inquiry, when the DPP investigation, began, this policy changod permanently.
                  Information and statements were guarded closely. The investigations conducted by the
                  West Midlands police for the DPP, Coroner and Police Complaints Authority put un
                  end to the policy of disclosure, except in isolated instances.


           2‘J    The new information the Divisional Court was asked Id consider in the 1^93 Judicial
                  Review had been obtained by dint of the persistence of individual families,
                  dissatisfied and ar times appalled by tbc fact -that South Yorkshire police appeared lo
                  have access lo information, whilst they themselves had liule. The Divisional Court’s
                  judgment of S'1’ November 1993 records only ti few of those efforts und the statements
                  discovered, but the fed that the substance of the various investigations was unknown
                  to them is evident from a reading o f the transcript as a whole.


           30     Over the years, more evidence became available, sometimes accidentally and
                  Iwphavardly, and often after many frustrated efforts. The appointment of the
                  “Scrutiny" o f Lord Justicc Stuait-Smith followed intense national nnd televised
                  publicity about material which had been discovered after the inquests.


           31     Only the open approach of the Home Secretary in 1998, in stark contrast to the
                  miserly approach of the police forces and the Coroner to the dissemination of
                  information, has permitted the IlFSG to obtain the information on which lo embark
                   with confidence on prosecutions. The information now avuiJable. it is clear,
                   undermines the inquest verdicts o f accidental death, and calls into question the
                  validity of ail previous investigations.


           'J'ht- decision lo prosccutc



           32     I laving advised the HFSG in relation to the “Scrutiny*, the author was asked to advise
                  on possible further steps. The report of Lord Justice Stuart-Smilh, published in
\                 Februaiy 1998, was regarded, with profound disappointment and frustration, to say (Lie
i                 least, insofar as it related to the new evidence. It seemed important that a decision as
1
                                                             10




                                               ..;C i        f'-'r          -Ur't; 1
lo how to procccd, if at all. should be taken after a pause lor reflection, and after the
material examined by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was disclosed as promised by the
Home Secretary in Parliament. (See remarks ol'tl»e Home Secretary, i lansard, Annex
A). However, the first batch o f statements of the South Yorkshire police arrived in
I .iverpool only a few days before the uulhor wem to Liverpool in April to address the
members of the HFSG about future action, and it seemed wrong lo delay a decision in
principle further.


Iwading counsel’s advice, delivered orally to the Group, and beforehand to the
Committee in writing, was that the findings of Lord Justice Taylor had survived
intact for 0 years. They had been, upheld by the Sluurt-Smith report. Prosecutions for
manslaughter, misfeasance and attempting to pervert the course ol'justice
(Duckonfield’s ‘disgraceful tie") were justified. Prosecutions for additional offence*
on Uk basis of the new material were feasible in spite of the "Scrutiny". I lowevcr, the
Group was advised that it might be better to confine any prosecutions to tlte plain
original facts, in order to avoid long and expensive technical trials involving expert
evidence about videotapes and cameras.


The other reasons put forward by .couhiwl. relating to thcprcsent charges, were similoi'
lo those that appeared in the written submissions attached to the informations
presented in July to the I,ecds Magistrates Court. There was evidence, in law. to
justify prosecution. Whether to proceed, it was argued, was a decision for the Group.
The HKSG decided that afternoon to accept counsel's advice, to instruct him to
consider the various statements that had come to light before and in Ihe course o f the
“Scrutiny", and to formulate charges accordingly on the basis of the Taylor findings.


tl was only after that decision was taken, and after members of the HFSG and counsel
had read the police statements disclosed by the Home Secretary, that it appeared thul
there had been, on the face of things, a sustained suppression of the truth in the eourxc
of the original investigations which went far beyond the matters which liad been
alleged by the HFSG, and which bad given rise to the “Scrutiny" in the first place.
         Public mlcn'xt a n d "inleresL* o f justice " factors: (h) fhe.wricealeel matv a g i



The ediictl Soitlh Yorkshire police slcilemenLs


       On 24"' August 1998 statements were sent by the 111‘SG Lo the CTS demonstrating ihe
       practice of editing, by which, it was submitted, the DPP and counsol had been misled
       iu 19%, (Sec pages I to IV of the file submitted on that day.) Further examples (see
       attached new file Annex D) have been selected .which show again, strikingly, the
       practice of deleting factual matters, which officers had originally asserted in writing,
       atvd which were prejudicial to South Yorkshire olTiccrs. These examples provide
       further evidence that Lord Justice Sluari-Smitlv, ulao* wax misled on this sitbjcet in the
       course of his ‘'Scrutiny’'.


37    There are dozens o f other instances of editing, of varying degrees of culpability,
       extending, in total and nature, f a r beyond the cases set out in the re p o rt   o f J ,ord   Justice
       Stuart-Smith. Unfortunately, some o f these statements have still not been supplied, as
       i.s apparent from. for example, the Master Witness List, and the exercisc of examining
       them is therefore incomplete. Two conspicuous mi^siog statements are those of ('Joke
       and tykes. 'Che task o f comparing those .edited arid unedited statements
       comprehensively is vast. .The time spent on the exercise must have already have
       cxet-uded substantially the time available to Lord Justice Stu&rt-Smith or the people on
       whom he relied in 1997.


38    The HFSG has little doubt that the statements provided by South Yorkshire police
       officers, where there were two versions, were the edited ones. It was pointed out in
       the letter o f 24th August 1998 that the page numbers on the index in the Master
       Witness List o f April 1990, prepared by the West Midlands police for pnstemaiion to
       the DPP, indicated this. The sD&^ents referred to in that list formed the basis o f the
       West Midlands Police Report. An example was shown o f an edited statement being
       one page shorter than the pages set out in the index to that list. The extra page was
       probably a Criminal Justice Act statement, attesting to live truth of the attached
      unsworn statement, (It ■would be interesting lo know, if this inference is correct,
     ‘ whether those formal statements were on West Midlands or South Yorkshire witness
      statement forms, or, perhaps, on paper which bore the printed name of neither force.)


39    The material which the HFSG lias now supplied demonstrates by itself tlial a policy
      was adopted by the South Yorkshire police of withholding information, criticul to the
      issue of negligence, from Lord Justice Tay(or in 1989 (.so far as they were able), the
      fdirector in 1990, the Coroner between 1989 and 1"99), and, presumably, ihe Police
      Complaints Authority between IV90 and 1992. How nnsch more i.s there in Ihe
      Shell icld archive?


The Sharpies statement

                                                j i j . j i.’f/'.v
40    The policy o f editing statements is t& be contrasted not only with the South Yorkshire
      statements selling out a<l ncatseam prejudicial comment about Liverpool supporters, but
      nlso with the statement n f Jumcs Sharples. now Chief Constable of the Merseyside
       Policc. It is dated 20® March' V990. aAd it attaches a computer print-out of some earlier
      assertions and o t h e r H F S J C r d i d noi:know that Sharpies had even
      been a witness to the d lsa ^ ^ ^ jU ^ ^ ^ d ^ d o su re of theJjriaster Witness I.isL A copy'
      of his statement was ob^ned^r^tiaejvleraeyside police. It wilt be noted that large
       tracts o f both statements are expressions of hearsay, impression, commendation and
       commcnu none o f which has been excised.

                                     ’   ;. j V;.;                        v       .....
41     The author o f the statem ents a tnenddf Assistant Chief Constable Jackson. Sharpies
       bestows lavish praise on th? ^nior officers o f Sourb Yorkshire, I lis account provides a
       sharp contrast with the edited statements of junior South Yorkshire police officers, whow
       criticisms o f their senior offceis wi;r&painstakingly excised. In the Master Witness List,
       Part V is composed for the inost paid o f police officers. The first entry is the statement
       o f Duckcnfield (pages 2457-3469); the second is 18 pages of statement* by Sharpies
       (2458-2375); the third is by the defendant Murray (2470-248X). No editing of Sharpies
       has taken place. It is to bieinfcrtcd that a dcKberale decision wax made to place his




                                                             /S .
                            : > > . • '                              :•   • , ■


                             ;>■.'                   Vs::?'.’f Cv.VV :
  statement between the two principal suspeeK in order to influence tlic reader against
  prosecutions.


  The Master Witness List also includes a statement of Ronald Hadfield. 11c was then
  Chief Constable of the Nottinghamshire Police. No douht he was invited for the same
  reasons of hospitality as led to the invitation to Sharpies. His statement remains
  undisclosed. In contrast lo the Sharpies stotemcnt/l ladfield's is listed as last bui one of
  ihc witnesses in Part V.


‘ignifictwcc o f the. Phillipa 'Inquiry and Report"


  The HKSG learned of the Phillips “Inquiry and Report" only in the course of
  correspondence during the '‘Scrutiny*. Attached a s Annex Fare letters of 8dl A u g u si   1997

  (which contained the first reference to the' report which the HFSG saw). 10th and 19c’
  September and 6th October). The first of these letters chums that the rcjxirt was ordered
  for civil litigation. The report itselfis dated ■‘August 1990". the same month in which the
  DPP deeided not to prosecute.


   Ihe origins of this report ore hot entirely clear. U is suggested tluit the South Yorkshire
  Police commissioned it. but the repeal would obviously have been relevant to llte various
  investigations o f the West Midlands police... Attached as Annex G are extracts from that
  report, namely, the covor sheet, contents page, and pages 1-4.41, V2-3. 100-105.148-9.
  I<>3-173. and Appendix C. (The whole report will he supplied to the Cl’S on request.)
  The conclusion indicated that the report attributed negligence (but weakly) to
  Duclcenftcld and Murray, suggested lhal fault was broadly spread, and offered mitigation
  for the negligence shown, fl was higfcly sympathetic to South Yorkshire police.


  Ihe date of the report is significant. Counsel advised against prosecution on 6U'August
  I WO. but "contribution hearings?were pending in the High .Court, to be lusird in October
  1990. at which the divuaon o f liability between the police, football elub. «nd engineers
  wus to be established, and proportional financial contributions to damages were to be
determined. 'Ihe reference to the closing of die tunnel in 1988 at pages 92-3 of the Report
shows the critical significance o f the editing in relation t« ihc tunnel, described in ihe
HFSG letter to the DPP, and attached file, of 24,bAugust 1998. Clearly. Phillips had been
misled in relation to While, Woodcock and Lang, the importance ofwho.se full evidence
is set out in detail in that leiter. lie must also have been misled in relation to Sgt
Crawford. (See pages 86 to 101 of Annex I},')


At page 41. para. 5.29. and page 105, para 83. Phillips refers lo a “weather eye". lr will
be recalled that in "his statement of 12thJuly 1990, Chieflnspccior Bettison (File of 24lf'
August 1998, Tab 3, pages 17-18) had referred to the requests lo police witnesses,
instigated by Peter Metcalf of Hammond Sucidards, to ‘clarify’'their evidence. Uutli.sou
suggested that when officers had talked of “monitoring" the terraces, they surely meant
"nothing more than keeping a weather eye out.’ Phillips' use o f the s;inie expression
indicates that Metcalf s exercise in clarification became indeed a successful manipulation
of the evidence.


Ihe tntaxJuctory pages of the Report fail to disclose who had commissioned it in October
1989. and whether the report had bcca;used for more than one purpose. U is not known
to the 1IFSG whether the repojt^or n yersion of it. was sent to the Director in 1990. The •
IIFSG has been sent a list o f documents in the possession of the DPP that were
considered in 1990, but it is suggested in the letter of Mr Croxlon lo I U\SCr o f 29,hJuly
1998 that other material may then have been in the DPP’s possession. It may be that vlic
Phillips report was incorporated, in some way into the,West Midlands police report.
Whether sent to the DPP or not the document shows the pernicious effect of the editing
process.


The contents o f Appendix C to the Phillips Report will be discussed below.
•.ve/t'dive supply o f i’nformation to the DPP


    In Ihc 11R?G letter of 31* July to the CPS. it was pointed out, not only that the edited
    statements were sent to the DPP. bui also (paragraph 13} that, of the 35 statements of
    spectators who had been provisionally selected for committal on the information then
    available, only 7 were    the Master Witness list, 8 vvere callcd at the inquest, and 2 were
    culled at the Taylor Inquiry.


    The breakdown of the provisional committal bundle is as follows. Of the 35 “spectator”
    w it nesses.



            only Thomas tliltoc and Peter Darcy gave oral evidence in the Taylor enquiry;


            only Steven Odger, Norman (.angley, Anthony Murray, Andrew Turner, Colin
             Henley, Shaun Sayer, and David Campbell, are on the Master Witness List;


             only Thorpas Milton, Norman Langley*. Anthony Murray. Derek Richards.
             Stephanie Jones. Colin J :Ienley, Frederick Maddox, and Hurl Mullee gave
             evidence to the inquest.


    There are about 571 statements in .Ihe Master Witness List. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
    records that X 776 statements wore taken by the West Midlands Police. Some hundreds
    were uiken by South Yorkshire police officers. The Police Complaints Authority records
    (produced below) tell us that 5341 statements were taken in the “overall investigation".
    It follows therefore that the Director had access to about 12% of the total statements
    generated in the enquiry. (Very few appear to have been made after August 1990).
    Obviously, many o f these would have been irrelevant or of little relcvnncc lo the question
    of criminal liability, but not, surely, 88% o f them. How were the 571 selected?


    Of the 36 edited statements that have now been senl to the DPP (24,b August file, and
    Annex D). 13 appeared on the Master Witness List sent to the DPP with the West
      Midlands Police Report in April 1990. Other very important edited statements huyc not
      been disclosed yet by ihe South Yorkshire police, in spite r>F the Home Secretary's
      instruction of February 1998.


53    Given the circumstances set out above, it is impossible lo argue that there is no relevant
      material to which the Director did not have access in 1990, and every reason to believe
      (hat the documentation submitted in 1990 was chosen with partiality; and that the archive
      held in Sheffield contains further relevant and important material that lias been carefully
      withheld from the.Dirccl.or and the Coroner, and which is adverse to (he South Yorkshire
      police and the defendants.


The sdttcnvc supply o f information lo the Coroner


54    The defendants refer, in connection with their arguments in favour o f discontinuing Ihe
       prosecutions, lo the findings of accidental death by the Coroner's jury. On Monday !4I,‘
      September 1998, the author of these representations, together with Ann Adlington and
       Philip Hammond of the HFSG. inspected documents in Sheffield given in evidence at the
       inquest, and which were now made available in accordance with Rule 57 of the Coroners’
       Rules 1984. The preseat Coroner. Christopher Domes, told us that among the Coroner's'
       archive is a copy of the West Midlands Policc Report, senl to Ihe DPP in 1990. The same
       incomplete material, including the edited statements, was sent to Dr Popper in 1990. fmm
      which he made a further selection, assisted by the West Midlands police, to produce
      about 200 witnesses, o f whom, it should be noicd, only 56 had given cvjdcncc lo the
      Taylor Inquiry.


55    This selection produced a wholly different emphasis to that contained in the Taylor
      report. Atiached to these representations is an analysis prepared by Ann Adlington,
       contrasting the findings of Lord Taylor with the summing-up of the Coroner. {dtW&JjO-
       llie Poppet approach no doubt lad its origins in the West Midlands police report, as well
       as in the 571 statements tendered to the DPP.



                                               17
1'hc c o n tro l o f inform ation.



5(»     The Director knows from recent correspondence of our deep conecrns that ihc South
         Yorkshire police hold all the original papers in the case, and thal Ihc 1)ireclor   ^ivcn
         'guidance*', apparently under the Prosecution of .Offeoccs Act 1985, that the Chief
         Constable might decide against disclosing these, or copies, until she has completed her
         review.


5 7     The South Yorkshire policy of non-disclosure, formed oil ibe basis or this "guidance" and
         advice from their own lawyers, Hammond Suddurds, is .obsessively sccret uud defensive.
         Mr Daines. the Assistant Chief Constable, now refuses to disclose to the !1FSG even
         outstanding documents, tl\c disclosure of which was promised by the 1lome Sccrctnry in
         February of this year* at the end citX^iircJVjustice Stuarj-Smith's “Scrutiny". Dames is
         thwarting the Home Sccret^ls. ^ p r w 6d intentions. He refuse*. perversely. even to
         provide the HFSG with, the work addresses of a number of South Yorkshire police
         officers who the prosecution wishes to interview. (Tab 17. file of 24th August 19%)


5#      Mr Kennedy .of the Crown Prosecution Service has said tliat “voluntary disclosure" Is
         inappropriate ax this stage, and thaL he understands that the urehive is the '‘property* of
         the South Yorkshire PoK<».''t^'^d^iMgr has told the autlior and a member of the HFS(i
         that his understanding also is that S^iith Yorkshire police “owns" the papers, and. ihut,
         although he has his own store o f papers ft the case, he cannot supply documents or copies
         (except as provided by Rule 5? o f             .Coroners* Rules 1984).


59      In search o f the origin of the aiguracnt that South Yorkshire police ’“owned" the archive,
         mcmhers o f the Group have looked back to previous correspondence and events in rl)c
         early years after ibe dh&^ster and have examined them in the light of the material now
         available. The true position is that West Midlands police appear to have regarded
         themselves as agents or servants of South Yorkshire police in the dissemination, coutml
         and protection of information, anid inthc presentation of facts lo the DPP. Coroner and
         W.’A, and to a lesser extent Lord Taylor. '

                                                         18



                                            :'O i



                                     .      ixiX i        5.<iiW

                                         !\ " ;4 'ii \m:. C' C3 '
60    li is now apparent ihat throughout all ihe enquiries in this case. the South Yorkshire
       polio: has bad access to all or most information obtained by West Midlands, bul that the
       South Yorkshire forte has instructed the West Midlands police, in its own interest's and
       in conformity with a distortion of the common. law. to withhold that information from the .
       bereaved families, cxcept in isolated instances.

                                              ' J » ^ r'’•
7'he roles o f the IVast Midlands Police


(>I   The ostensibly independent We,st Midlands police force has reported to, and      collected

       evidence for, four official bodies:
                                             ' il.   •




       a)     I.ord Justice Taylor's Inquiry of 1980, which reported to the}lome Secretary;


       b)     ‘the Director of Public Prosecutions in 1989 and 1990;


       e)     The Coroner’s Inquest between, 19th April' 1989 and the end of March 1991;


       d)     The Police,Complaints Auth(ifty'5,5upwvLston of investigations made by officers
               from, not only West Midlands..but from a variety o f other police fiirces ii\U>
               complaints made against a number of South Yorkshire officers.


/>2   fn these circumstances, it would seem obvious to the layman that the papers in the case
       would belong to one or other o f these four todies* vvho would e»jch be c.xpected to retain
       them (or copics. if one of the other bodies had the originals.) Alternatively, it unglu
       possibly be thought normal that the'West'Midlands police might retain the originals or
       copies. In fact, the South Yorkshire police appear lo hold the entire archive, except for
       such copies as are stored by the Coroner.


63    Only if tbc investigating police force was truly independent of those it investigated, and
       impartial, could any o f the ftnit inquiries be regarded m full, independent and complete.
       If U were demonstrated that the West Midlands police inquiry was not independent, but
       that lluil force luid in fact, regarded itself as acting as the ugcnt of South Yorkshire police,
       no weight could be attached tn its reports, ond the value of the conclusions of those to
       whom their officers reported is diminished


The history o f the claim that South Yorkshire 'awn'the iTrdiive: and. thiiL Jh^v “am i* »r urc
W rndptik* o f tire *infonnationM



April to August 1VSQ: The i'uroner. L a id Taylor an d tftc tu'o private police invest i^adans


6*1    H was reported in the newspapers on IT '1* A p ril 1980 that the C h ie f Constable o f the
                                      ■ ' '.’Or'-
       South Yorkshire Police, Peter Wright, had asked the Chief Constable of the West
       Midtaiuis Policc, Gcof&cy Dear, on 16* April “to nominate a senior otficcr to carry out
       an investigation into the policing ofthe match* It is not known wh.it power was invoked
       by Mr Wright in making that request This appears lo be the same subject for which Mr
       Phillips was commissioned as ancxpert witness in 1989. and. if the April prctw reports
       were accurate, the Phillips report may have been commissioned by West Midlands police
       in the furtherance of this role. Other early prey's reports, however, make it clear that Mr
       Dear's officer was to rcpon to;the TayljC* Inquiry, which had been announced by tlie
       Government on 16* April.                ::' ;


ti5    On 16* April 1989, the Assistant CliicfConstable of West Midlands, John Mervyn Jones,
       was nominated by Dear as an investigating officer. According lo the evidence of Jones
       to the “mini-inqucst* in April 1990 (Annex!), he met the Coroner on Tuesday 18* April
        1989 when Popper first gave instructions to him to gather evidence on Popper's behalf.
       “At dial time my other master was Loitl Justice Taylor". Al the time Jones was giving
       evidence Us 1990, the West Midlands police were assembling evidence, he said. for the
       DPI*.


66     It appears to the HFSG. although they cannot he sure o f the point, that West Midlands
       became the force nominated to help Lord Taylor and the other bodies simply becausc
        Wright had asked Dear to investigate on 16th April 1989. The West Midlands force had

                                                  20
bad such poor publicity for Ihe year before April 1989 that h Ls hard to believe that Ihe
I lome Office would h?ve chosen it.


However, it is dear from the reports and statements of the South Yorkshire Police
(supplied to the HFSG this year at the request of llie Home Secretary) tliat by 1?'h April
1989 ihe South Yorkshire policc were carrying out their own investigation into the
policing of the match- The relationship between this and llic .separate West Midlands
policc investigation into the policing of the match, requested by South Yorkshire police,
is unclear.


Ai all events, Mr Jones was reporting to both Ihc Coroner and Ixud Justice Taylor, 'Hie
statements that he and his officers look were taken on behalf of. and Tor Ur: purpose o f
presenting to, one or other o f those persons, or to both of those in succession. U cmnot,
plainly, be said that those statements were taken as agent for. or on belialf of. the South
Yorkshire police office or its Chief Constable, although the fact that Wright first called
in Dear allows a spurious claim to be made for such agency.


On 26* April 1989, a rneetmg occuired in whieh Chief Superintendent Wain of die South
Yorkshire policc said "our job is merely to collate what evidence SouU> Yorkshire poli.or
officers can provide to their Chief Constable in order that we can present a suitable case,
on behalf o f the force, to subsequent enquiries." The accompanying memorandum,
distributed to all officers present ot the ground when the disaster occurred, said "This
exercise has no connection with tbe investigation into the policing of the T.A. Cup semi­
final which is being conducted by the Chief Constable of the West Midlands." (See
SUwrt^Smith report, pages 78-9; and questionnaires contained at the beginning of the file
.submitted on 24* August 1998.) This latter investigation must plainly refer lo the
.investigation commissioned by Mr Wrigjit on 16* April 1989.


It appears therefore that there were four separate investigations at lliis slagc. The Coruna-
had opened the ifKyyyfo forajally.A second was conducted by West Midlands into the
policing o f ll>e match, and ccmi'missioned by South'Yurkshire.            A third was an
      investigation by West Midlands for Lord Taylor. A fourth was an internal Souih
      Yorkshire police investigation inio their own policing, for tbe benefit of presenting
      evidence lo, among others. Lord Taylor (confirmed by Appendix 8 ttvthe Report of Lord
      Justice Stuart-Smith. page 211).


71    This fourth investigation, conducted by the South Yorkshire police, appears lo have luid
         full and unimpeded access to ail the papers, unrestrained by any restrictions imposed by
         West Midlands police, See the two-page memorandum of Peter Carr. K1A for example,
         dated 25''*' April, in which he spoke of the briefing, which, tbe Chief Constable (of South
         Yorkshire) had with “Operational Staff on 16'\ 17th and 19* April. He also referred to
         various documents in his longer twenty- page report of ihe same day. of video tapes and
         photographs, which were obviously in the possession of die South Yorkshire, not West
         Midlands, investigators. These Carr documents are ArvwsJ. Why hail ihe West Midlands
         policc not taken. these exhibits Tor their own inquiries?


72    it is clear from the report o f l.ord Justice Stuart-Sroith that the South Yorkshire oflicers
         drafted their own statements, and that the editing was done not by West Midlands oHioon*
         but by South Yorkshire officers or Haxnmond Suddards.-(See Report, page 78-79). but
         apparently for the purpose of presenting evidence to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry, and to any'
         other official investigation.'


August         la August 1990: the investigationJot the DPP


7.1   Alter the Taylor interim report was published, it appears that in August 1989, the Chief
         Constable of South Yorkshire wrote to the Director of Public Prosecutions, requesting
         a derision in relation to criminal liability. ‘Ihe Director or Public Prosecutions
         commenced an investigation by writing to Mr "Wright on 15* August 1989, saying that
         the matrer should be the subject o f a’full investigation. ‘The West Midlands Poliee had
         already done considerable work, in gathering evidence tor Lord Justice Taylor's Bnquisy.
         It seemed sensible therefore to invite Mr Geoffrey Dear QPM DL LLB, Chief Constable
         of the West Midlands Policc Force; to undertake this investigation.* (Sec Report of Chief
      Constable to South Yorkshire Police Authority of JTh November 1980. Anwxj & para
      5..V The report went on to assen that the West Midhmds policc     \ vctc   also acting tor the
      Coroner and the Police Complaints Authority.


74   On 5'h January 1990 the Chief Constable reported that the West Midlands policc
      investigation into the disaster was being conducted “independently”.


75   The D irecto r received the M aster Witness List, the W est M idlands Police Report, and

      attached statements, exh ib its, and transcripts o f evidence, in this period, probably in

      A pril. On ft* August 1990, Wading counsel advised against prosecution, imd the decision

      that there w o u ld be ru> prosecutions was announced by the DPP on 30,b August I 9^0.
                                            / V. U '




April I9HV lo March 1991; the inquests: the roles o f West Midlands police untf Hammond
Snddunh



76    U is nccessary lo consider, not just Hie role of ihe West Midlands policc, but the position
      of Hammond Suddanis in the case. They were the solicitors who have acted for the South
      Yorkshire police throughout mostofJhe.<?iyil.proceedings,'including two House of I .ords
      eases, and on behaH'of the force althii yaripus inquiries. (Weighlman Rutherfords aeled-
      in sonic civil proceedings lor. Soi^.YoHtshin* police in about 1992. and perhaps later.
      V/inkworth and Pernbcrton. acted for them in the ‘Scrutiny*.} Lord Justicc Sluart-Smith'*
      report shows the prominent pari played by Mr Metcalf of that firm in the early stages of
      the Taylor Inquiry (see pages 78-81, and 211). Mr Meteal for an assistant attended the
      “Business Meetings", to which interested lawyers and others were invited by the Coroner,
      before the main and Interim inquests were held, lor the purposc of managing the inquest.
      Mr Mctealf ^poke o f both the coronal and civil law aspect* of the ease, and was clearly
      concerned in each. Copies o f notes of these Business Meetings are attached as dilMZKJj.


77    At page 0 o f ibe minutes o f ihe meeting of 26,h Februsffy 1990. Mr Metcalf made the
      following observation;
         "In general terms, an inquest takes place before a civil action and it's always
         legitimate expense lo go and he represented at the Inquest because something
         might cotnc out that will be relevant to the civil action.’


In April and May 1990, the Coroner held “mini-inquests" at which contentious aoss-
cxarnirtation. was not allowed, so as not to,‘’prejudice* the investigation o f the DI*P and
any possible criminal proceedings. The cvidencc adduced asserted that in all casts, death
had followed rapidly from unconsciousness, which.had followed rapidly from the crush.
A   amscquence of this.-of course, is that damages for pre-death suffering would h e               low er

than if suffering had been greater.
                                    .....




                                -■ . . .    \ /.rC v -'..:;   .   '
In June 1990, Mr Justice Hidden heard civil eases in which the evidence o f .sudden death,
given at the mini-inquests, was adduced. That evidence defeated the families* claims fu r
damages for pro-death suffering; The apportionment of liability between the police and
other parties, such as Sheffield Wednesday I'octba!]                  C lu b ,   wax not determined until
October 1990.


In September 1990, the C t ^ i ^ 'D r ’P opp«, announced that the full inquest would be
resumed in November. At this tltrw. South Yorkshire policc was defending itself in.a
number of civil actions, including the,issues whether claims could be mode by those who
had watched events on ielevi»bri,ajul appeals by the victims' families in the pre-death
suffering cases. Further litigation was outstanding in relation u> a number of spectators
or relatives o f victims who were present at the match and had suffered injury or mental
trauma.                                       -


The three-year limitation period had not expitvJ. A verdict of unlawful killing at the
inquest might lead to prosecutions, in spite o f die Director's earlier decision. At the tunc
it was known, and topical in the nows, that prosecutions by the Director in the Zecbrugge
case had been comtmenced only alter a verdict of unlawful killing ut the inquest, mul the
DP? had declined to prosecute at an earlier stage. •
       (

     m2    On 30 Octobcr 2990, HttmniOiKl Suddsrdo were represented at <i                 McctUi^ by
           Belinda Norcliffe o f Ilammond Suddards. (She had announced at payo I of the minute*
           of 6* March J990 that she was IVom lhat finn). The Coroner announced at rhnl fncctin^
           (pages 9-11 o f the minutes for that day) that he would not he distributing copies of
           statements at the inquest (p 10- 11) and also that he would not be eircula'ing a list of
           witnesses ho intended to call (middle of page 10). He also announced that lie
           proposing to hnpose a “cut-ofP1time in respect of the disaster, after which tLiie no events
           would be ihe subject of inquiry.


    • 83   The Ciiiun of "agency". Attached is correspondence of November 199!) in the eases of
           Sarah and Victoria Tlicks (Annex \ f ) . On J 5* November 1990. Mervyn Jones. Assistant
           Chief Constable of the West Midlands Police, wrote to the solicitor for Trevor Hicks.
           Chairman of the HFSG. in response 10 a letter which Mr Hicks's solicitor wrote for the
           specific purpose o f arguing that the Coroner should not impose a “cut-off’ time ol 3.15
           pm.


      84   *1lie leUer m3dc itcicsrthuv« statement c f Psttl fflylor couki nc* he reJested wiiho”! f e
           pcrmission o f South Yorkshire policc. The utterly extraordinary assertion is made that
           the West Midlands police wetc ’constitutionally’ the agent of South Yorkshire police.
           Taylor’s statement was taken by the West Midlands police (see Stunrt-Sniith report, pa«»:
           72, paragraph 15) on 8lh May 1989. West. Midlands policc were the ’agents'- of ix>id
           Taylor and the C orner jr. Asking it. It would of course have been impossible for the
^          lawyers acting for South Yorkshire policc to advise On the’propriety bt discl<isinji it
            unless the South Yorkshire police had the body of evidence of which it formed part, oi
            at least had access to it.


      85   A lkr legal argument on 19th NVvercbcr 1990, when the inquest reconvened, the ( oroner
            formally imposed this “cut-off, a ruling which has been the cause of greui controversy
            and resentment among the Liverpool families. It shielded the South’t orkshire polivc
            from. much embarrassing inquiry. Mr Hicks had not been given luylor s staicnu-jx-
            South Yorkshire police, not the Coroner, had refused to give it tn him. The suhjeet
     formed one of ihe grounds on which judicial review was applied for in 1993, and is
     discusscd in Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s report.


X6   In this connection, therefore, Mr Mervyn Jones gave the advice Hint the South Yorkshire
     policc was responsible for advising on ihe question of disclosing matters relevant to-the
     jury's decision: the South Yorkshire police hod the "ownership" of the information. The
     actions of the South Yorkshire police were o f course at the centre of the inquexi. They
     were under attack. The proposition that the Coroner had had responsibility tor the release
     of information at .some earlier period, but did not have it as the main inquest was uboul
     lo begin, is ridiculous and legally indefensible. The conflict of imerest in         S outh

     Yorkshire police and their lawyers whs severe.


*7   The role of Chief Superintendent Bcechey, The letters to and from Sandra Stringer
     throw further light on this (Ann?x NY On 2Xih March 1991 Chief Superintendent
     Beechey of the Wesl Midlands Police, on behalf of Mavyn Jones, wrote to Mrs Stringer
     in terms adapted from the letter to Mr fljclcs o f November I99fo. Mr Reechcv's namo
     will be familiar to the CPS. Me was fortunately able to find the lime to prepare himself
      for the task of acting ns Coroner's officer, which he eventually performed on a daily
     basis, bccause, as a former Head o f    West Midlands Serious Crime Squad, he had been,
     removed in. August 1989 from operational duties after thui squad hnd been disbanded, so
     low had its reputation sunk-


88   These facts are sel out is “Unsafe and Unsatisfactory”, an indepcndcul report by Tim
     Kaye in 199!. Appendixes A and C to that report arc attached (Annex O). Appendix A
     supplies the interesting information that in.t989-90, West Midlands investigated South
      Yorkshire: (page 85); South Yorkshire investigated Wesj Yorkshire; and West Yorkshire
     in turn investigated West Midlands No doubt no serious faults in police officers were
     detected by any of these enquiries. Appendix C shows that Beeehey was removed lrom
     operational duties in August 1989, -but was restored in time to act as Coroner’s officer lor
     the bulk o f the inquest from 30* November 1990. and to deal with the question ol
     disclosure o f information.

                                              26
                                                                       / u i   i i j/ojuyy




89    The penultimate paragraph of Becchcy’s letter to Sandra Stringer o f 28th March 1 I
      indicates that the South Yorkshire policc had “directed." him not to disclose material, after
      advice had been taken: South Yorkshire were the “principals* of the information.
      Information could only he released on the order of a cmirt which could include that of the*
      coroner. In the coursc of the inquest, Mr Hicks had not been told of the advicc that had
      been given, presumably by Hammond Suddaids. The transcripts of ihe inquest
      proceedings show no reference to the disclosure of statements. The notification of this
      new policy camc too ]aie. The 28!h March was thy last day of the inquest.


‘>0   While the inquest was continuing, therefore, and South Yorkshire p o lice had the power
      lo determine disclosure, they, the “principals*, did not disclose. Only when the inquest
      was over was it alleged that the legal advicc was to the effect that the Coroner could have
      taken this decision. The Coroner’s approach to this question, and the severe difficulties
      facing the families before, during* and after the inquest, arc evident from the Idlers in
      Annex N.


 1    It may be expected that, if South Yorkshire police had access to all the material in 1990-1
      for the inquest and far civil proceedings, the individual officers who were represented.ut-
      tho inquest also bad similar access. No conflict of interest appears to have embarrassed
      Hammond Suddaids oc indeed Winfcworth and Pemberton, the lawyers who advised the
      South Yorkshire police in the course of the “Scrutiny". Winkworth and Pemberton
      reminded the CPS of this when they wrote on Mr DuekcnQcld’s behul f in July 190X. The
      flFSG beiieves ihai South Yorkshire Police Authority are funding the defence of both
      defendants, and the close relationship between that force and the defendants is lurther
      proved by tbe fact that Puckcnfield instructed lawyers who had worked closely with the
      South Yorkshire policc, and who. it Is to be presumed, have knowledge of the history of
      the control of documents in this ease.




                                                27
The fu rth e r sig n ifica n ce o f the P h illip s *In q u iry a n d R eport “



92      Reference has been made already to the PhiUips "Inquiry arid Report”. The Coroner had
         said at the “Business Meeting" on 30,b October 199C that lie would not distribute copy
         statement. However, it now appears that the Weal Midlands policc, acting among: other
         capacities as Coroners’ officers, had been supplying copies of statements o ('L iv erpo o l
         supporters to the South Yorkshire poiicc before tliaf date. 'fhis is apparent from
         Appendix C to the Phillips Report. Phillips had been {isked in Octobcr 1989, allegedly
         by   the South Yorkshire police, to prepare an “Inquiry and Report” into the policing of the
         match by South Yorkshire police, and had also been nsked at some point to inquire into
         Oic behaviour o f Liverpool supporters on the occasion of the disaster.


93      it will be seen from the Appendix to the report that, although most of those witnesses
         gave evidence at the Taylor inquiry, many did not, and it is reasonable lo conclude that
         (heir statements came to Mr PhiLtips froni South Yorkshire police, who in turn obtained
         them from the West Midlands poticc.


94      | f the inference is eorrccithar Soutiv.Ydrkshire police had access to papers from the West
         Midlands policc for the purpose o f the-Phillips report, it is obvious that the We,st
         Midlands policc co o sid(^'^i^i^> «|* iiQ m )ai to provide the South Yorkshire police,
         but not the families, with any information gained in the cuursc of that inquiry

                                 ■y    *k )" “*!.* •.
95      The Jones letter o f November 1.990, cited above, suggests that Maiuniond Kuddnrds
         were advising South Yorkshire police on ihcir obligations as to whether u> disclose
         documents wanted for use at the inquest. If Jones was telling the truth. South
         Yorkshire was able to deprive the lamiliea of materials at the inquesL but to have full
         or extensive access, as the Phillips report shows, lo the statements and evidence
         collected by the West Midlands police. Iii this way, the inquest, ostensibly objective
         and dispassionate, is now shown to have been manipulated by South Yorkshire police
         for their own ends, and by. West Midland? policc. Tor this reason, the defendants flrc
         not entitled to i«ly uponthc inquest verdicts to put an end to this prosecution.
the continuing role o f Hammond Suddards


%     Peter Metcalf of Hammond Suddards continued lo advise South Yorkshire police on
      (he subject of disclosure after the inquest. See, lor example, the letter from Miss Steel
      to M rT eareofl 6,hJuly 1991 contained in Annex >V. Metcalf is, of course, the
      lawyer who is currently advising the South Yorkshire police not to disclose any of the
      documents in their possession to anyone at nil. fTc has written u> the RFSO that “That
      policy will continue to be applied impartially to prosecutor, defendants und to any
      other party” (letter of 17'h August, page 202 of Hie submitted on 24"' August) and "In
       the interests o f fairness and justice this policy will apply to all requests received.”
      (letter 7’1’ August, same file, page 206).


07    Mr Metcalf did not reveal, as we have recently been informed by a confidential
       source, that South Yorkshire Pbliee A u th o rity ait; funding the defence of the present
       defendants; a fact which he mt^hl havc thought il proper to disclose when he claimed
      a principled impartiality in the handling of confidential materials, and when he
      asserted tlial neither he nor the Chief Constable was aware of any ewnmcl of interest.


I 'WJ-199 I; The role o f the Police Complaints 'Authority


       ()n the retirement o f Geoffrey Dear at the bcgitfabig of April 1990, ihe investigation
      supervised by the PCA was taken over by the Chief Constable of the Cumbria policc.
       Attached as Annex P arc a number of PCA formal reports of Auyuxi 1v90, which
      suggest that officers from the Cumbria police force performed » central investigative
       role after April 1990.


99    On 11thJuly 1991 the Policc Compfeints Authority directed the South Yorkshire
       Policc to bring disciplinary charges for neglect o f duty against Duckenfield and
       Murray. On 261* July 1991, Mr l^uclcenfield. who tod been suspended from duly in
       August 1989 after the interim report o f I x>rd Taylor, went on “sick leave*, though still
            U u i OI     i / o\j




      suspended.


100   Or: 10f!*November 1991, the Chief Constable cf South Yorkshire retired Mr
       Duckcn Fidd on health grounds, after a report had been submitted by a local police
      surgeon. Thereafter. South Yorkshire police asked permission Jo abandon the chargc
      against Mr Murray, and wers cJ.'cwed ti> by the PCA, on Lte “round lhai it would be
      “unfair" iu proceed against Mr Murray for whai was in effect u joint charge. A public
      announcement lo this effect was made on I3,!) January 1992. Subsequently, Mr
       Murray also retired on “health grounds".


101    It is submitted that no proper legal basis can exist for claiming that document.';,
       collected for the Police Complaints Authority by the Cumbria police, can he said to be
       the property of South Yorkshire. Those reports must contain confidential material
      about the conduct of South Yorkshire police officer?. Can it possibly be said that
       Cumbria policc or the PCA were the "agents’ of South Yorkshire police?


The /aw relating to acccxx to police documents


IU2   There is no reason to impute had faith to the <.'otoner fur his decision of 10lh October. •
       1990 not to disclose statements. though the decision was deprcssingly unhelpful: no
       doubt he was ignorant o f the feet that South Yorkshire had had copics or the West
       Midlands material. If the Coroner had known that, it is impossible to imagine that he
       would have withheld access to those statements by the bereaved families.


103   There Ivivc been a number o f eases in the last twenty years in wluch the courts have
       considered the confidentiality of papers acquired by police in the course o f
      iiYvcstigiitions. In a letter to Sandra Stringer ai Annex N above, the Coroner, Mr
      Dorries wrote on a dace in 1993 that he was constrained by the ease o f R v.
       Hammersmith Coroner, cx parte- Peach 11980] Q.B. 211 to witWioId information that
       had not been produced ia the inquest, exccpt where Rule 57 required him lo supply
      copies o f documents put in evidence at the Inquest

                                                30
               u*o i ljui/ju                 11   *    o   u      •   ✓u a « i   yo o u y y     fy.   %j c




104   ll is submitted that this approach by Mr Domes, advanced in good 1'ailh. is wrong.
      The Peach ease decides only that where documents have been compiled or crcuicd by
      a police force in the course of a disciplinary enquiry imo its own officers, those
      papers   remain the property of the police force. Jn this case, Jones was appointed by
      the Coroner from the outset lo act as his, tlie Coroner's, agenL


105   A series of decision after 1981 dealt with the question of access to documentation for
      civil proceedings which was in the possession o f the police. The principal cases are
      Neilsen v_ Lauj^tamc [1981} Q.B. 736. Campbell v, Tamcside [ 1QX2| 1 Q.B. 1065,
      Hchir v, Chief Constable of Police for the Metronnlis f19821 I WJ..K. 7i5. iVach v,
      CummissiQacr of Police for the Metropolis T198611 Q.B. 1064.l;ynn$ v^.CikT
      Constable of .Surey 11988] 1 Q.B. 588, Makaniuola V-Commisioner of Policc for tlx;
                                          -•'.tv-
      fclclrm lis          Q.B. 455, Parcel v. CoromissiaiterpIPojic'? for Iha MsJmpjiliij
      11 W2J 2 W.I..R. 50„ and R v. Chief Constable of-V/est Midinnds Police . cx parlc
      Wiley [ 1W5] A.C. 274.


106   This is not the occasion for a consideration as to whether the Chief Cunstable of South
      Yorkshire Policc can claim public interest immunity for the archive he holds.
      However, until the WfleVc&effi seemed dear dial if documents had been col’ccted or
      obtained for the purposc.pnecipsl.fyofa disciplinary investigation info complaints
      against police officers, public interest inununity ^’attached to those documents on a
      “class” basis. Kencc. if it could be cmimcd that &police force was taking statements
      for the primnry purpose of investigating complaints, it was very hard for members of
      the public or interested parties to obtain copies.


107    However, the existence of th!$ line of cases suggests that the JSouth Yorkshire policc
      believed that they could claim possession of the eatire archive on the ground thai they
      had appointed West Midlands police to investigate matters o f n disciplinary character,
      that West Midlands policc had therefore been its “agents": and that, as a further
      advantage, public interest immunity attached to the contents of The archive.



                                                      31
                                              »«   i    * J t j        ' u   w   i u   y   u   o   u   y   y




108    It is submitted that such a claim would be wholly ■vvregg. cveu absurd, and that the
       prosecution is being wrongly frustrated in its legitimate desire to obtain sight ol
       probative statements to give further support to its ease. The documents arc nut the
       property of South Yorkshire: they surely "belong to” one or mom of the various
       oOIcinJ bodies that have inquired into the case.


10<>   1lowever. the very claim of ownership by South. Yorkshire, and the al leged
       relationship of principal and agent, demolish by liirin.selves the contradictory claim
       that the previous inquiries have been served by an independent Force. South Yorkshire
       police can be said lo “o\ra" the.archive only if West Midlands police were working,
       not independently, but in reality as agents for South Yorkshire policc From 16':' April
       1989. whatever their other responsibilities.


                Public interest and “interests' o f justice* factors: M PbhtwUv


110    Tlie solicitors for Mr Duekenfiekl. advance the adverse publicity o f the 1096
       McGovern draina-documcntaiy as a factor in this review, it is submuted that the eff’cei
       o f publ icity over the years must be a matter fat tho judge or magistrate considering an
       abuse o f process applieationto consider "in the round*, together with all other relevant
       factors. Any prejudicial publicity in this case towards the defendants is minor
       compared to       against defendants in the eases of Rosemary W est. Kevin and lan
       Maxwell, the James Bulger defendants, the Kray brothers, the Guinness trial, the
       proposed Lockerbie defendants," the Moore murderers, and muny others. In fact, as
       Lord Taylor found, there was widespread, false and defnmarory propaganda pul about
       in 1989 by South Yorkshire police officers to the prejudice ol'Liverpool supporters.
       This prejudice has never been completely dispelled.




                                                   yi
                    .u   u i ;ju                                       U t • t O v xj \ J U J J




                           The limitations oflhr Stuor(-Smith report


11   The defendants invite the CPS to heed the conclusions of the “Scrutiny1*. It is
     submitted that the conclusions of Lord Justice Stnart?Smith in relation to "new
     cvidonce* arc not significant in this review. That report upheld the perioral approach of
     1 -ot'd Taylor, on which the prosecution relies, but its review of “new evidence"' was
     confined to the evidence tendered as new in 1996. However, lhat exorcise was
     necessarily a limited one. because the J.iverpooi families hiid bc-on starved of evidence
     for years. The existence of the edited statements was unknown. One example only.
          Frost, was offered to the “Scmtiny” by a third party. The scale of the editing, now
     revealed, exceeds anything shown to lx>rd Justice Stuart-SiniLii.


12   Further, it is submitted that caution has U>be employed in accepting fuels set out in
     the report. It has been pointed out that the conclusions about ihc edited siatements are
     seriously wrong. The dates on page 1, in paragraphs: 4 and 5. .should read 11* July
     199J' find 19* November 1991. Duckenfield did nol.rctire at the beginning of the
     main inquest. Me gave evidence to it in fuli uniform. The "auiumn »»f i 990" in
     paragraph 6 should resd .'^O^ .August ]991T- In paragraph 15. page 87. it is wrongly
     asserted that the main inquest began in March 1991: in fact it began on I9,h November
     1990.


13   The South Yorkshire policy o f making statements available to relatives, described at
     pages 89-90, is inconsistent with the history of difficulty experienced by. for example,
     Sumlra. Stringer (See Annex N". above). The discussion of the decisitm not u»
     prosecute for manslaughter (page 10, paragraphs 53,56 and 57) uses the word
     “recklessness*. There is no recognition of the significance of the decision in
     Adomakn which replaces the. complicated "recklessness” test apparently applied in
     1990, and reinstated the gross negligence test.


14   The StUdrt*Sraith report is itself economical with information. For example, only
     small parts of Ihe advice o f counsel in 1990 are set out. The provision o f the whole

                                                      .      33




                                        ;<   SsiS              I?-?'
                                        ;           j1**?'
                           ..   t.< *                        i:--. ■
  S \J   k sj .   J                        tt   I   o v l               ' U   X I I J / v J O U / /




          advice is required, so that the whole reasoning is apparent, rather than a lew snippets.
          Clearly, privilege has been waived by the provision of that report to the “Scrutiny".
          Why do South Yorkshire police have the advice and the West Midlands police report?
          If the CPS advises that a driver should not be prosccutcd for manslaughter, a copy of
         that advice ii>not sent to him or his employer. Why does tho Coroner have the West
          Midlands police report in addition to the statements? Does he have the advicc of
          counsel? Why in these circumstances is the prosecutor in this case not given access to
          these documents?


i 15       The terms of reference of the “Scrutiny* are set out at pages v and vi. They called
          upon Lord Justice Stuart-Smithto examine whether any evidence existed which was
          not available to. among others, tbe DPP. The knowledge available to the l-il;SG now.
          from the 35 statements, the Master Witness List, and the edited statements, proves that
          materia! was not available, and information of a critical kind had been withheld.


116       There is no evidence that I^ord Justice Siuari-Sraiih saw the Master ’w itness List, or
          knew what maierial the DPP had considered. There is no ground tn believe thai he
          sought to compare the evidence available to the Director with the total evidence
           available. He looked only at the comparatively small pieces o f new evidence then -
          known to the families. A “Scrutiny* is an unusual legal animal. Absolutely no
           opportunity was given to the HFSG,before it was published, to sec the edited and
           unedited unsworn ststsntsnts. Thu Group was evoti denied access lo the statement of
           P.C. Bichard, whose account was at the centre of the matters under investigation.
           Control over the archive was maintained.


117        If the HFSG had known then what the Home Secretary has allowed it to discover
           since, it is submitted that thc icsuhoftfcc “Scrutiny” would have been very different,
           and that the flaws and partiality o f previous investigations would have been exposed.
           A "Scrutiny" is an inquiry, it seems, with little opportunity for those whose concerns
           have prompted its establishment to ask questions, only to he questioned. *1be accouni
            given hy Roger Houldsworth is set out in fulL ami bis evidence criticised. The wport




                                            ot.jsrevic
                                                                        ✓ UA<   i




         doc.s noi even mention the conversations {.cud Justice Stuart-Smith had with the
       . defendants in the present ease, which the UFSCi know took place?, bevau.se Lord
         Justice Stuart-Smith referred to them casually in discussion with one of the families.


                  The frustration o f the Home Secretary's order fo r disclosure


118      1 lie TIFSG docs not have copics of the West Midlands police report nor the advice of
         counscl. It is submitted that justice requires that they should ho disclosed to the
         Group. In R v. Saunders [1996] 1 Cr. App. R. 463. Lord Taylor CJpt limed out at page
         479B-C and 485C that the Serious Fraud Office and Department of Trade and
         Industry had disclosed in thai appeal quantities of documents Ihat would normally be
         expccted u.) attract claims of public interest immunity and legal professional privilege.
         Public bodies arc usually prepared to disclose matters when they have nothing to hide,
         considerations o f confidentiality notwithstanding. When the documents they possess
         are embarrassing, they seek, to withhold the in by invoking the "public interest” find
         “privilege”.


11 9      The recent secrecy o f the South.Yorkshire police. acting under the advice of
         Hammond Suddarda, merely ii^cnsifi^ the justified belief of the Liverpool Gimilics..
         that they have been manipulated and chcatcd over the years, that the DPP was misled
         in I‘>90 when he took his decision on the basis of careiuily selected mutcriui. and that
         the course c f justice    beenperverted.


120      Copies o f these submissions and supporting documents will be sent to the Home
         Secretary and Attorney-General, who was included In the terms of reference set out in
         Lord Justice Stuait-Smith’s report, and to those Liverpool Members of Parliament
         who have supported the HFSG this year in attempting to obtaiu fulier access to the
         materials considered in the “Scrutiny*, os promised by the I tome Secretary.




                                                  35
                                                                                         z. (><>(. < n ° > s




                               Adlingto.n v. Murray: Adlinyton v. Duckenlield


                         Supplementary Representations on behalf of-lhe fe i&SU&r


                                  Auemptim: to pervert the cour.se o jju st set'

        }      A summary o f the evidence on this charge was not attempted in the substantial
               Representations o f 24th September 1998. The evidence o f this charge against M r
               Uuekenlleid is com pelling. und much stronger, it ?s submitted, than was presented to
               the DPP by W est M idlands Police in 1990. The fact that previous inquiries were
               seriously m isled about this aspect by M r Duckcntieid, South Yorkshire and West
               M idlands police, appears from the facts set out below.


        2      Lord Taylor found, at page 16, paragraph 98 of his Interim Report, that Mr
               Duckenfteld m isled Graham K elly and Glen Kirton o f the F .A . and Graham M ack roll
               oi Sheffield W ednesday, at a tim e when he knew there were fatalities (and that there
               would therefore be an inquest and no doubt other formal inquiries). Duekcnfield
               indicated that a gate had been forced and there had been an inrush o f supporters, and
               pointed out to them the gate allegedly forced on the screen.


        .>    K elly gave this evidence on D ay 25, page 58 and p 83. Kirton on D ay 26, page 5.1.
               K irton's statement makes it clear that deaths had occurred at the time o f this
               conversation which took place in the Control Box, and that this was obvious from the
               Control Box. N either was in any doubt about the conversation. M ackrcl! could not
               remember details o f the conversation at the T aylor Inquiry. (A s may be imagined,
               neither K elly nor K irton was called at the Inquest.)


        4     When M r D ysca for tkc Football Association put to Duckenfield that he had told this
               lie ( 25!* M a y , p 112). there was a half-hearted admission from Ouckcnlleld. hut a
               denial o f an intention to deceive, and M r Duckenficld claimed to have been in a “state
               o fs h o c k ".

J   .
        The transmission o f the lie to (be Fire Brigade

        5     Andrew C ollins Q C spoke in his Opening to the Taylor Inquiry on 15lh M ay 19X9 o f a
               record o f the Fire Brigade received at 3.14 pm;


                       “There has been a m ajor accident at Hillsborough Football ground, i he
                      crowds have forced th eir w ay in. ITiey have broken fences and the gale down.
                       I don't know exactly what it is but there are people trapped."

        6      M s S.!-. Davies from the Fire Servicc produced the recording at Day 20. p 42.




                                                           1
7     Mr Coiiins did not question Mr Duckecfidd about this He, which was not in itself, ami
      without further information, attributable to him. However, Duckenficld was asked in
      cross-examination by Mr Hytner about it. He replied at pages 94-5 (same day) “J
      have never heard of that”, and. when asked if he could help as to the "genesis of the
      belief of a police officer that there had been a breaking down of a gate by fans*. said
      “No”. (95C). This wan a lie* as bis later admissions in the course of evidence
      demonstrate.


The transmission o f the lie to the Ambulance Service

X     To M r Kal'ipctis, representing the Ambulance Service, Duckenficld replied that he
      had asked r.C. Biehard to call tor ambulances (1! 5D), and that Bichard had contacted
      Snig Hill Police Station. Mr Kaiiipetis disclosed that the ambulance service had
      received a telephone call from Snig Hill at 15.06 pm saying, inter alia, “Apparently ai
      one of the gates they have been pushing, pushing and shoving. I understand one of
      the gntes has col lapsed or broke." (same day. p 121C-f>)

■)    Dueken Held could not explain that message, but accepted that he had asked Bichard in
      the Control Room to telephone Snig Hill (121 E-F). Ducken field did, however, say
      that the officer at Snig Hiii was Chicflnspector Edmondson (119K). Obviously that
      officer had relayed the message, or caused it to be relayed, to both Fire and
      Ambulance services.


The transmission o f (he lie to (he BBC

10     John Motson. the BBC commentator, says that he understood as the disaster became
       apparent that fans were said to have broken down a door or gate, (statement of 4,fcMay
        1989).


The misk'tu.fi}?}* nfthe management o f Sheffield Wednesday Foothail ( 'tub

11    Duckciiitcld accepted the questions put bv Mr Glasgow on behalf of the club that “he
      withheld the information that the decision to open the gates had been a policc one
       from 'everybody on the afternoon in question * (26/5/8l>, 24!;-<i) and allowed die club
      to continue to believe that the supporters had broken die gates down (p 24-6), but for
      “good motives’'.

12    Uuckenfield refused to answer questions about this in detail at the inquest, but said he
      could not remember what he had said on the topic. It is submitted that Duckcnfield
      lied to the Coroner's jury in saying this.
The transmission o f the lie (a the management o f Liverpool Football Club.

13     Two witnesses will be called by the prosecution to show that Duckcnfield lied. H.i i.
       judge i'lisut' and Peter Robinson, Chief Executive of the 1.ivcrpool Club, were told the
       same sa>rv in the formal circumstances of the Boardroom about 3.30pm. lie told
       them and the late- John Smith, Chairman of Liverpool Football Club, that the
       Liverpool fans had forced the gates, after which they. Kitsor and Robinson, went oft'to
       investigate, and found no damage to the gates.


The accounts o f Assistant C hief Constable Jackson

       Further reluctant evidence of the lies told by Duckentleld comes from Assistant Chid
       Constable Jackson, who said, when asked about conversations in the presence of
       Kelly and Makreii, ~i have a feeling that somebody mentioned something about
       storming the gates”. (30/5/89, page 7, 7A.-B). “1 have a. feeling it v v j w somebody in the
       llox that said that. In fact 1 think it may have been Mr i )uckenfie!d\ he was able to
       recall. Jackson said he learned the true facts only from Superintendent Marshall ut
       about 4.15 (7G), Until then he believed that the supporters hud forccd the gate. (p46).

15     At the Inquest, although Jackson said that Duckcnfieid was “doing a superb job*, at
       about 3.12pni (Day 63, page 14), he repeated that he "thought* it was Duckenlield
       who had told Kelly that the gates had been “stormed", adding mysteriously that “in a
       way that would be right because I think there were iwo gates stormed,” There is i\o
       evidence to support this extraordinary assertion.

The a!tempt to limit the number and effect o f Duekenfteld's lies.

io    On 25"’ April 1989, DS Carr reported on the internal investigation into the policing of
      the match being conducted by South Yorkshire police, apparently in parallel to the
      similar investigation allegedly being conducted by West Midlands police. His
      statements are at Annex K of the file of 24* September. Page 3 refers to notes of the
      Chief Constable's Briefing with Operational Staff of 16*. 17“*and i 9~ April. These
      notes, presumably, remain in the exclusive possession of South Yorkshire Police, and
      have not been disclosed. Duckenfseld's contribution to one of these meetings is
      recorded at the foot of page 8, but it is concluded towards the foot of page 10 that “It
      is not known whether it [Gate C j was opened as a result of pressure from fans or in
      response to Superintendent Marshall's earlier request, or otherwise.” Iherc is a
      strangely imprecise reference on the next page, in the context of gates in genera!, that
      “In the briefing notes Chief Superintendent Dueketifield and Sujierintcndenl Marshall
      speak of an acute situation and opening gates to relieve pressure fearing loss of life."

17    These briefings and assertions surely intensified the need for South Yorkshire and
      West Midlands police to rccohi and investigate the dissemination of Duckenfield’s
      lies. West Midlands police appear to have left South Yorkshire almost entirely to their
      own devices to work out their approach to this thorny question.

                                                3
it is dear from the cross-examination of Duckentield by Mr Kallipetis, referred to at
paragraphs 6 and 7, above, that police records of this Ducke n11e Id-Hdrnund.son
conversation were not known to counsel to the Inquiry. In the course of cross-
examination of Jackson by Mr Kallipctis, it was suggested that the radio messages
passed to Snig Hill had not been recorded by police. (30/5/89 pages 50-1) Chief
Inspector ndmundson was not called before the Taylor fnquiry, and not called at the
Inquest. Fdmurdson has made several unsworn .statements to the South Yorkshire
police, disclosed to us this year, but none, so far ns is known, to the West Midlands
police. The Master Witness List records that a statement or statements of F.dmundson
appeared at pages 2600-2605 in the midst of a succession of statements including
Goddard, Bichard. Ryan, Sanderson and Jackson.

A onc-paye unsworn South Yorkshire statement by Edmuudson of 18lh May 19X9,
made a.-> I.ord Taylor was hearing the evidence, purported to produce "an extract” of
the Racai tape recording of the radio transmissions to and from hi.s control room.
There was no exhibit or exhibit reference attached to the statement, Lidmundson’s
undated tiirce-page “Amended Report" lias no reference to the tape ;ii ail. There is no
indication at all that the Taylor Inquiry was given the tape. The information available
to the prosecution suggests that it was not sent to. the DPP. At no stage in any of his
statements did P-dmundson record that he passed on to the Fire and Ambulance
services ihe allegation that supporters had brokets down gates, although he says in his
statement o fl4 !f' June that he passed on a*tuessaye” to the Fire Service, ft is only on
reading die record produced by the Fire Service that it becomes obvious that
Edmundson passed on the false information at 15.14pm.

None of the statements of South Yorkshire police in April and May 1989 dealt with
the Duckenficld lies. Bichardvwho apparently made the call to hdmundsom did not
deal with them in his eleven-page unsworn South Yorkshire .statement of May
 1995, nor in his two-page West Midlands statement oH ImMay. 1knvover. Bichard
gave a llircc-puge statement to West Midlands police on 9 :h January 1990, agreeing in
pari with the Kelly/Kirton account, but suggesting that Duckeniicld had been
innocently referring to the earlier opening of Gate C to eject a fan. It is not clear
which of Bichard’s statements were sent to the Director, but they occupy eleven pages
in the M aster Witness List, the same length as the statement of 3 ('1M ay 1989

Jackson's nine-page unsworn South Yorkshire statement, also of 3rd May 1989, failed
io moution the lie at all. fr. marked contrast to his evidence to ToyJor. 27 days later, he
said mereiy. “he [Duckeiifietdj was unable to say what happened at that stage and 1
recollect that the game had been stopped.” Jackson’s statement or statements in the
Master Witness List occupy ten pages and, in spite of his evidence to Taylor, he was
not asked to make a West Midlands statement

DuckenF.eld's undated and unsworn South Yorkshire policc statement fails to mention
the lies at all.
Murray made an unsworn South Yorkshire statement, again tm 3,J May 1989. In his
evidence io ihe Taylor Inquiry, he said he had been in the Control Room when the
first call was made to the ambulances. (31s' May, page 10 i A) This was almost
certainly not the call that referred to the gates being broken. Although Murray was
apparently out of the Control Room when the emergency call was made to
Kdmun&stm. he was in the Control Room for much of the period between 3 05 and
4.15 pin, and told the Taylor Inquiry specifically that he went back at 3.30 pm to find
Ducken field and Jackson there (104F-105A). He loo failed to mention in his statement
that ihcrc had been talk of the supporters breaking down the gates, an allegation that
was known by then to Duckenfieid, Jackson, senior members of both football clubs,
ITre and Ambulancc services, the BBC, untold numbers of television viewers, m the
1 Initcd Kingdom and abroad, and large numbers of supporters at the ground.

I    i v t Ryan
            1 U i (seven-page unsworn South Yorkshire statement of 5/5/K9 and 2 page

unsworn South Yorkshire statement of !9/5/89} nor Goddard (12 page unsworn South
Yorkshire statement 5/5/89) mentions the lies at all. Neither appears lo have heett
questioned about them by West Midlands police. Ryan's statement or statements
occupy 8 pages in the Master Witness List; Goddard's 12.

A striking aspect of the evidence of the South Yorkshire police officers on this
question is how late their statements are dated. Few contemporaneous notes are
referred to, aud no witness or other statements were produced until nearly three weeks
after the disaster from those senior and Control Box officers most closely involved. In
early May, of course, over a hundred junior officers had provided original unsworn
statements, and were also signing secondary versions, edited for them by the same
interna! South Yorkshire inquiry which was no doubt taking a close interest in the
statements of senior officers. It is impossible to accept that these crucial witnesses
had not committed some recollections to paper beforehand, which have not been
supplied to the prosecution.

The staieiuenis of James Sharpies, Chief Constable of the Merseyside Police (Annex
L of the files of 24* September 1998), show none of the reticence in dealing with the
subject of Duekenfield’s earliest assertions about the gates as had characterised the
first South Yorkshire statements, Sharpies was able, nearly a year later. Us remember
that Duckenlield’s account to Jackson after 4 pin, which he heard amidst the calm
control and professionalism of which he spoke so highly, was obviously ihe first
reference to the circumstances in which the gates were opened. No-one, he said,
referred to any “storming" by fens of gates.

It has already been pointed out that Sharpies’ fulsome testimonial to the conduct ofhis
South Yorkshire colleagues in presiding over England's gravest sporting tragedy was
strategically inserted between the statements of the principal suspects, Duckenficld
and Murray, in Part V of the papers which me West Midlands Police sent to the DM*
in April 1990. The statement is, of course, at obvious variance with the facLs.
The West Midlands' Police Report

2x     The report of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith’s “Scrutiny* suggests to ihc prosecution that
       the DIM* may not have considered in 1990 the question of a charge ofatfcmpting to
       pervert the course of justice, it is thought likely dial the West .Midlands Police Report
       would have dealt with the DuckciifieJd lie by saying thai the evidence of Kelly and
       Kirton had to he looked at again in the light of the further statements of Bichard and
       particularly Sharpies. It is considered unlikely that the report will have highlighted the
       (act thal the Fire Brigade, Liverpool and Sheffield Wednesday representatives, the
       BBC’ and television viewer-;, were all misled.

( 'onctnsion


29     The true position, it is submitted, is that the Ducken'field iie was repeated to u number
       of persons, carefully mid deliberately, by him, or by others with his encouragement,
       for about an hour as the known numbers of the dead mounted. Tor the purposes of
       misleading an inquest and other legal investigations. At various times afterwards, the
       iie was still used on occasions, or hinted at, or used to confuse. The evidence against
       him is .strong, and its strength was apparently coneea'cd from the DPI*, Taylor and the
       Coroner (who scarcely inquired into this aspect at all). The original lie retains some
       potency to this day. It is still believed by many people.

30     The wider signiiicance of these matters in relation to the integrity of the investigations
       by South Yorkshire and West Midlands police, and to some of the individuals
       discussed above, is obvious. It remains under active study, and will be the subject of
       separate consideration by the HFSG. Of course, these matters further aggravate the
       concerns that the South Yorkshire police ought not to be holding all (he papers.

               Evidence against Duckenfieid on Manslaughter and Misfeasance

31     'No doubt the main features of this are familiar, but it may be helpful to make
        references in outline to some admissions relied on by the prosecution in evidence to
        the Taylor Inquiry.

32     Duekenfseld does not dispute that he looked round the ground on I'1April 1080
       {Taylor Inquiry, 24/5 p J 16) in preparation for the match, fle does not dispute that he
       appreciated the problems of tunnel and pens, lie was aware of the cent ml tunnel. (n
       118)

33     I le accepted that fans were likely to gravitate towards the central tunnel, if they liked
       io wuich the game from the back of the goal (24/5/89, p 119), and that the obvious
       way to the terracing was through the tunnel; anyone coining in would gravitate
       towards the tunnel, whether or noi he wanted to go directly behind the goal..

34     Duckcnlteld’s defence, at first, was that crowd management and filling of pens was
       not a police responsibility but that of the club (120). but later he said he did appreciate

                                                6
           ihe importance of ensuring that there was no overcrowding in the pens. (124B). He
           said that officers ai ihe back, that is, hi the concourse behind the tunnel, should know
           ihc problems. Inspector White [see Representations of 24* August} knew the location
           (127). Duckenfield’s own document emphasised (hat ‘'out-job is to ensure the safely of
           spectators" (137)

35          !>uck.eiifjeld noticed by 2.30 that there was a concentration in pens 3 and 4 and asked
           the spectators to move forward and spread along the terraces. (25/5 page 1213). In
           performing his duiics, he was acting on the “advice" of Superintendent Murray (28A).
           About 2.44 pm it was becoming clear trial they were not going to get a!! the crowd in
           by 3 pm (33A-B). Duckenfield appreciated that opening gates was “likely to cause
           potential problems inside” (page 39).

36          Duckcniicld conecded that when the second request came to open the gates, thal was
           the lime when he thought about where they would go. (41B). There was of course
           live minute between the first request and the command to open the gates. He knew
           that il was pretty crowded in central sections; and that the tunnel gave on to those the
           central sections; that they would want to get to positions as quickly us possible; and
           that they would take the obvious, easiest route lo terraces. (25* May, p 430-lTj. lie
           did not then think o f the tunnel. He might then have given instructions to close the
           tunnel, but he d id not because he did not think o f the risk. (It is submitted that this
           passage comes close to the slate of mind amounting to recklessness in the old
           Caidwe! 1/Lawrencc definition, sufficient in itself to satisfy ihe mens re;*, of involuntary
           manslaughter before the decision in Adomako. ).

37         Duekcnfield then conccded, however, ihat he had saiu in his statement “I watched the
           Lcppings Lane terraces intently for any developments as a result of iiie gates
           opening* (47D-E) “I was concerned to see what the effects of opening the gates and
           allowing people into the ground would have." (47F,-F.) “There was a possibility of
           overcrowding everywhere." (52G)

3«S          DuckuJitield accepted that “I made a mistake but in fact other officers should have
           remedied that mistake by using their .initiative" (92B). Me would have expected that
           an inspector or individual officers would have raced to the tunnel and taken action.
           (‘>311). (Of course, oniy those in the Control Box had sight of all relevant parts of that
           end of the ground and the area behind the turnstiles).

,5■>r\'*   On 26lh May 1989, Duckcnfieid acceptcd that il was important to warn police officers
           and stewards inside the ground thal the gates were to be opened. Supt Murray took on
           the responsibility of trying to contact Lock of Sheffield Wednesday, (page 10-11) Me
           also told Lord Taylor that he knew when Gate A opened that a serial of officers
           formed a funnel to divert them from seeking to enter the stands, where entry was by
           special ticket. There were no such arrangements for the tunnel. This important
           evidence shows futethought about the consequences of opening the gates, and made
           the possibility of crushing even mere obvious.


                                                     7
4u   The prosecution will invite a court to conclude that these admissions show gross
      negligence, causative o f death: and furthermore, they will submit that they disclose a
      wanton and perhaps angry disregard for ihc safety' of people in the pens, when other
      people, whom Ducken field regarded as of the sa w ilk, were causing him a serious
      problem outside the ground.

41   !!', ahemafivcly, these facts suggest incompetence, and a very bad or crass attempt to
      avoid ail already dangerous situation, attention is drawn lo R v. Hatemm (1925) 10 Cr.
      App. R. S, approved by the House of Lords in Hv. A'hnjako, in which incompetence
      in a person exercising specialised or expert functions was held capable of amounting
      to gross negligence (in that case the defendant was a doctor)


               Evidence against Murray on Mu/jslaughter and Misfeasance

42   it is submitted that the responsibility of Murray for manslaughter and misfeasance is if
     anything greater than DuckenffeUTs. The following extracts from his evidence to the
     Taylor Inquiry and Inquest are retied on for the purposes of the presen! review, as
     evidence of these two offences.

43   Murray liad occupied the same role in 1988 and 1989 and had written a report on the
     match afterwards, in May 1988. He had taken a leading part in policing a
     Hillsborough game between Sheffield Wednesday and Liverpool in January IW>.
     (Taylor Inquiry, 31/5. p 63). ( His involvement was well summarised in cross-
     examination at Is* June 1988, page 1, by Mr Woodward: he nau been involved in the
     1998 semi-final; the review of the 1988 semi-final; and the planning and preparation
     for the 1989 semi-final. A copy of his review in May 1988 of the 1988 game was read
     out at to him at the Icquesl (Day 67, page 140}j,

44   The pens were often filled up in accordance with directions from the Control Box.
     Officers would direct fans down the tunnel. This did not apply to the semi-final,
     however. No officers were briefed to keep a specific eye on the filling of pens 3 and 4
     15/4. (31/5, p 67). Neither Duckenfieid nor Murray gave instructions at oral briefing.
     Murray's role was overall charge of the Control Room and adviser to Duekenfidd.

45   Murray said his role was as "adviser” to Duekenfield. (68D~F.). The policy was to. let
     the fans "find their own level" (758). At about 2.30 pm. “I did not consider whether
     there was room in any particular pen. I was looking at the terrace as a whole and the
     North Stand and the West Stand.* Murray thought there were gates which supporters
     used to move between pens.

46   Murray conceded that no instruction was given to close off the tunnel to any police
     officers or stewards, arid that there may have been four requests io open the gates.
     (31/5/89, p 92). The request was to open the gates “in the plural".




                                              8
<17   ii is submitted that Murray’s account at page <13(1 is almost an admission to
      Caklweii/i .awrcnce recklessness. He admitted at K, “When I saw the gates opened 1
      wus obviously looking in that jpeus 3 and 4] direction”. H was put lo him that“the
      obvious place to tor them to go was down the tunnel:

               “it is now that I know. I know the ground. 1 know where the tunnel is. 1know
              where C gate is. I had never drawn any so rt of realisation th;«t people coining
              through C gate wouid go towards ihc tunnel, or whatever,! have never
              envisaged C gale as an entry gate of course, hut the two things did no! register,
              did not tie up. It seemed so obvious after the even! but certainly i gave it no
              thought and no realisation before.”

4X    in cross-examination. Murray ero.phasi.sed thai he thought that fans could move from
       pen U>pen. However, he coneeded that pens 3 and 4 tilled upfirst because they were
       popular; and they tended to iiii up to the back <118D-F)

4v    U is submitted that this fact makes his assertions that supporters could walk through
      the gales between the pens meaningless and irrelevant, when thousands were pouring
      through gates that had been opened to relieve a terrible and constantly intensifying
      crush. Murray conceded to Mr Woodward, for South Yorkshire police, that at 2.46.
      according to photographs, the terraces looked “pretty fuli\ (1/6/89, page 3)

50    In answ er to questions from Lord Taylor, Murray seemed to acknowledge thal it had
       been an option for the policc to till up the pen* in series at the match (17)

5i    At the liique.su Murray accepted that he had full authority to take steps to avoid the
      risk to occupants of the ground as a result of opening the gates, had he recogniscd
      such a risk. (Day 67. page 3 iB-C). He would not have beer, dependent on
      Duckenfield’s authorisation for any such steps.

52    Murray accepted at page 43D that the policc “had a role (o play as regards the
      distribution of spectators across the Lappings Lane icmices." Sec also 45 A. At page
      48C. lie accepted that the police had a duty to monitor the build-up and filling of the
      terraecs before kick-up. At page 56B-D, he accepted that “there may well have come a
      time when it was necessary " for him to divert supporters from ihe central pens. (It is
      the prosecution case that he should have put in hand this diversion in any event.
               the outer pens were sparely occuDied).

53    tic accepted that if it had been brought to his attention thal the central pens were full,
       and then:'was space in the side pens, he would have taken some action. 58D-U. It is
       the prosecution case that that fact was abundantly clear to anyone who looked.

54    Murray accepted that he could have got manpower to block the tunnel in the five
      minutes that Duckenfield was considering the request thal the gates be opened. (77D
      and 78A). He knew that the funnel was in that part of the concoursc. (page 86C-87F.)


                                                9
55    Jl is submitted that once it is shown by photographs, video recordings and television
       Him that ihc pons were effectively full, or even nearly full, at the lime the gates were
       open, the cases against both Murray and Duckcnfield becomes very powerful. The
       stale of the pens was clearly visible from the Control Box and on the cameras,
       equipped with “zoom" facilities, in that Box.

5(5   The nature of the relationship between Murray and Duckcnfieid is not manifest from
      the evidence, bat it may be inferred that there was at leasi coolness hctween them,
      uuekem'ieid was entitled to look to Murray for advice and support. Duckcnfieid had
      been promoted to a higher rank than Murray very recently. Murray was three years
      older, and more experienced at policing of this kind. The question by Murray, “Arc
      you going to open the Gates, Mr Duckenfield?" docs not show a warm or co­
      operative relationship.

o     !t i.s .subtnilied that the Police Complaint Authority rightly recognised that the charge
      of neglect was “joint1’. I hc reckless or grossly negligent decision to open the gates
      without closing off the pens way the responsibility of both defendants.

58    The evidence becoming available, and previously concealed, about practices in 19X8,
      adds to the weight of the evidence. It suggests that other evidence exists, proving
       further the element of foreseeability. However, even without that new 1988 evidence,
      and irrespective of the belief that the South Yorkshire Police is guarding much more
      evidence showing gross negligence, it is submitted tiiul there is powerful'evidenco
      against bodi defendants.

50    U i\ not proposed lo set out further evidence, given by other police officers, about the
      conduct of the two defendants. The prosecution may cal 1some of them, as they think
      appropriate after a review of the Sheffield archive, once it becomes available.



> Raymond Buildings
G ray’s Inr,
London WCi


2 October                                                            Aiun Jones QC




                                              10
y/:u      yo   i j . jo                                                      ' U A A O C * * J / *f i t
                                                                                                          '   ■■ :


                                               01512361936                                                «\ [ to l i e




■I/ppO*                                                                                                    StfppG^
                          H illsborough Fam ily Support Group


       Your Ref: YBF/GC/3341/89


       9 October 1998


     Mr George Croston
     CPS Central Casework
     " United House
     r’iccadill.v
     York YOl 1PQ

    Dear Mr Croston

    Adlington v Murray: Adlington v Duckenfield

    Supplementary Representations on behalf o f the Prosecutor

    I,          On 8‘" October 1998 representatives o f the Hillsborough Family Support Group
               attended the Public Record Office at Kew, to search for documents, and to test the
               various claims o f “public interest immunity”, “legal professional privilege”, and other
               confidentiality which have been made, notably by the South Yorkshire police, but also
               by the Home Office, CPS and West Midlands police. They there obtained a copy of
               the West Midlands Police Report o f October 1989, which the Home Office had placed
               there at some time in the past for public inspection.

   2.           The visit had taken place at a late stage of the review by the Crown Prosecution
                Service because it was considered a relatively low priority to incur the costs and time
                of travelling to Kew, when the probability was that no relevant material would be
               found there by reason o f the “public interest immunity” claim. In addition to the
               report, there is a file o f correspondence to the Taylor Inquiry from spectators at the
               disaster, and statements from various police officers, including PC Bichard. The
               HFSG was denied access to Bichard’s statements in the course o f the “Scrutiny”.
               There is no indication at all that any o f these persons had consented to their statements
               being made public, the condition (among others) that South Yorkshire Police imposed
               for years for disclosing statements.



                                                      -   1
                                                          -




          Phone 0151 2 3 6 1 9 1 9 . Fax 01S1 236 1936. E M ail info@ hfng.org
           Floor Centra] Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
                                     RE C EIVED TIME19. OCT. 16:50
' 98 ‘15:39     01512361936                                                                              Pg. 02



   3.     It is submitted that the lodging of those papers in the Public Record Office makes
          nonsense of the claims to “public interest immunity” for statements and police reports.

   4.     In July 1998, the KFSG asked to see material in the hands of the Crown Prosecution
           Service. Mr Croston denied them access to it, and the material sought included this
           report. The report would have given great assistance to the HFSG in compiling its
          representations; its disclosure has however been withheld unjustifiably after it had
          already been put into the public domain, unknown to the HFSG, causing expense, time
           and trouble in obtaining it. A detailed submission upon the report is impossible within
           the time allocated to Mr Croston’s review. Nevertheless, the following matters are
           clear from a quick reading of the report.

   The significance o f the J9XX match

   5.         At page 17 of the report, Mr Mervyn Jones asserted that supporters in 1988 “stated'’
              that access to the tunnel was cut off. He continued “If this happened it is not
              documented and was not a decision made by the senior officers present at the 1988
              game” [This is of course similar to the South Yorkshire/Bettison approach; see File of
              24lh August 1998]. “Enquiries have found just one retired officer who recalls this
              happening. He. it must be said, is vague in his recollection but the probability is that
              some officers acting on their own initiative     [turned spectators away]”.

   6.         This demonstrates the vice of deliberately concealing the materia! evidence of White,
              Woodcock. Lang and Crawford. In any event the retired officer, Higgins, is not
              vague. He said this in his statement of 2nd June 1989;

                      “I received instructions to close the gates to the entrance and thereafter direct
                      fans to the outer pens of the stand. I cannot recall where the instruction came
                      form. Under normal circumstances instruction came from a Serial Inspector or
                      via radio from control. Tcannot say from which the instruction came.”

   7.         The significance of this evidence is that "control” used as a matter of habit to give this
              instruction, as did an Inspector, no doubt in liaison with each other. This instruction
              was given in 1988 when Murray was in the Control Box. It is to be assumed that the
              DPP was given the same account in 1990 about the opening of the gates in 1988, as
              appears in the Interim Report of October 1989. If so, he was demonstrably misled.

   The perimeter gate

   8.         The Interim Report speaks at length of the alleged “forcing” of the perimeter gate,
              exaggerating the significance of the event out of all proportion. This is an Aunt Sally,
              rightly rejected as of no real consequence by Lord Taylor, but raised often by South
              Yorkshire officers. The purpose of the suggestion is to imply that the lying assertion
              made repeatedly by Duckenfield that the fens had broken down the gates might have
              had some basis in fact, and been the result of some confusion. In fact, an unsuccessful
              attempt had been made to push the gate shut against the oncoming supporters, and the
              incident did not affect the inrush through Gate C, which, as the defendants themselves

                                                      -   2   -




                                PFfFfVR!) TIMR Q OCT. 1 6 : 5 3                   PRINT TIME   9. OCT.     16:56
*28 1 5 : 3 9     0 1 5 1 2361936                HF S G*                      -

                                           G !5 i 236 1 936

                say. was opened to relieve a formidable crush at the turnstiles.

   The appendices lo the Interim Report

   9.       These appendices, which are in the process of being copied, appear to demonstrate
            that much time was devoted by police officers (probably both West Midlands and
             South Yorkshire) to collecting statements from officers of other forces to bolster what
             Lord Taylor derided as the “conspiracy theory" that there was a plot by ticketless, late-
            arriving and intoxicated supporters to force an admission into the ground. “Public
            interest immunity” has o f course been claimed for police statements, including these.

   10.         It is submitted that, because the Interim Report of the West Midlands police has been
               placed into the public domain, there can be no justification of any kind for withholding
               the final report, or the advice of counsel that was made on the basis of that report.
               The CPS is asked to produce them.

   11.      Substantial representations have been received from Murray’s lawyers today, and none
             from Duckenfield’s. It appears from a first reading that Murray’s lawyers have waited
             until effectively the last day of the review, not just to reply to the material supplied
             recently by the prosecution, but to put forward wider arguments, at a time when a
             considered reply by the prosecutor is not possible.

    12.        The HFSG will be ready to deal with any questions the CPS may have about its
               representations, or the material presented by the defendants, or other concerns.


   Yours faithfully




          bp

   Ann Adlington
   Solicitor




                                                              -3-




                                    nrrpiv&n TTMJ* 0 ACT            Ifi-C'}        PRINT TIME 9. a c t 16
  W      I N C K W                O R T H                   S H E R W O O D                                             35 Great Peter Street
                                                                                                                        Westminster
  SOLICITORS              AND PARLIAMENTARY              AGENTS
                                                                                                                        London SW1P 3LR

   Our ref:                S B E \N A F O \2 4 3 3 2 -l
                                                                                                                        Telephone: 0171 593 5000
   Your ref:               Y B F \33 4 1 \8 9
                                                                                                                        Fax: 0171 593 5099
                                                                                                                        DX: 2312 VICTO R IA
   CPS Central Casework
   United House
   Piccadilly
   York YOl 1PQ                                                                                                        9 October 1998

   For the attention of George R Croston
   Prosecution Team Leader


   Dear Sirs

   Hillsborough: Adlington -v- David Duckenfield & M urray

   We refer to previous correspondence in this matter, in the light of the requests made on
   behalf of the Defendants for the Director of Public Prosecutions to take over the conduct
   of proceedings, pursuant to Section 6 of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 and to
   discontinue those proceedings pursuant to Section 23. You have kindly provided copies
   of the exchange of correspondence between your office and the Hillsborough Family
   Support Group (HFSG), and we refer specifically to your "policy letter" of 27th July 1998
   outlining the policy to be adopted in cases of this type, i.e., private prosecutions. We have
   been provided with copies of the representations made on behalf of MURRAY by Messrs
   Walker Morris and would adopt those submissions on behalf of Mr Duckenfield insofar
   as they relate to matters of relevance to both defendants.

   Introduction

   The power of the Director to intervene under Section 6 of the Prosecution of Offences Act
   1985 is unfettered. It is not limited to a consideration of the strength or weight of the
   evidence but embraces a consideration of the wider public interest in whether a trial ought
   to take place.

   All the submissions of the HFSG have concentrated on a perceived evidential basis for the
   summons currently issued. If the existence of a prima facie case were the only basis upon
   which the Director could exercise the power under Section 6 then the effect of the section
   would be largely redundant If no evidence existed an information could not be properly
   laid and if no prima facie case was made out then the magistrates could not com m it for
   trial. Were these the only circumstances in which the power under Section 6 would be
   exercised then there would never be any need to exercise the power. It is submitted on
   behalf of Mr Duckenfield that the power of the Director is far wider than a mere
   assessment of the evidence and embraces a consideration of the wider public interest.

   The Director is well placed to assess where the public interest lies having had involvement
   in the case over a period of nine years and having seen the Taylor Report, the Stuart-Smith
   Scrutiny, the coroner’s verdict, the judgment of the Divisional Court and the review of
                                                                                                                        The firm is a m em ber o f B W f i e a U .
PARTNERS                        STIUM ll;N W tC C S             K O C liK FIT I'ON          TIM W A I T S
                                                                                                                        an international network ofla w y cr s .
N IC H O L A S O W S T O N     - MU<'II M A ( ‘l)O U (> A I.D   l*AUI. IK V IN C            HEAD OF TAX
H R IA N I l O O l )            J O H N K lil:..S               R O N A I .l) WARRANTS                    1
                                                                                            lil-O R tU : U U I *        The Hrm is regulated by The Law Society
l»AUI. M O R R I S              N i l l:R W U .U A M S                         1
                                                                R O l iU R T HO KAI         CONSULTANT                  in ihc conduct o f investment business.
               11
M ICM Al.l f A I <Tl ll-K       A N O R I -W M U R R A Y        S I M O N K A ST W O O !)   I:R A N K R O K SO N OUI
A l ISO N c o i l ! O V         < ill RlSTOI*! IliR VINIi       N A O M I G OO DI!
evidence and the advice of leading counsel obtained when the Director made the decision not
to prosecute.

We understand and sympathise with the sentiments of the bereaved and injured who feel
understandably that someone must be made to pay for the disaster. • We also understand the
disappointment they feel when at every stage the decisions made have been against any
recommendation for prosecution. It must be recorded that the lives of everyone involved in
the disaster have altered as a consequence of these terrible events, including that of Mr
Duckenfield.

On the date of the disaster he had only been in his post of chief superintendent for 21 days
and this was the first operation of this type where he had been in command. While the
impact of the events on him cannot be compared to the impact on those on the terraces they
were nonetheless personally catastrophic.

Until the disaster he had been a highly successful career policeman with 21 years of service
to the community and 3 commendations for good police work. He has never worked since
and has had his actions subjected to analysis and examination for a period of nine years. His
health has been destroyed and the trauma of the disaster and the consequential need to assist
the authorities in the various investigations and inquests has meant that any attempt to start
a new life has been thwarted.

Many factors combined to contribute to the disaster as Hillsborough and these have been the
subject of the most exhaustive investigation by Lord Justice Taylor. One of them,-not
mentioned hitherto in the correspondence to the Director, is the construction of pens on the
terraces with inadequate gates to enable fans to escape in the event of an emergency. No-one
appreciated at the time the danger these structures presented although as a direct consequence
of this disaster they have been removed from every football stadium in the country.

We do not intend in this letter to repeat all the points made forcibly by Lord Justice Taylor
in his report nor analyse in detail the scrutiny of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith. The Director is
well able to assess each and decide where the public interest lies in this case. Nonetheless
in view of the assertion by the HFSG that a clear prima facie case exists, a view we find
ourselves compelled to disagree with, and in the light of a number of important factual
inaccuracies in their submissions of 24 September we feel it necessary to set the record
straight at this stage.

The Stuart-Smith Scrutiny

One of the terms of reference of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was to ascertain whether any
evidence exists relating to the disaster at the Hillsborough Stadium which was not available
to the Director or the Attorney General for the purposes of discharging their respective
statutory responsibilities and to advise whether any evidence not previously available is of
such significance as to justify their attention to be drawn to it. There was none. As part of
the Scrutiny, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith read the joint opinion of counsel dated 6 August 1990,
he considered the resume of evidence and the statement of law set out therein. The
conclusion reached was:


                                              2
       "I do not consider that there is any material which should be put before the
       Director of Public Prosecutions or the Police Complaints Authority which
       might cause them to reconsider the decisions they have already taken".
                                                                     (Chapter 7 p 103(5))

It would seem that the submission made by HFSG that leading counsel, providing the joint
opinion, would have misapplied the law relating to manslaughter to the facts of the case
is wrong. (HFSG submission 17/8/98 para 14). No such view was formed by Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith and the Director has available the opinion to assess for herself the merits of
this submission advanced by HFSG.

All the evidence alleged to be "new" was available to the Scrutiny, it is inaccurate to
suggest to the contrary.

       "South Yorkshire Police have an extensive archive of material about the
       Hillsborough disaster. There is a substantial storeroom full of investigation
       files, statements, photographs, videotapes and computer records. They have
       given me and my team unrestricted access to their archive for work on this
       scrutiny".
                                                                       (Chapter 5 p89(27))

Further Lord Justice Stuart-Smith considered the editing of statements by Messrs Hammond
Suddards, the fact that the statements had been edited was known by counsel to the Taylor
Inquiry (Andrew Collins QC) and the Treasury Solicitor (Mr Whitehurst). Having
considered the editing exercise Lord Justice Stuart-smith concluded that "for the most part
the suggestions for amendments by the solicitors are not open to criticism". (Chapter 4
p93(101)) and "I am quite satisfied that the exclusion of these comments could not possibly
have affected the Director". (Chapter 4 p84(105))

It is wrong to allege that "the statements and documents sent to the DPP in 1990 were the
result of a calculated selection, from which many statements of central importance were
excluded and which included edited statements of police officers". (HFSG submission
24/9/98 para 11(d))

The conclusion of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith was to the opposite effect, furthermore he
investigated allegations of improper interference with witnesses made by the HFSG
(Chapter 4 p63) and concluded that the allegations were "not substantiated". (p84)

It is also wrong to allege that any evidence exists disclosing "prima facie such a thorough
manipulation of the evidence to the past benefit of the defendants and South Yorkshire
Police". Lord Justice Stuart-Smith again arrived at the opposite conclusion,.

Much of the submission made by the HFSG involves an attack on the Stuart-Smith
Scrutiny and the conclusions it reached. It is alleged to be "economical with information",
it is suggested that "caution has to be employed in accepting facts set out in the report" and
that "the conclusions about the edited statements are seriously wrong" (HFSG submission
24/9/98 paras 114 and 112). The Director will be able to form an independent view about
the criticism of the Scrutiny. What is clearly exercising the minds of the HFSG is that if
    the conclusions of the Scrutiny survive then no new material exists to justify the current
    charges.

    We do not intend to correct each and every factual inaccuracy in the submission of the
    HFSG as it is known that that task is being undertaken by those representing Mr Murray.
    We would like to draw the attention of the Director to one false statement relied upon by
    the HFSG, namely that Mr Duckenfield met Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, notwithstanding that
    the latter did not see fit to refer to it. This allegation is untrue as the two men have never
    met. It follows that the criticism of the Scrutiny for not recording the details of the
    meeting are unfounded. It is also an example of the willingness on the part of the HFSG
    to rely upon conjecture as if it were uncontroverted fact.

    Analysis of new evidence

    The HFSG concedes that the findings of the Taylor Inquiry fall short of those needed to
    establish a "prima facie" case.

           "The Taylor findings themselves amount almost to a prima facie case".
                                                     (HFSG submission 24/9/98 para 12)

    The further evidence relied upon to support the prosecution is analysed in paragraph 17 and
    all was before the Taylor Inquiry including the action of the police in 1988 (Taylor
    Chapter 11 para 230). What is of critical importance is that there is no evidence
    whatsoever that Mr Duckenfield was ever told about the police action the previous year,
    or should have been aware of it.

    Reliance is placed upon the editing of statements for which it is asserted "there can be no
    honest reason" (HFSG letter 24/8/98). This allegation is wholly inconsistent with the
    conclusions of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith and cannot survive even a simple exercise of
    analysis.

    The editing complained about to the statement of PC Woodcock excludes material that is
    clearly hearsay and relates to a conversation he had with Inspector White at the debrief.
J   Inspector White makes no mention of being given the instruction spoken about and no
    other officer at the debrief apparently heard this conversation. In any event, Woodcock’s
    reference is not to the diversion of fans moving from the concourse to the tunnel, but to
    the general dispersal of fans on the terrace from one pen to another. We note that not one
    of the deletions identified relates to any admissible evidence probative of guilt against
    either defendant but consist mainly of the type of deletions described by Lord Justice
    Stuart-Smith as "quite trivial and of no consequence whatsoever" (p82 para 99) and were
    of a type which he concluded "were properly excluded".

    By reference to HFSG submissions (their letter 24 August 1998, submissions of counsel
    24 September 1998) it is self-evident that the question of the 1988 events are central to the
    submissions made by HFSG as they say that these events "prove foreseeability, which is
    of course critical to civil and criminal allegations of negligence. They are of the most
    obvious relevance to the manslaughter issue in the prosecution".


                                                  4
It is suggested by HFSG that the evidence of police officers concerning 1988 indicates that
senior officers monitored the pens, a diversion from the central pens took place in 1988, and
that there was a failure to take this "known and obvious precaution" in 1989 resulting in the
96 deaths. The HFSG suggest that "the South Yorkshire Police claim that the diversion of
the oncoming supporters from the central pens in 1988 was unknown to senior officers".
They fail to refer to the findings of Lord Justice Taylor and the Coroner (see HFSG annexure
H - Summary of variances between findings of Lord Justice Taylor and summing up of
coroner Dr Popper - page 5) that the South Yorkshire Police "claim" was correct.

The evidence which HFSG says is so important to the present reconsideration adds nothing
to the foreseeability case against the defendant. When viewed against the findings of both
Lord Justice Taylor and the inquest the evidence referred to by HFSG (the new "unrevised
evidence") cannot assist in any way in establishing that any failure to divert fans from the
central pens simply involved a "known and obvious precaution". In the circumstances we are
bound to submit therefore that much of the submissions made by HFSG, in relation to the
events of 1988, adds no strength to the case against the defendants and if HFSG believe that
this issue is at the "heart of the case", we say that it must patently fail even on the
prosecution’s own assessment.

Evidential Matters

In your policy letter you advise that the Code for Crown Prosecutors (Code), which contains
the principles applicable to CPS review of criminal proceedings instigated by the Police,
provides the basis for the policy applicable to private prosecutions and as to whether -the
Director will intervene.

More specifically, you advise that in regard to the evidential requirement of the Code a less
stringent standard is to be applied to private prosecutions, to the effect that the case will be
taken over and discontinued where there is clearly no case to answer.

By comparison, when applying the Code to criminal proceedings generally, the evidential test
of "a realistic prospect of conviction" is a clearly more onerous standard. The implication is
therefore that in the terms of the evidential requirements of a private prosecution, the Director
may allow those proceedings to continue in circumstances where the evidence would not reach
the Code’s standard for a realistic prospect of conviction.

We note from the policy letter that "it has been considered that to apply the Code test to
private prosecutions would unfairly limit the right of individuals to bring their own cases".
We take issue with this statement of policy, and its applicability in the present circumstances.

We accept of course that the Director is bound to consider, as part of the review, whether the
evidence is sufficient when considering intervention pursuant to the Prosecution of Offences
Act. We are also aware that in the past the Director has adopted a less stringent test than the
CPS apply when considering whether to intervene under Section 6. Having considered the
observations made by the Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure ("Phillips Commission")
(CMND 8092) (1981) Para 8:8 and 8:9, and the Law Commission, Criminal Law: Consent
to Prosecution C.P. 149 (Para 6:5-6-17) we are uncertain as to the justification for the policy
as applied in the past and request clarification accordingly.

                                                5
Criminal Law: Consent to Prosecution C.P. 149 (Para 6:5-6-17) we are uncertain as to the
justification for the policy as applied in the past and request clarification accordingly.

       "The test applied to the Director’s cases (ie, whether or not there is a
       reasonable prospect o f conviction) should be extended to all cases and
       applied by all who make the decisions that bring a case to Court".
                                                        (Phillips Commission para 8.9)

In any event applying either test to the relevant material, such as that referred to on page
3 of the policy letter, together with any further material provided by the HFSG, and
additional material made available by the Home Office and any other source, will lead
inescapably to the conclusion that has been previously reached by the Director, to the effect
that there is insufficient evidence for a realistic prospect of conviction. If that be the case,
pursuant to the Code, the Director will be bound to take over the conduct of proceedings
and discontinue "no matter how important or serious" the case may be.

On the basis that the Director proceeds as indicated in the policy letter and therefore
applies a lesser standard, we ask the Director to consider the two specific questions posed
in the Code as follows:-

1.     Can the evidence be used inCourt?

2.     Is the evidence reliable?

We invite the Director to consider those questions in the specific context of the 4 charges
against our client as follows:-

1.     Unlawful Killing

       In the broadest sense it is rightto say that the question of unlawful killing, in the
       context of involuntary manslaughter, requires proof of the following:-

       -   duty of care
       -   breach of duty of care
       -   breach causing injury or damage
       -   breach of sufficient gravity, that is grossly negligent, to amount to a criminal
offence.

       At the time of making these submissions, we have been served with 3 folders of
       copy statements and transcripts of evidence served in support of the prosecution.


       A bundle of 35 statements, largely comprising the recollections of spectators at the
       game on 15th April 1989 relate in general to the build up of the crowd outside the
       ground, access to the ground, and the crush at the Leppings Lane end terrace. 3
       Statements included by Police Officers do not involve the direct operational
       management within the control box on the day.


                                               6
    We are bound to emphasise that no evidence has been served by the prosecution of
    any person other than the Defendants, that will assist a criminal court in considering
    the issue of the particular duty of care to be alleged against the Defendants, and as to
    whether their conduct amounted to a breach thereof. To be specific, there is no other
    evidence, apart from the transcript material, relating to the circumstances and activities
    within the control box on 15th April and Mr Duckenfield’s role on that day. HFSG
    correspondence has pointed to Lord Justice Taylor’s conclusions in regard to the
    involvement and actions of certain individuals on that day. His conclusions were
    based upon a mountain of evidence which it would seem is not to be put before the
    Court in the context of the present prosecution. The hearings by their very nature will
    be completely different and the evidence that can be adduced in support of a private
    prosecution for manslaughter will be considerably narrower than that heard by Lord
    Justice Taylor.

    The HFSG, in their most recent submissions dated 2 October 1998, comment on the
    "Evidence against Duckenfield on Manslaughter and Misfeasance" purely by reference
    to the 1989 Taylor transcript material, which of course the Director will have
    considered previously in the context of the consideration of which charges, if any,
    should have been brought.

    On the available evidence submitted in support of the prosecution, we therefore urge
    the Director to consider that there is a clear paucity of evidence relating to vital issues
    that would need to be proved. As L.J. Stuart-Smith pointed out in his Scrutiny report
    at para. 56:-

            "Any prosecution of an individual police officer would have to
            establish his individual responsibility. It would not be enough to prove
            the composite failure of the police operation."

    Notwithstanding the comments made by HFSG (eg see para 15 Submissions 24.9.98)
    any admissions of liability by South Yorkshire police in negligence proceedings can
    only relate to those proceedings and South Yorkshire police. They can have no force
    in relation to the specific actions of individual officers and charges brought in separate
)   criminal proceedings.

    In terms of reliability we must take issue with the observation of the HFSG (their
    letter 27th July 1998) that all the facts are clear and that no-one will have forgotten.
    The events in question were obviously traumatic for all concerned, and the passage of
    9 years since those events is a considerable period of time. By definition, the
    recollection of any relevant witnesses must be expected to have lessened either because
    of the passage of time, or indeed the natural mechanism of avoidance of the memory
    of the horrific events that occurred. In those circumstances, we suggest the Director
    treat with great caution the reliability of the evidence that is or may be served in
    support of the prosecutions.

    No evidence exists o f the current ability of witnesses to recall the events and those that
    were heard by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith were described by him variously as "vague
    and confused" (per Miss Martin), "version changes in various ways over the years"

                                             7
     (per Paul Taylor) and "unable to accept Mr Holdsworth’s recollection of events as now
     being accurate". There is no reason to suspect that the memory of other witnesses is
     any more reliable than those seen by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

2.   Misfeasance in Public Office.

     As indicated by the submissions as to issue of summonses,from theHFSG, thesame
     facts are to be put forward in support of the allegations for this offence as for
     unlawful killing. The prosecution have referred to the case of R -v- Dytham ('1979')
     69 Cr.App.R. 387 as indicating the relevant standard. Our only observation in regard
     to this case in the present context is that it clearly indicates that for culpability to be
     established concerning the misconduct of an officer of justice, mere misfeasance will
     not suffice, but a deliberate failure and wilful neglect will be required. We raise again
     the issues as to what reliable evidence the prosecution intends to adduce to satisfy this
     onerous test as indicated by the reliance of HFSG (submissions 2/10/98) on alleged
     admissions made by the Defendant in 1989 transcripts which the Director will have
     considered previously. From the material we have been served with so far, we believe
     the evidential test is not satisfied either on the basis of "a realistic prospect of
     conviction" or in the alternative that there would be "clearly no case to answer",
     justifying the Director’s intervention and discontinuance.

3.   Acting with Intent to Pervert the Course of Justice

     According to the HSFG submissions as to issue of Summonses, this relates to-the
     alleged false and deceitful allegation by Mr Duckenfield that the gates had been
     broken by the supporters. It has never been suggested that the words complained of
     were ever uttered by Mr Duckenfield to anyone charged with investigating the disaster.

     In terms of the evidence so far served, we point out once again that there is no
     evidence apart from the transcript of the Defendants’ own evidence, regarding any
     such discussion. The HFSG (submissions 2/10/98) have referred to the Taylor
     evidence of the Defendant which the Director is aware of. We note that further
     evidence will be called but emphasise the prosecution have not served statements from
     other witnesses in relation to this charge.

     The thrust of the recent (2/10/98) submissions appears to concern the "transmission"
     of the alleged comment of the Defendant to parties who were not present at the time
     the alleged words were spoken. We are bound to point out that no evidence has been
     served to support the contentions made to the effect that the Defendant played any role
     in the "transmissions" referred to, or in the alleged "limitation" activity (paras 5-22).
     The HFSG’s critical reference to the Sharpies statements when subject to realistic
     appraisal can not be justified. In the context of this charge, we submit the true import
     of his recollection is that between 3 and 5 pm on the day of the event, the question
     of "how" and "why" was not at the forefront of the minds of those in the control
     room, who were "all deeply shaken" officers endeavouring to carry out their duties.

     We think the argument is overwhelming that proper analysis of this charge cannot
     satisfy either o f the evidential tests that might be applied in this case and accordingly,

                                              8
      the DPP ought to intervene and discontinue without need to refer to public interest
      issues.

4.    Public Interest

      We have noted the exchanges in correspondence between your office and the HFSG
      and for the purpose of your review would like to point out by reference to the
      individual components set out in 6.4 and 6.5 of the Code our views as to the relevance
      or otherwise of the public interest factors set out therein. We are of course mindful
      of the fact that this exercise is "not simply a matter of adding up the number of factors
      on each side".

6.4

(a)   Conviction is likely to result in a significant sentence.

      Cases of manslaughter vary enormously and in many cases a non-custodial sentence
      will be passed. We believe in all the circumstances of this case, the prospect of a
      sentence of immediate imprisonment is remote. The Director will be aware that
      prosecutions for involuntary manslaughter, such as in the House of Lords’ leading case
      of R -v- Adomako, notwithstanding a conviction, the Court imposed a suspended
      custodial sentence, as did the Court in the associated Court of Appeal decision R v
      Prentice & Sullman.

(b)   A weapon was used or violence was threatened.

      This is clearly not applicable here.

(c)   The offence was committed against a person serving the public.

      Once again this is not applicable. It is relevant that the alleged offences occurred
      whilst the Defendants were engaged in the conduct of their public duties.

(d)   The Defendant was in a position of authority or trust.

      This strictly speaking is true, but the import of this factor is, we submit, that authority
      or trust has been abused. There is no evidence that we have seen that suggests that
      the Defendant in any way consciously acted so as to abuse the authority or trust placed
      in him, and rather to the contrary, acted to the best of his ability to discharge his
      public duty, in the most difficult of circumstances.

(e)   The evidence shows that Defendants was a ringleader or an organiser of the offence.
       This clearly cannot apply.

(f)   There is evidence the offence was premeditated.

       The allegations in this case relate to the actions taken by the Defendant, in a life or
       death context, without lengthy time for consideration. Judgment was exercised and
      decisions were taken. There can be no element of pre-meditation in the normal sense
      relevant to a guilty mind.

(g)   There is evidence that the offence was carried out by a group.

      Whilst the Defendants were working together as part of an overall police operation,
      we have not seen any evidence to suggest a conspiracy or joint enterprise to carry out
      a criminal activity.

(h)   The victim of the offence was vulnerable, had been put in considerable fear, or had
      suffered personal attack, damage or disturbance.

      There can be no doubt that the loss and suffering of the deceased and others involved
      in the Hillsborough disaster is a terrible tragedy. We would not wish to diminish that
      in any sense but emphasise that there is no evidence that the Defendant intended to
      place the victims in this situation. Rather quite the contrary all the actions that were
      taken by the Defendant were taken with a view to minimising personal injury and
      suffering.

(i)   The offence was motivated by any form of discrimination against the victims ethnic
      or national origin, sex, religious beliefs, political views or sexual preference.

      This cannot apply.

(j)   There is a marked difference between the actual or mental ages of the Defendants and
      the victim or if there is any element of corruption.

      Whilst strictly speaking true, we cannot see that this can have any relevance in the
      present circumstances.

(k)   The Defendants previous convictions/cautions are relevant to the present offence.

      Once again, not applicable.

(1)   The Defendant is alleged to have committed the offence whilst under an order of the
      Court.

      Not applicable.

(m)   There are grounds for believing that the offence is likely to be continued or repeated,
      for example, by a history of recurring conduct.

      The allegations of criminal offences arising out of Hillsborough are of course in the
      most unusual of circumstances. The Defendant has long since retired from
      employment as a Police Officer, and there is no real possibility of a recurrence. The
      circumstances, as all the subsequent inquiries have revealed, were unique.



                                             10
(n)   The offence, although not serious in itself was widespread in the area where it was
      committed.

      The alleged offences of unlawful killing, in particular, are serious, but occurred in a
      limited context in unique circumstances,. This factor is therefore not applicable.

      It will be seen by reference to the foregoing comment, that the only factor tending to
      support a prosecution pursuant to 6.4 of the Code is the seriousness of the charges.
      It is in that light that we believe the previous enquiries, reviews and the like that have
      been conducted into the events of Hillsborough are particularly relevant. Previous
      correspondence with you from ourselves and the Solicitors for Mr Murray highlighted
      the outcome of those reviews and the consistent conclusion, notwithstanding the real
      concerns as to the events of 15th April 1989, that no good will be served by pursuing
      criminal proceedings at this time. We emphasise that point in the present context.

      Further we offer the following observations with regard to the common public interest
      factors that may tend against a prosecution, set out in the Code.

6.5

(a)   The Court is likely to impose a very small or nominal penalty.

      We reiterate the comments made above in regard to 6.4(a). We think the likelihood
      is, even in the event of a conviction for unlawful killing that the appropriate sentence
      in this case would, effectively, be non-custodial.

(b)   The offence was committed as a result of a general mistake or misunderstanding (these
      factors must be balanced against the seriousness of the offence).

      Once again we emphasise that the allegations in this case concern decisions made
      under the pressure of the moment in the course of employment, at times when serious
      injury and death was threatened. To prove gross negligence manslaughter, the
      prosecution has an onerous burden to prove to a high standard that any negligence
      ought to be considered criminally culpable. The relevant authorities (see R v
      Adomako (H/Lords), R v Holloway & Others (Court of Appeal) make it clear that
      mitigating circumstances are particularly relevant in this context. Furthermore the
      contribution to the disaster of the unexpected late arrival of so many fans, the refusal
      by them to heed requests to queue for entrance in an orderly manner and the physical
      construction of pens on the terraces without sufficient gates to permit escape in the
      event of an emergency all contributed in some way to the disaster.

(c)   The loss or harm can be described as minor and was a result of a single incident
      particularly if it was caused bv misiudgment.

      Once again we would not wish to diminish the suffering caused by the victims, or
      others involved in the Hillsborough tragedy. We would point out, however, that the
      case against the Defendant is in essence one of gross misjudgment on a singular
      occasion.

                                              11
There has been a long delay between the events taking place and the date o f trial.

The   offences are serious.
The   delay has been caused in part by the Defendants.
The   offence has only recently come to light.
The   complexity o f the offence has meant that there has been a long investigation.

It is clearly of great concern that a private prosecution is being commenced more than
9 years after 15th April 1989. The material we have been served with in support of
the prosecution in relation to the transcripts has been available since 1991 at the latest.
The 38 statements served by HFSG in our submission, firstly, do not raise any
substantial new matters that could not have been dealt with by evidence available
many years before and secondly, do not go to the heart of the cases, in respect of
unlawful killing, neglect of public duty, and perverting the course of justice as raised
before in the context of evidential issues.

Once again the seriousness of the offence is relevant, but on balance we submit this
factor should not outweigh the significance of the very considerable delay.

As we have noted the HSFG are of the view that the recollections of witnesses will
be accurate notwithstanding the passage of time. It is interesting to note that in the
context of the Judicial Review of the inquest (which of course was a hearing on oath
before a Jury considering issues of unlawful killing) the Divisional Court, commenting
onwhether an exercise of discretion to        order a fresh inquest was appropriate,
observed:

         "I have to take an objective view and I have to consider the
         interests of all concerned, including those of all the witnesses
         who would have to come along 5 years later and try to cast
         their minds back to events that they must have been trying to
         forget. Taking that objective view and considering the interests
         of all concerned, I would in my discretion conclude that this
         was not a case in which it would be right to order a fresh
         inquest."

         - R v HM Coroner for South Yorkshire Exp Stringer & Ors. 17 BMLR 92 per
         LJ McCowan.

We submit similar considerations apply with greater force now that a further 5 years
has elapsed.

A prosecution is likelv to have a very bad effect on the victim’s physical and mental
health always bearing in mind the seriousness of the offence.

Although some families of the deceased clearly are anxious to pursue a criminal trial
against the defendants others we suspect have been anxious to put these terrible events
behind them and will be distressed to find the facts yet again rehearsed in public and
have the memory of the disaster revisited.
(f)    The Defendant is elderly or is. or was, at the time of the events suffering from
       significant mental or physical ill health unless the events are serious or there is a real
       possibility that it may be repeated.

       Crown prosecutors must balance the desirability of diverting a Defendant who is
       suffering from significant mental or physical ill health with the need to safeguard thp
       general public.

       The Defendant retired from the Police Force in 1991 on ill health grounds. We have
       noted with concern the HFSG comments regarding our client’s health, and advise that
       he continues to experience ill health as a result of the Hillsborough disaster.

(g)    The Defendant has put right the loss or harm that was caused (but the Defendants
       must not avoid prosecution because they can pay compensation').

       This does not apply. It of course was not within the Defendant’s gift to redress the
       loss and injury suffered by the victims.

(h)    Details may be made public that could harm sources of information, international
       relations or national security.

       We do not suggest that this factor is applicable.

On an overview basis, therefore, our submission is that the factors contained in 6.5-when
applied to the present case against the Defendant, strongly indicate the prosecution should not
proceed in the public interest.

Further, when paragraphs 6.4 and 6.5 are looked at in conjunction, we believe the public
interest is overwhelmingly shown to be served in this case by proceedings being discontinued,
as the public interest factors tending against prosecution clearly outweigh those factors tending
in favour.

We appreciate that such a decision would cause considerable disquiet with the prosecutors,
but with respect, this is not a relevant consideration. The criminal prosecutions arising out
of Hillsborough are by their very nature unique, relating to specimen charges of manslaughter,
as well as the lesser offences, in circumstances where 96 people died. It seems clear that if
a criminal prosecution were to proceed, such a trial would not take place until more than 10
years after the events in question, and it is relevant to point out that any trial subsequent to
April 1999 would take place against the background of the 10 year anniversary of events
having recently passed.

We believe that the case for the Director intervening, and discontinuing proceedings pursuant
to the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985, is in this case compelling and that the circumstances
are exceptional, and we urge the Director to so conclude prior to the next hearing of the
Magistrates Court proceedings at Leeds on 30th October. If the Director wishes to clarify any
matters arising out of this or previous correspondence submitted on behalf of the Defendant
we would be grateful of the opportunity of confirming same. We are, of course, aware of the


                                               13
significance of this decision, and believe it entirely appropriate for the Director for clarify any
outstanding issues or concerns before a final decision is taken.

In view of the importance of the decision, we are of the view the Director is bound to give
full and detailed reasons for the decision taken addressing the issues raised by all the parties.

Accordingly, we look forward to hearing from you once the review is completed.

Yours faithfully




Winckworth Snerwood




                                                14
                                                                                      2 ( < o ( ' <n i s



                      ADLINGTON -V - DUCKENFEELD and MURRAY




      REPRESENTATIONS TO THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS

                          ON BEHALF OF MR. BERNARD MURRAY




1.1     In 1996-7, the HFSG pretext for re-opening the investigation was a claim that ‘new evidence’
existed to undermine the previous findings and decisions. That claim was emphatically rejected by Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith’s Scrutiny. It was inevitable that any post-Scrutiny attempt to justify a prosecution
womd include another claim that further fresh evidence had come to light.

1.2     We are now able to respond to the ‘new evidence* claim, as well as to the variety of other claims
in the prosecutor’s representations.

1.3     There are also important points to be made about the declared CPS/DPP policy on the provisions
of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985.

CPS/DPP Policy - evidence
2.1     The CPS letters to HFSG on 27 July and 4 August 1998 set out Policy. They refer to evidence,
public interest and the interests ofjustice. The latter is one specific aspect of public interest. This is not
the moment for detailed argument about policy, but we indicate our concerns.

2.2      The evidence criterion for intervention is wrong. (We do not accept that the private prosecutor
can make out a case to answer. What follows is addressing the principle behind the policy.) It cannot be
right to restrict the Director’s scope for intervening on evidence grounds to cases where there is 'clearly
no case to answer’.

2.3     First, it has the effect that the Director will only intervene in cases where the Court would be
bound to stop the proceedings in any event, either by refusing to issue summonses, or by refusing to
commit for trial. To that extent, intervention on evidential grounds would never serve to achieve more
than an acceleration of the inevitable.

2.4      Second, in rare cases such as the present, it has a potential for undermining the public’s
perception of the authority of the Director, as well as that of the Attorney-General. For more than eight
years, the Director has publicly asserted that there is no realistic prospect of conviction of any person on
the charges now levelled against the two defendants. This after the most detailed, thorough, responsible
and high-level assessment of the position it is possible to imagine, carried out more than once, and
coupled with the clear conclusions of the Scrutiny of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith, which have in turn been
publicly accepted by the Director, the Attorney-General and the Home Secretaiy. The policy
contemplates that the Director may conclude that because it is not clearly demonstrated that there is no


                                                                             Mr Murray's representations -1/5
V    I.   i   J J   0   * 1 . V -J




    case to answer, all that has gone before must count for nothing, and that the publicly appointed body
    responsible for criminal prosecutions roust stand aside and leave it to a private prosecutor. That such an
    outcome is theoretically possible suggests that the underlying policy is flawed. Particularly in the unique
    circumstances of this case, where an independent Scrutiny Inquiry under a Lord Justice of Appeal has
    been set up by Ministers of the Crown to examine whether there is any basis for reviewing the decision
    not to prosecute.

    2.5     We mention the position of the Attorney-General at this stage because there is a need to
    coordinate the roles of the principal officers responsible for the criminal process. Were there to be a
    committal for trial to the Crown Court, the Attorney’s power to enter a nolle prosequi would be called
    upon by the defence. Ex hypothesi, such intervention only arises after it has been found that there is a
    case to answer. It cannot be right that the Director is unable to intervene on evidential grounds if there
    may be a case to answer, when it is plain that the Attorney can do so in a case where there undoubtedly
    is a cCse to answer. We note section 3(1) of the 1985 Act. In any case where the Attorney would enter
    a nolle prosequi, notwithstanding that there is or might be a case to answer, there is nothing in law or
    principle to preclude the Director from intervening to the same effect at an earlier stage, acting either
    independently or under the Attorney’s superintendence.

    CPS/DPP Policy - public interest
    3.1     The public interest factors to be taken into account when considering whether to take over and
    discontinue a private prosecution will not be different from or less than those factors which the Code for
    Crown Prosecutors requires to be taken into account when deciding whether to prosecute.

    3.2    Without repeating 2.4 above, the public pronouncements from the office of the Director, from
    the Law Officers and Ministers of the Crown have created a legitimate expectation in the defendant that
    there will be no prosecution. It is unthinkable that this should effectively be overridden by the
    commencement of a private prosecution. It would set at nought the assurance contained in § 10.1 of the
    Code. There is no basis for invoking the exceptions in § 10.2.

    3.3    Material public interest factors against prosecution as identified in §6.5 of the Code are:
            (d) Jong delay, and
            (f) significant ill-health of the prospective defendant.
    Both apply here. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith found significant instances of altered recollections in
    witnesses upon whom the prosecutor would rely.

     3.4     Assessment of culpability. We do not propose to argue issues of substantive law at this stage. For
    present purposes it is sufficient to refer to the quotation which Lord Taylor chose to cite prominently,
    with obvious approval, in his Interim Report, PART II - WHY DID IT HAPPEN? [p.20]:
             “Events of the magnitude of Hillsborough don’t usually happen just for one single reason, nor
             is it possible to pin the blame on one single scapegoat... Disasters happen because a whole series
             of mistakes, misjudgments and mischances happen to come together in deadly combination.”
             (The Archbishop of York.)                                                                         v'
    Lord Taylor’s Report, read as a whole, found the disaster was caused by a series of factors: ultimately
    a failure of systems as well as of single individuals, involving the Police as a Force, Sheffield
    Wednesday as a Club, their consulting engineers, the Health & Safety Executive, the Local Authority and
    the Football Association.

    3.5      Regrettably, HFSG has become acampaigning pressure group for what is now a relentless pursuit
    of these ex-police officers. Their lives have been and will continue to be seriously afflicted by their
    knowledge that they were involved at the epicentre of the disaster. A fair and dispassionate assessment
    of the position of the two proposed defendants would see them as having been seriously affected by their
    involvement in the tragedy. But there is no prospect of this private prosecution being carried on and

                                                                               Mr Murray's representations - 2/5
 conducted with any regard to the broader concepts of fairness and balance of public interest factors which
 any defendant in a criminal trial in this country is entitled to expect.


CPS/DPP Policy *the private prosecutor.
4.1     Even if there were to be a defensible evidential basis for continuing the proposed prosecution,
it would be wholly wrong for the public prosecuting authority to abandon responsibility for the conduct
of what undoubtedly would be a serious, complicated and important ‘high-profile’ case. Section
3(2XbXi) of the 1985 Act imposes a duty on the Director to institute and have die conduct of proceedings
where it appears that:
        “the importance or difficulty of the case makes it appropriate that proceedings should
        be instituted by him...”.
Although this duty is distinct from the duty to “take over” the conduct of proceedings, it is not a duty
whiciTthe Director can ignore. Parliament did not envisage that important or difficult cases(this would
be both) should be left to private prosecution. The scope for intervention by a private prosecutor in such
cases must clearly be confined to situations where inertia, partiality or improper action on the part of the
public prosecutor can be demonstrated.

4.2      Although section 6(1) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 expressly preserved the right of
private prosecution, it is clearly not an unfettered right. The purpose in preserving private access to the
criminal courts was stated by Lord Wilberforce in Gouriet -v- Union ofPost Office Workers R 9781 A.C
435 at 477:
         “This historical right..., though rarely exercised in relation to indictable offences, and
         though ultimately liable to be controlled by the Attorney-General (by taking over the
         prosecution and, if he thinks fit, entering a nolle prosequi) remains a valuable
         constitutional safeguard against inertia or partiality on the part of authority.”
See also: Report of the Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure (Cmnd 8092 (1981)): it provides a
useful and effective safeguard against“improper action” by the prosecuting authority: cited by Lloyd LJ.
in R -v- Boy/ Street Stipendiary Magistrate and Another, (1993) 96 Cr.App.R. 405.

4.3    The lengthy history of public investigations into the circumstances of the Hillsborough tragedy,
carried out at all stages under the auspices of the Home Secretary and the Law Officers, clearly
demonstrates that this is not an appropriate case for private prosecution.


HFSG - 1998 Representations to D.P.P.
5.1     Fundamentally, the HFSG representations amount to claims that, by reason of fraudulent
interference with and /or concealment of evidence by the South Yorkshire Police and/or the West
Midlands Police, the Taylor Inquiry, the D.P.P., the Police Complaints Authority, the Inquests, and Lord
Justice Stuart-Smith were all in their turn deceived about the culpability of the South Yorkshire Police
Force in relation to the tragedy of Hillsborough. These claims are presumed to be true, then translated
simplistically into a justification for prosecuting the two proposed defendants.

5.2    To overcome the objection that these were the veiy claims expressly considered and rejected by
the Scrutiny, HFSG contends that it is only post-Scrutiny that material has been released for their
consideration which now enables them to demonstrate the truth of their assertions. It is necessary to
examine this material with close attention to detail, for the claims based upon it are wholly spurious.

53      When viewed in conjunction with the serious allegations which were made to Lord Justice
Stuart-Smith. the present claims are seen as the continuation of a series of unfounded allegations made
in support of the long-standing conspiracy theory which has become entrenched in the thinking of the


                                                                          Mr Murray's representations - 3/5
/
    HFSG, and which now dominates the presentation of all their arguments. A summary of certain
    allegations together with the findings of the Lord Justice is set out in the following table.




                            A LLEG A TIO N                           FrNDrNGS OF STUART-SM ITH L.J.

       1    Video tapes w ere stolen by S.Y. police as pa n   There is no evidence for this suggestion. §22.
            o f a ‘cover-up’, p. 18, §22.                     One tape would have been blank. The other show ed
                                                              turnstiles 9 to 16. §21.

       2    Police blamed failure to see overcrowding in      “Quite untenable,” p.26, §61. N ote also:
            pens 3 and 4 on fact th at camera 5 defective.    [a] pp.24-5, §§51 and S2: M r M urray had given
           xThis was deliberately false, p.20, §33.1          evidence to the opposite effect. Ignored by HFSG
                                                              and not drawn to the attention o f Stuart-Smith L.J.
                                                              [b] M r Houldsworth (upon w hom HFSG relied)
                                                              said police would not rely on cameras; they had a
                                                              good view out o f the window: p.25, §55.
                                                              [c] When consulted by Stuart-Smith L.J., counsel
                                                              for the families at the Inquest said ic had n ever been
                                                              the police case that they could not see pens 3 and 4
                                                              were full because CCTV not working: p.26, §58.

       3    Evidence from video tapes o f w hat was filmed    There was never any disappearance or concealment
            by camera 5 deliberately supressed and            o f video footage from camera 5: p.27, §63. “ There
            concealed (by S.Y orkshire police and/or West     is no new video evidence...” p i 04 §7
            Midlands), p.20, §33.2                            Allegation that police hid videotape evidence is
                                                              completely unfounded. There was no suppression
                                                              or disappearance o f footage from the vital t a p e s ...
                                                              which were at all tim e s ... available to be seen by
                                                              legal representatives o f the families: p.30, §77.

       4    Houldsworth’s evidence w as deliberately          Importance o f his evidence exaggerated out o f all
            withheld from Inquest ju ry , p.20, §33.5         proportion. His existence and evidence w ere known
                                                              to Taylor Inquiry and to Coroner: p.36, §97.

       5    Inquesc verdicts procured by fraud,               Submissions unfounded: p.48, §53.
            suppression o f evidence o r insufficiency o f    “The suggestion that the evidence now put before
            inquiry; fraudulent concealm ent o f evidence:    m e ... was deliberately suppressed and those
            p.48, §52.6                                       concerned acted in bad faith is ... wholly
                                                              irresponsible” : p.52, §70.
                                                              [fraudulent concealment o f evidence]: “ suggestion
                                                              is false and 1 regard it as wholly irresponsible":
                                                              p.104, §12.




    5.4      The prosecutor continues to assert that the South Yorkshire Police and/or West Midlands
    carefully withheld important material from the Director and the Coroner, such that the 1990 decision not
    to prosecute and the Inquest verdicts were reached on an incomplete assessment of material evidence.
    These claims are dealt with in detail in Schedule A. An illusion of incomplete consideration is created
    by highlighting the fact that not all statements were considered and not all witnesses were called, Of
    course they were not For obvious reasons, many witnesses were repetitive of others, many were unable
    to speak about the focal matters under inquiry. Some sifting process to extract representative sample
    witnesses on critical issues was essential, otherwise the Hillsborough Inquiry and the Inquests would
    have been unmanageable. Evidence now relied on by the prosecutor as being new and previously

                                                                                   Mr Murray's representations - 4/5
               is substantially the same evidence as has already been thoroughly considered, but from
S n c o n s id e re d
different sources. This is analysed in Schedules B and C.




Mr Murray's representations - accompanying Schedules,
6.1      To assist the Director to give detailed consideration to the points and counter-points arising out
of the HFSG representations, we have prepared responses in the form of three Schedules:
         A - responses to the 40-page representations of Mr Jones Q.C. (24 September 1998);
         B - an analysis of the claims about ‘new evidence’ as it relates to the witness statements referred
to in the HFSG letter to CPS (24 August 1998); (these statements were withheld from us until late
September when they came with the representations);
     ^ C - an analysis of the claims about ‘new evidence’ as it relates to the 22 statements in Annex D
to the representations.
We respond to the claims made about the 38 statements served in support of the summonses in schedule
A. Most of these are general in nature.

6.2     Our submission is that none of the statements relied on establishes anything of material
significance, that is, which has not been known of or available before from other sources. The
prosecutor’s presentation relies on bulk without substance.

6.3      For brevity, we have adopted short-form responses where the same response can be made to
claims about witnesses or points about their evidence, (or deletions or amendments where those
allegations are made). The meaning of the notation we have adopted is as follows:
        NOT NEW - the witness says nothing which has not been established before by other evidence;
         INQUIRY, INQUEST, or SCRUTINY - indicates that the evidence, point or argument was fully
         taken into account by the relevant body, albeit as a result of evidence from other sources;
         AFTERMATH - this indicates that the evidence or argument relates to events after the tragedy
         had occurred, which are not material to the charges against Mr Murray;
        NOT MATERIAL - this indicates that the evidence or argument is not material to the charges
         against Mr Murray.

6.4         Accompanying these Representations.
            [1] The judgments of the Divisional Court in R -v- H.M.Coroner fo r South Yorkshire, ex
            p.Stringer, (see Schedule A, response to §§ 54-55).
            [2] Yorkshire Evening Post report of 17 September 1998, (see Schedule A, response to § 110).




                                                                    Michael Harrison Q.C.

                                                                    Simon Myerson.


Park Court Chambers
40, Park Cross Street
LEEDS, LSI 2QH.

2 October 1998.


                                                                          Mr Munay’s representations - 5/5
SCHEDULE A: RESPONSE TO PROSECUTOR’S REPRESENTATIONS: 24 September 1998.


  §                                H FSG A R G U M E N T                                                                     RE SPO N SE

  5     [aj CPS Code borne in mind.                                                     [a] Its principles have not been applied.
        [b] Realistic prospect o f conviction on basis o f Taylor findings alone        [bj If true, (his was (he position in 1990, so the implication is that counsel (hen
        (supported by proper basis o f witness statements).                             advising the DPP, and the Director himself, were wrong. They were not.
        [c] Prospect of conviction enhanced by Adomako.                                                [c] It is not. The fundamental principles o f law are the same. In any
        fdj Private prosecutor entitled to apply less strict test. Approach o f CPS     event, it would be contrary to principle and practice to prosecute after 9 years on
        now.                                                                            basis o f a change in interpretation o f the common law,
                                                                                        [dl Wrong. A private prosecutor who does not believe in a realistic prospect o f
                                                                                        conviction ought not to prosecute. The declared CPS policy o f not intervening with a
                                                                                        view to discontinuing is a different issue; as to which see §§2.2-2.5 o f the
                                                                                        accompanying representations.

 6-7    |a] Public interest factors and basis for taking over a private prosecution,    [a] See §§ 3.1 - 4.3 o f accompanying representations.
        (b] Prosecutor may dccide to raise an abuse o f process argument.               (b] Bizarre.

 9-10   [aj Mass o f new evidence made available since Scrutiny, hilherto               [a] There is no ‘new ’ evidence o f substance. It is the same evidence from different
        concealed by SYP.                                                               sources. See detailed analysis in Schedules Q and C.
        [b] Significance ‘difficult to overstate’; disclose manipulation o f evidence   [bj An extravagant claim in every respect.
        to the past benefit o f (be Defendants and SYP in general; cause all aspects
        o f investigation, statements etc to be examioed differently.

  11    Implies; [aj that the defendants rely upon previous                             Wrong. The issue is w hether there is any basis for the DPP to reconsidcr the 1990
        inquiries/investigations, and [bj that propositions (a)-(e) are relevant to     decision, sufficient to override the S-S conclusion that there was none. The corrupt
        that, (presumably to underm ine reliance).                                      conspiracy fixation o f the private prosecutor was repudiated in SCRUTINY. See also
                                                                                        INQUIRY § 16, Lord Taylor, and tribute to fairness and thoroughness o f policc
                                                                                        investigation from Secretary o f Football Supporters’ Association.

  12    [a] As pointed out in previous submissions, Taylor findings in themselves       [a] In §5 ante, it is claimed the same Findings alone disclosed a realistic prosped of
        amount almost to a prima facie case.                                            conviction.
        [b] The decision was taken by Duckenfield, with (he agreement o f               [bl Tills identifies (he prosecutor’s alleged basis for manslaughter against M r Murray.
        acquiescencc o f Murray.




                                                                                                                                                             SCHEDULE A - 1/7
         Witness statements already provided to the defence...provide cogcnt           This must refer to the 38 witness statements Hilton ( I) to Lang (38). The statements
1   13   evidential support for manslaughter/misfeasance allegations, combined         do not support the claim to cogent evidence o f manslaughter or misfeasance. There is
         with admissions o f fact by each defendant. The same is repeated as lo        nothing 'n e w ' in the statements.
         negligence in §16.                                                            The defendants’ statements and evidence have always been available. Fully
                                                                                       considered by INQUIRY, DPP (1990), SCRUTINY.

    14   Elements o f manslaughter.                                                    No admission as to individual criminal liability in respect o f any element.

    15   Taylor found, and inherent in acceptance o f liability by SYP in negligence   Muddle. Admissions by SYP in civil proceedings have no relevance to prosecution
         cases, that police w ere under duty, in breach, and causalion. Frosl.         o f individuals. Corporate civil liability is different from individual culpable homicide

    17   ’Conspicuous features’ in 35 (sic) statements:                                [a] Not new. Fact well-known to INQUIRY: §230 "Since pens 3 and 4 were full by
         fa} 1988 - policc diverted spectators from tunnel;                            2.50 pm, the tunnel should have been closed o ff whether gate C was to be opened or
         (bj “The unedited statements o f While and Lang ... prove the same, and       not. The exercise was a simple one and had been carried out in 1988 ... Unfortunately,
         suggest that it had been the practice of senior officers lo ensure that the   the 1988 closure seems to have been unknown to the senior officers on duty at the
         tunnel was dosed when the pens were full...                                   time. Jt did not figure in the debriefing notes. It therefore had no influence on the
         (cj could easily be seen from steps near control box;                         planning for 1989.”
         [dj this evidence ‘suppressed’ until 1998.                                    [b] A most serious distortion o f what the statements said. Insp. WHITE: (p.100-101)
                                                                                       “Although on rare occasions in the past I have used the gates nearest the concourse to
                                                                                       control flow away from the tunnel around to the south pen. I did this only for a few
                                                                                       moments as a psychological support to turn the fans round Co the south pen. I would
                                                                                       not use them for any length o f time as when they are in the closed position they would
                                                                                       be an obstruction in an emergency evacuation situation as they would have to be
                                                                                       opened against the crowd and also because (his is the only ingress/ egress for fans in
                                                                                       the central pens to get to the snack bar and toilet,’’ SCRUTINY, p.208.
                                                                                       P.C.LANG: (p. 165) [J988] “From approximately 2.30pm (1430) the area outside the
                                                                                       pens contained a large number o f people and at (he stairs there was an occasional
                                                                                       ‘rush’ bu( sufficient stewards were on duty to funnel the fans into a fairly orderly
                                                                                       queue. Sometime between 2.45 (1445) and 2.50 (1450) I received an order to close
                                                                                       the gates at the top o f the tunnel leading to the central pen and remain at these gates
                                                                                       to prevent entry by any further fans into the central pen. I closed the right hand gale
                                                                                       and remained at this post directing fans to the wing en tra n c e .... I do not know who
                                                                                       gave the order lo close these gates or why (he order was given.”
                                                                                       [c] Not new. View from conlrol box was established by INQUIRY: §231. This is
                                                                                       accepled by HFSG in §19.
                                                                                       [d] The facts were not suppressed.


                                                                                                                                                            SCHEDULE A *2/7
18   [aj Evidence o f how fans entered the tunnel and the central pens after Gate   [aj None o f this is 'new evidence’.
     C opened.                                                                      [bj This is not what Guest said. The words m our italics have been added. T he
     fb] “ P.C.Guest said lhat at 2.40 it was not going to be possible to           witness is dead. His statement will not be admissible.
     accomm odate the crowd outside the Leppings Lane entrance in those
     pens,"

19   M urray had been on duty m 1988 in the ContTol Box. He culpably failed         The first sentence asserts nothing new. M r M urray’s position in 1988 and J989 has
     in 1989 to give the proper and obvious advice.                                 been known throughout. The second sentence is assertion not proof.

20                                                                                  Nothing new. All o f this has been well known throughout.

23   Further witnesses.                                                             Not disclosed.

24                                                                                  None o f this can afTect the Director’s decision. The advice to SYP has come from
                                                                                    CPS and conforms with authority.

26   “ It has been an important part o f the prosecutor’s approach to the           This is a spurious justification. Nothing that HFSG has now which it did not have
     Director’s current review, and of our justification for bringing criminal      pre-Scrotiny adds anything o f material significance lo the facts which have been
     proceedings in 1998, lhat the HFSG has been deprived of critical               established since the INQUIRY INTERIM REPORT (August 1989). See Schedules
     information, statements and documents about the disaster for nine years.”      analysing (he statements upon which the private prosecutor relies.

31   [a] Documents made available by Home Secretary in 1998 permitted               [a] This is the SCRUTINY material, all examined by Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.
     HFSG to embark with confidence on prosecutions.
     [b] information oow available undermines Inquest verdicts o f accidental       [b] The SCRUTINY conclusion after consideration o f the same material was exactly
     death, and calls into question validity o f previous investigations.           the opposite.




                                                                                                                                                       SCH ED U LE A - 3 / 7
1 32-35   The decision to prosecute.                                              These paragraphs expose the reality o f the prosecutor's approach, and demonstrate
                                                                                  the implausibility o f the current claims to have further new evidence:
                                                                                  ■         tlie Scrutiny conclusions were rejected and ignored, §31; (by implication, so
                                                                                            were the views o f the Home Secretary, the Director and the A-G as to the
                                                                                            finality o f the Scrutiny Report);
                                                                                  ■         the decision to prosecute was taken before considering any of the Scrutiny
                                                                                            material which was to be made available, (despite conceding the importance
                                                                                            o f not making any decision without first doing that), §32;
                                                                                  »         Leading Counsel advised that prosecutions were justified on the basis o f the
                                                                                            INQUIRY findings, §33; (this involves that his advice purported to override
                                                                                            the 1990 advices o f leading counsel to the DPP, the decision o f the DPP, and
                                                                                            the Scrutiny conclusions);
                                                                                  ■         after counsel was instructed to formulate charges on the basis of the Taylor
                                                                                           findings, examination of the Scrutiny material disclosed sustained
                                                                                            suppression of the truth beyond the allegations which had led to the
                                                                                            SCRUTINY, §35.
                                                                                  It is obvious that some pretext o f further, post-SCRUTINY, fresh evidence would
                                                                                  have to be claimed in purported justification o f private summonses.

 36-37    Editing ofstatements: 24.8.98 documents and Annex D                     This argument is contrived to overcome the two factors which roost clearly show the
 39       [a] led to DPP and counsel being misled in 1990;                        prosecutions to be unjustified: the 1990 decisions and the SCRUTINY conclusions.
          [b] Lord Justice Stuart-Smith also misled on subject;                   The spurious nature o f the claims is demonstrated by careful analysis o f the
          [c] policy o f withholding information on negligence from INQUIRY and   statements now relied on: see SCHEDULES B and C.
          PCA.

 40-42    Sharpies and Hatfield                                                   [a) Sharpies’ statement does not seek to exculpate either defendant. Inconceivable
          la] deliberate plot to place Sharpies’ statement between those of       that experienced leading counsel and the DPP were influenced by juxtaposition, or
          DuckenfieJd and Murray in Master Witness List to influence reader       that anyone could have thought they might be.
          against prosecutions;                                                   (bj Something sinister seems to be hinted at here, but the author does not seem to
          [bj Hatfield's undisclosed statement was placcd last but one in MWL,    know what. The MWL position seems to contradict the theory advanced in §41.




                                                                                                                                                      SCHEDULE A -4 /7
43-48   Philips Report                                                                   Fanciful speculation that the report o f a witness for SYP in contribution proceedings
        [a] Report is dated ‘August 1990', same month as DPP decided not to              has influenced the 1990 decisions not to prosecute.
        prosecute, §43; date o f report is significant. Counsel advised against          [a] An irrational association o f unrelated events, based upon coincidence o f timing.
        prosecution on 6 August 5990, bul “contribution hearings” pending.               [b] Persislent speculation in the face o f contra-indications.
        [b] Not known to HFSG w hether DPP saw report. Not on list of                    [c] Unsubstantiated speculation. Irrelevant issue.
        documents considered by DPP in 1990. Maybe DPP saw other documents.
        M aybe report incorporated into W/Midlands Report.
        [c] Philips misled.

49-53   Selective supply of information to DPP                                           [a] The statements were edited to exclude opinion. This could not have influenced
        [a] edited statements;                                                           DPP because not admissible.
        [b] provisional selection for committal: only 7 in MWL, 8 at Inquest, 2 at       [b] the illusion o f ’new evidence’ by suggesting the committal will be based largely
        Inquiry;                                                                         on evidence not considered before; there is noihing ‘new ' in the 38 statements; [in
        [c] DPP only considered about (2% o f statements generated in Inquiry;           fact 4 gave evidence to the Inquiry];
        [d] partial (=.biased) selection o f documents submitted to DPP;                 [c]/[d] an illusion o f inadequate consideration based on an (inaccurate) manipulation
        [e] SYP have carefully withheld important material from DPP and                  o f statistics; inconceivable that DPP and counsel did not have an appropriate sample
        Coroner, adverse to SY P and the defendants.                                     o f statements in 1990; (see § 5.4 o f our accompanying representations).
                                                                                         fej prejudicial speculation.
                                                                                         The whole question o f editing o f statements, using sample statements and witnesses,
                                                                                         the decision o f the DPP in 1990 was considered thoroughly by the SCRUTINY.

54-55   Selective supply of information to Coroner                                       Continuation o f a long-running campaign to challenge the Inquest verdicts.
                                                                                         [a] Judgments in R-v- H.M.Coronerfor South Yorkshire, exp. Stringer [5 November
                                                                                         19931 arc attached.
                                                                                         [b] The conduct o f the Inquests was carefully reconsidered by the SCRUTINY.

56-91   Control of materiul                                                              Mr Murray cannot comment.

92-95   Further significance of Phillips                                                 [a] The conclusion does not follow from the stated facts.
        (a] “ In this way, the inquest, ostensibly objective and dispassionate, is now   fb) It is a relevant part o f the background that Inquest verdicts did not find unlawful
        shown to have been manipulated by South Yorkshire police for their own           killing. The defendant is entitled lo rely upon that as part o f his argument to the DPP.
        ends, and by Wesl Midlands police."                                              The extravagant rheloric in §95 is o f concern.
        [bj "For this reason, the defendants are not entitled to rely upon the
        inquest verdicts to put an end to this prosecution."




                                                                                                                                                             SCHEDULE A -5 /7
        Further argument about disclosure to a private prosccutor.              Mr Murray cannot comment.


110     Prejudicial Publicity                                                   [a] Factors affecting whether defendants will have a fair trial under a private
        [a] matter for judge o r magistrate;                                    prosecution are relevant lo the Director’s power lo intervene and discontinue. The
        [b] "m inor” compared to that West, Maxwells, Bulger case, the Krays,   McGovcm dramatisation was calculated to prejudice the public’s perception o f the
        Guinness, proposed Lockerbic defendants, Moors murderers, and many      role o f police officers in the tragedy.
        others;                                                                 [bj There are clear indications that further public prejudice against the defendants will
        [c] 1989 prejudice against Liverpool supporters never dispelled.        be deliberately created in the period leading up to committal hearings and any
                                                                                subsequent trial:
                                                                                ■         The ManicStreet Preachers. On 14 September 1998, this very well known
                                                                                          pop group released an album containing a track entitled “ S.Y.M.M.” , whose
                                                                                           lyrics refer to 'South Yorkshire Mass M urderer', with an undoubted link to
                                                                                           the Hillsborough tragedy by reference to the McGovern dramatisation o f the
                                                                                            1989 events. This group featured prominently in events run by HFSG in
                                                                                           May 1997 to raise funds in support o f the prosecutions.
                                                                                ■         A splinter group called Hillsborough Survivors and Relatives and
                                                                                          Supportersfor Justice Campaign has recently been formed. On J7
                                                                                          September 1998, the Yorkshire Evening Post (circulation in the Leeds and
                                                                                           West Riding areas) reported a message inviting support from people living
                                                                                           in Yorkshire. A spokesman was quoted as saying the* Group aimed to take “a
                                                                                           more proactive approach”, and the report added that the group is planning to
                                                                                           demonstrate outside Leeds Magistrates* Court next month at the next stage
                                                                                           o f a private prosecution against two former senior police officers by families
                                                                                           who hold ihem responsible for the tragedy. The pressure group message
                                                                                           amounts lo an invitation to persons in Yorkshire to support the
                                                                                           demonstration now that proceedings are lo be io Leeds, and not in Liverpool
                                                                                           as the HFSG intended when summonses were issued in Sefton.
                                                                                [c] Tins 'lit fortal’ argument is unbecoming.

111-7   Limitations of Stuart-Smith Report




                                                                                                                                                     SCHEDULE A -6 /7
111     Scmlmy conclusions on “ new evidence" are not significant, because              Entirely svrong and seriously misleading. Lord Justice Stuart-Smith examined
        confined to that tendered as new in 1996 when existence o f edited              approximately 100 amended statements. In 74 the amendment was o f no
        statements was unknow n; starved o f evidence; one example only (Frosl)         consequence, fn 26, comment and opinion had been excluded. In 5, factual matters
        offered to Scrutiny by a third party; scale o f editing now revealed excceds    were excluded which arguably should not have been. In 4, factual matter* implicit in
        anything shown to Stuart-Smith L»J.                                             comment arguably should not have been excluded. See SCRUTINY Report §§78-88,
        Also §112; conclusions about edited statements seriously wrong.                 pp.78-80. See further detail in SCRUTINY, Appendix 7, pp.205-210; Appendix 8,
                                                                                        pp.2l 1-12.
                                                                                        Note im p o rta n t conclusions a t §§104,105, p.64.

112     Caution in accepting facts in Report.                                           Nitpicking.

113     (aj Sandra Stringer,                                                            This § contains unrelated propositions.
        [b] Adomako.                                                                    Lord Justice Sluart-Smilh did not misunderstand the law.

 114    “The Stuart-Smilh report is itself economical with information."                We do not speculate as to what is implied by this comment. If the complaint is that
                                                                                        the 1990 Advice of counsel has not been disclosed, that could have been shortly
                                                                                        stated, but the explanation is obvious.

 115    “The knowledge available to the HFSG now, from the 35 (sic) statements,         This proposition cannot stand in the face o f the Scrutiny examination o f statements,
        the Master Witness List, and the edilcd statements, proves lhat material        the conclusions, and the analysis o f the so-called further ‘new evidence' relied on to
        was not available {to the DPPJ, and information o f a critical kind had been    justify the prosecutions.
        withheld."

 117    [a] Result o f SCRUTINY would have been very different; flaws and               [aj There is no basis for this assertion.
        partiality o f previous investigations would have been exposed.                 (b) The prosecutor has been asked to say whether it is intended to call Houldsworth
        {bj Account given by Houldsworth set out in full, and evidence criticised,      either at committal or at any subsequent trial. Response awaited.
        {cj Report does not m ention conversaiions                                      (c] Factually wrong. The Lord Justice spoke to neither defendant

IIS -   Frustration of Home Secretary's order for disclosure.                           la] The whole purpose o f the Scrutiny was to investigate allegations o f this sort. It did
120     [a] 119. Justified belief o f the Liverpool families: manipulated and cheated   so thoroughly and found no basis for the beliefs which leading counsel describes as
        over years; DPP misled in 1990; course o f justice perverted.                   justified. Nothing revealed since warrants the conclusion that the beliefs are justified,
        [b] 120. Distribution.                                                           [b] The distribution to members o f parliament smacks o f an attempt to bringing
                                                                                         political pressure to bear on the decision.

121                                                                                     It would be a serious injustice lo allow Ihe prosecution lo continue.




                                                                                                                                                              SCHEDULE A - 7/7
                  SCHEDULE B - RESPONSE TO CL/VIMS ABOUT WITNESSES IN LETTER 24.8.98


                  Witness       [ ta b ]                        Claim - per letter 24.8.98                                                               Response
                  [4] Holmes               ‘Careful excisions o f factual matters adverse lo SY police.’             In context, this is a comment about lack o f contact with Police Control o r a senior
                                           Page 24, last sentence.                                                   officer about action required in the confusion following the events which took
                                                                                                                     place. AFTERMATH. INQUIRY.

                  (5] lCFrost              ‘Careful excisions o f factual matters adverse to SY police.’ Page 35,    AFTERMATH. INQUIRY.
                                           Penultimate scDtencc. Comment about nobody organising the injured.

                  [6] Wilson               ‘Careful excisions o f factual matters adverse to SY police.' Page 50,    N O T MATERIAL. INQUIRY.
                                           third sentence. Impression about num ber o f foot officers at Lcppings
                                           Lane and on train escort.

                  [7J Guest                At pages 63 and 68. Obvious at 2.40pm that crowds outside L/Lane          This witness died before the Inquest, He was never cross-examined, His
                                           could not be accommodatcd. Would have been obvious to Defendants,         slatemenl would not be admissible at committal o r in a trial.
                                           SYP case at Inquest that overcrowding not evident before 3.00pm.          ‘Not sufficient room for all to be accommodated* is ambiguous. The witness
                                           Coroner took that view.                                                   never said "in those pens” {implying (he central pens} as claimed by leading
                                                                                                                     counsel in submissions § 18. The Inquiry found that the tragedy occurred because
                                                                                                                     the Gate C crowd were admitted lo the tunnel and thus lo the central pens. It was
                                                                                                                     never found that they could not have been accommodated in the West Stand at all,
                                                                                                                     which is what Guest's statement suggests. INQUIRY.

                  [8] Titterton            Removal o f important factual observations ... going to heart o f all     T he material ‘removed’ at pages 85-89 adds nothing at all to the evidence fully
                                           investigations.                                                           considered by INQUIRY.

                  {91 White                Deletion o f passages on pplOO-IOL White would always monitor build       Evidence has always established that there was a view o f the pens Grom the
                                           up in L/Lanc pens by climbing steps to control box (occupied ... by the   Control Box. INQUIRY. fNQUEST. SCRUTINY (§51. Bxtract from M r Murray
                                           two defendants and others) to get a good view. Can be no honest           at Inquest: "W e had a good view o f the terraces from the Control Box...’’, §52.
                                           reason for deletion o f (his evidence. [See also Claims under             Lord Justice Stuart-Smith expressed surprise that Counsel had not seeD fit to draw
                                           Woodcock.]                                                                this passage to his attention.]
i n ■ r i ncc I




                                                                  *

                                                                                                                                                                                SCHEDULE B- 1/2
[JO] Woodcock     Demonstrates central importance o f deletions from White. White              Woodcock says: "H e told me that his serial usually got the jo b o f putting the
                  (p.i 12) normally diverted spectators from central pens, but on this         crowd in the different pens at the rear o f the goalmouth, working from the outside
                  occasion w as told not to. If true proves statement o f Betlison wrong.      to the centre, but for some reason he’d been told to lei the fans find their own
                  Issue at heart o f ease. SYP claim 1988 diversion from central pens          level, on this occasion, resulting in too many going into the area immediately
                  unknown to senior officers. 1988 events prove foreseeability: Obvious        behind the goal.” (p. 112)
                  relevance to manslaughter. Honest course would have been lo ask              What Woodcock says White told him is not proof o f anything against Mr Murray.
                  White about W oodcock’s account. Instead, passages in both were              The prosecutor's complain! about how these statements were handled is not proof
                  excised and truth suppressed. Seven page statement of While is in            cither.
                  M W L. May have been first statement submitted with lines deleted.
                  [Further argument based on Wilson.]

[11] Pattison     Important deletions of factual observations adverse to interests o f SYP.    P. 123 Penultimate para. AFTERMATH.

[12] Tissington   Important deletions of factual observations adverse lo interesls o f SYP.    P. 141 “ 1 remember saying ... lynched through it.” P.144 last para.
                                                                                               AFTERMATH.

[13] Lang         'N either the important matters at the end of page 163 in the six page       [A] U is correct lhat the last 7 lines on page 163 are not repeated in the statement
                  statement’ (sic, there arc five pages), nor any of the statement of 2nd      at pages 167-171. There are two points: [a] comment that opening Gate C
                  June 1989, appears in the five page amended report al pages 167 to 171       transferred the problem inside the ground and would need a lol more P C 's to
                  o f the file.’                                                               control it; (this adds nothing to the conclusions of INQUIRY, INQUEST or
                  M W L shows 5 (possibly 4) page statement sent to DPP.                       SCRUTINY), and [b] comment that one Serial was employed in 1989 against two
                                                                                               in 1988.
                  (Sec also HFSG Representations §17; reference WHITE & LANG;                  (B) The contents o f the statement 2 June 1989 about 1988 control of the tunnel
                  argument that evidence suppressed.)                                          and the order to close the gates to the central peos were no! deletedfrom thal
                                                                                               statement. Although the 1988 evidence is not contained within the subsequent
                                                                                               statement at pages 167-173, il is substantially repeated in the statement at p. 166
                                                                                               (dated 30 June 1990).
[14] Kennedy      Important deletions o f factual observations adverse to interests o f SYP.   P. 176 “Several senior officers...lacking in directing the officers there towards
                                                                                               useful purpose." AFTERMATH.

[15] Dunn         Important deletions o f faclual observations adverse to interests o f SYP.   P. 189 "I was on duty at the same Semi-FinaL.unable to assess Ihe situation
                                                                                               correctly and out swiftly from I..." (sic) Adds nothing to findings o f INQUIRY,
                                                                                               INQUEST or SCRUTINY. Comment about observations from control room add
                                                                                               nothing.

[16] Royle        Important deletions o f factual observations adverse to interesls o f SYP.   P. 198 - last 4 lines. Adds nothing.                                                   |


                                                                                                                                                          SCHEDULE B- 212
SCHEDULE C - RESPONSE TO CLAIMS ABOUT SPECIFIC WITNESSES: ANNEX D


   Witness                       C la im - [-] page reference in A n n ex D                                                   Response
( ! ) Booth      [J] [a] deletion at (3].                                                    [a] Immaterial.
                 [b] deletion at (7-9]: references to 1988 in statement 1.6.89 not           [b] Observations not new material. The 198 8 circumstances were fully
                 incorporated into amended report [10-13].                                   considered at INQUIRY.

(2) Beresford    [14) [a] deletion and 2 amendments [21]                                     [a]Not new. Communications issues were fully considered at INQUIRY,
                 ]b] amendment and deletion [22 and 31; 23]                                  [b]Changes and deletion of no substance. Aftermath.

(3) Bradley      [33] deletion and amendment.                                                Aftermath.

 (4) Hubbard     [40] [a] deletion re Wain.                                                  (a] Immaterial.
                 [b] report not incorporBling 1988 experience. Implication o f a queuing     |b ] Nolb'ing new in ihis. INQUIRY fully considered 1988 policing; §214-5.
                 system.

 (5) McDonnell   [56] [a] amendment; [b) deletion                                            la] N o change o f substance; (b] aftermath

 (6) Powell      [65] deleiion                                                               Not new. Issue fully considered by INQUIRY/SCRUTINY

 (7) Bustis      [76] deletion. Complaint that Stuart-Smitb LI did not comment on            SCRUTINY p.208. As indicated at [76], the Report quoted the passBge
                 "how Liverpool fans always congregate very heavily behind the goal          describing the wiiness's impressions o f 1988 conditions in the pens w here
                 area".                                                                      Liverpool fans had congregated. Stuart-Smith LJ must have been fiilly
                                                                                             aware o f the rest of the deletion, which adds nothing to the substance o f
                                                                                             what was quoted. This witness was fully considered by the SCRUTINY.

(8) Crawford     [86] [a] deletion.                                                          [a] The claim is unfounded. Scrutiny Report (p.209) does not quote the
                 None o f statement 31.5.89 (dealing with 1988) was incorporated inlo        passage cited, but it does refer to it: “ But his past experience relating to the
                 amended report.                                                             shutting o f the centre pens is a question o f fact” .
                 Complaint that Stuart-Smilh LJ fails to refer to deletion o f passage       Clear that Stuart-Smiih LJ fully considered the point.
                 [94]:                                                                       INQUIRY: §230 - fully aware that tunnel had been closed o f f m 1988.
                 "A t 1450 hours we had an instruction believed verbal, that no more         SCRUTINY: p .2 I9 §9: ciled this passage from Inquiry Report.
                 fans were to be allowed info the central pens, therefore, the wooden
                 gale at the rear o f the tunnel was closed deny ing access. This was done
                 by PC 1278 Lang "                                                           [b] Involves no material change.
                 [b] amendment.


                                                                                                                                                         SCHEDULE C - 1 / 3
(9) Brookes     [102} [a} amendment: ‘stressed/adamant’ - Duckenfield.         [a] Not material.
                [bj deletion: officers’ distress.                              [b] Not material.                , ,
                [c] amendment: ‘centre section was now [too) full.             [c] Not new, INQUIRY: § 184 - finding that by 2.52 pm “pens 3 and 4
                [d] amendment: 2.54 lo2.56.                                    were over-full even by this test. Many were uncomfortable. To allow any •
                [c] deletion (107]                                             more into those pens was likely to cause injuries; to allow in a large stream
                [f] deletion o f ‘observations’.                               was courting disaster” ; §230 - "since pens 3 and 4 were full by 2.50pm, the
                                                                               funnel should have been closed o f t w hether gate C was to be opened or
                                                                               not".
                                                                               No need for SCRUTfN Y Report to refer lo distinction full/too full.
                                                                               [d] Not material.
                                                                               [e] Not new.
                                                                               [fj Not evidence. Comments about kick-off and capacity fully considered
                                                                               by INQUIRY. Comparison with Manchester United match was considered
                                                                               by SCRUTINY (P.208).

(JO) Burgess    (118] [a] amendment,                                           [a] Establishes nothing new: was a factual correction o f an estimated time
                [b deletion.                                                   or a guess. INQUIRY §66 concluded request came between 2.40-2.45.
                                                                               Point is that it was established that the call cam e before gates opened.
                                                                               [b] Not new. N ot material.

(f 1) Walpole   [131] [a] deletion: did not hear radio message; packedsolid.   [a] Comment about radio message adds nothing. 'Packed solid* remained
                                                                               in the statement in an important sentence: [ 134] lines 4-7. Considered in
                                                                               SCRUTINY: P.207.
                                                                               [b] Opinion. All factors considered: INQUIRY, INQUEST, SCRUTINY.

(12)Crroome     [143] [a] deletion: observations 1030-1230.                    [a] Irrelevant.
                [b] deletion: re Insp.Calvert                                  (b) Irrelevant.
                (cj amendment: 'o v er the air’ to ‘from the control room ’.   [cj Change o f no substance. Aftermath.
                [d] 3 deletions [148-149]                                      [d] Aftermath.
                je] deletions numbered (1 >-(3), (5)-( 10).                    [e] (l)-(3), (5) and (7) considered by SCRUTINY, p.2<tf; (6), (8>-(10)
                                                                               were comments fully considered in INQUIRY and SCRUTINY.

(13) Brophy     [157] deletions.                                               Nothing new. All considered INQUIRY.




                                                                                                                                        SCHEDULE C -2 /3
(14) Sanderson   [166] [a] am endm ent 'g o in g o n ’ to 'being conducted’ ,   [a] Change o f no substance.
                 [b] 2 insertioDS.                                              [b] Neither is significant.
                 (cj amendment: changes re technical work done.                 [c] The amendment is an expansion of the technical work carried out. It
                 (e] amendment: 'about 1440' to ‘about 1448'.                   makes no change o f substance.
                 [f] Insertion.                                                 [e] Change unexplained. Relevance?
                                                                                [f] Adds nothing.

(15) Croot       [173] deletions.                                               Comment, nothing new.

(16) Huckatepp   [194] deletion.                                                Fully considered by INQUIRY (Huckstepp cross-examined); West
                                                                                Midlands and SCRUTINY (p.207),
                                                                                Per SCRUTINY, the unamended statement (7.5.89) was seen by
                                                                                INQUIRY and W.Midlands.

(17) France      [205] amendment.                                               N o change o f substance.

(18) Cauunock    [219] [aj amendment,                                           [a] No change o f substance.
                 [b] deletion.                                                  [b] Irrelevant.

(19) Bennett     [240] [a] 3 deletions,                                         [a] Nothing new.
                 [b] amendment.                                                 [b] No change o f substance.

(20) Ramsden     [257] deletions at [263] and [267-268],                        [263] Was expressly considered by Stuart-Smith LJ, SCRUTINY p.209.
                 Complaint that Scrutiny Report does not comment on             (267-8] was opinion which added nothing new.

(21) Hanson      [279] deletion.                                                Comment, Not new.

(22) Athom       [295] deletion.                                                Not new.




                                                                                                                                        SCH ED U LE C - 3/3
                        ADLINGTON -V- DUCKENFIELD and MURRAY

                    FURTHER REPRESENTATIONS TO THE DIRECTOR
                        ON BEHALF OF MR BERNARD MURRAY

1.1   This is in response to the further representations of the private prosecutor, dated 2
October, received after completion of our principal representations and schedules of even date.

1.2    The Director may be as concerned as we are to receive ten further pages of
representations. We had thought that the thirty-six plus pages of closely-typed representations
were the distillation of leading counsel’s analysis of the justification for the proceedings.
Apparently not.

1.3 We have already invited attention to the HFSG approach to issuing these proceedings, (see
our Schedule A, response to §§ 32-35). It boils down to: issue the summonses come what may,
and then try to find the justification. The Supplementary Representations purport to identify an
evidential basis for the charges. That this should come as an after-thought, to buttress extensive
submissions already made in Defence of the summonses, is a further worrying indication of the
way in which these proceedings are being conducted.

A ttem pting to p e rv e rt the course o f ju stic e
2.1    We make no response to § § 1-3 0, so far as they relate to a charge against Mr Duckenfield
alone.

2.2 In §23, the references to Mr Murray are irrelevant to and certainly inadmissible on the
charge against Mr Duckenfield.

M anslaughter a n d M isfeasance - M r D uckenfield
3.1    §35. It is said:
        “In performing his duties, he [Mr Duckenfield] was acting on the “advice” of
Superintendent Murray.”
Reference “28A” is cited in support. This is page 28 of the INQUIRY transcript of Mr
Duckenfield’s evidence. It is important to read it in context. The witness was answering
questions about the rate at which spectators can pass through the turnstiles:
       “Q. MR COLLINS: Are these figures that went through your mind at the time, or is this
       with hindsight?
       A: This is with hindsight, and the advice of Superintendent Murray.”
The citation does not support the much broader proposition which the prosecutor asserts.

3.2     §39. Reference to pp. 10-11 (INQUEST 12 March 1991). Nothing turns on this fact.

3.3      Although aimed at Mr Duckenfield, we express concern at the approach to Prosecution
disclosed by §40:
         “... and furthermore, they will submit that they disclose a wanton and perhaps angry
         disregard for the safety of people in the pens, when other people, whom Duckenfield
         regarded as of the same ilk. were causing him a serious problem outside the ground.”
It is not the proper role of a prosecutor to pui such a tendentious gloss upon serious allegations.

3.4   At §41, the prosecutor attracts attention to one of the inherent flaws in the claim that
manslaughter can be made out in iaw.
M anslaughter and M isfeasance - M r M u r r a y
4.1    §42. The first sentence is an extraordinary proposition; mere assertion without proof or
any basis in evidence.

4.2     The prosecutor cites extracts from INQUIRY and INQUEST as evidence of the two
offences. Nothing identified and relied on here is in any way ‘new’. (Citations are given without
indication of whether they are from INQUIRY or INQUEST evidence.)

4.3    §42: “... for the purposes of the present review...” If this is meant to imply the existence
of further evidence on which the prosecutor may seek to rely, it should be identified now.

4.4 §§43 to 55. All of this was fully taken into account by the INQUIRY, INQUEST,
SCRUTINY. It must have been known to and taken account of by counsel advising the Director
in 1990.

4.5 §47. The prosecutor cannot distinguish between foresight and hindsight. 93G-H
(INQUIRY evidence) is nowhere near an admission to Caldwell/Lawrence recklessness. It ought
not be necessary to point out that “almost an admission” is not an admission.

4.6     §50. Careful consideration of the evidence given is necessary. It appears at INQUIRY
1 June 1989, pages 18C-19A (not page 17 as indicated in §50). Mr Murray was there referring
to the position at league matches where fans from opposing teams had to be segregated behind
the same goal. The position was different where tickets for the whole stand were allocated to one
team. But the prosecutor has simply translated the evidence into an acknowledgement that “it had
been an option for the police to fill up the pens in series at the match” (our emphasis), meaning
on 15 April 1989. This is not what the witness said. Further, the policy of ‘find their own level’
was fully considered by INQUIRY : (§§ 171 -4), with reference to past practice at both league and
cup matches.

4.7 §§53-54. References are to INQUEST 11 March 1991. Nothing here amounts to a case
against Mr Murray on manslaughter or misfeasance. The prosecutor wholly ignores the critical
context in which the events occurred.

4.8    §56. A shabby argument.

4.9     §57. The PCA decided that it would be wrong to continue disciplinary proceedings
against M if unable to do so against D. To use this in support of the proposition that M must be
responsible for all the acts or omissions of D is captious reasoning.

4.10    §58. This theme is no more convincing by repetition.

4.11    §59. Is there other relevant evidence or not? If there is, why has it not been served or
        disclosed? The situation is irregular and unacceptable.


                                                                                Michael Harrison QC

                                                                                Simon Myerson
Park Court Chambers
40 Park Cross Street
LEEDS
                                                                                                            im
Miss D. H. SharpUng
Chief Crown Prosecutor                                                                                      CPS
                                                                                                            CPS Central Casework
                                                                                                            United House
                                                                                                            Piccadilly
                                                                                                            York YOl 1PQ

                                                                                               Switchboard: 01904-450070
 r   Winkworth Sherwood
                                                     1                                            V X N«-   65204 York 6

     35 Great Peter Street                                                Fccsimil/'-   019'
     Westminster
     LONDON                                                            Direct Line:     019
     SW1P 3LR
                                                                     Ojt- Reference:           YBF/GCY3341/89
 L                                                   J               )W                        24332/1/SBE/jet


                                                                                               18 November 1998



     Deai- Sirs


     RE:     ADLINGTON V DUCKENFIELD and MURRAY
             LEEDS MAGISTRATES’ COURT-2 1 DECEMBER 1998


     In early July 1998, you wrote lo the Crown Prosecution Service asking that we take over, in
     order to discontinue, the criminal proceedings against your client which have been brought by
     Ms Ann Adlington on behalf of the Hillsborough Family Support Group.

     We have considered this request in detail.

     Mr. Duckenfield faces two charges of manslaughter, one of wilful neglect to perform a public
     duty and one charge of attempting to pervert the course o f justice. Mr. Murray faces two
     charges of manslaughter and one of wilful neglect to perform a public duly.

     We have considered the evidence, the representations made by the parties and all the
     surrounding circumstanccs of the case. We have concluded that we should not intervene to
     take over any of the charges.

     For your information I enclose a copy of a press notice.

     Yours faithfully,




     Christopher H. Enzor
     Branch Crown Prosecutor




                                jxrr,rrr^l^ryi]   - Working in thf jvtervsts of justice
C W P Newell
B«reett3tJ0fGasewcudr^vah»ttsii
                                                                                                CPS
ajsMSbietlropesteE
                                                                                                Headquarters
                                                                                                50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                London EC4M 7EX


                                                                                 Direct Line:   0171-273 1226
 r                                                  1                            Switchboard:   0171-273 8000
     Messrs Winckworth Sherwood                                                    Facsimile:   0171-329 8366
                                                                                      DX No:    300850 Ludgate EC4
     Solicitors
     DX 2312 Victoria

                                                                   Your Ref: 24332/1/SBE/jet

 L                                                  J               1 February 1999




     Dear Sirs

     ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

     You wrote to the Crown Prosecution Service on 23 December 1998, following the receipt of a
     letter from the CPS dated 18 December 1998, informing you of the Service's decision not to
     exercise its power under Section 6(2) o f the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 to take over the
     criminal proceedings against your client with a view to discontinuing them.

     You ask for further information; first, for full and detailed reasons for the decision taken;
     secondly, for confirmation that the evidentiary test applied by the CPS in coming to our
     conclusion was that set out in our letter to the HFSG of 27 July 1998; and thirdly, as to the
     way in which the Service applied the Code for Crown Prosecutors in deciding whether to
     intervene.

     These questions indicate that you misunderstand the factors that the CPS considers when
     deciding whether to take over a private prosecution at the request o f a defendant, with a view
     to discontinuance. It may help if I indicate again in broad terms the approach that the Service
     adopts to these decisions.

     As you know, the Code for Crown Prosecutors sets out the general principles applied by the
     Service when (inter alia) deciding whether to continue a prosecution it has taken over; or
     whether to institute proceedings, or to advise the police whether to do so. It is correct that the
     CPS decided in 1997 that the evidence at that time was not sufficient, in its view, to provide a
     realistic prospect of the conviction o f either your client or Mr. Murray for any offence.
     However, the decision whether to intervene in a private prosecution with a view to
     terminating it calls for different considerations to be applied. It is quite possible for a private
     prosecution to continue, notwithstanding that the CPS is not satisfied, on the basis of its own
assessment of the strength of the evidence, that the evidence would pass the evidential
sufficiency test in the Code (that there should be a "realistic prospect of a conviction").

In broad terms, the reason for this is that Section 6(1) of the Prosecution of Offences Act
1985, the Act which established the Service's powers and duties, specifically preserved the
right of private individuals and prosecuting authorities or bodies other than the CPS to bring
criminal proceedings. This right is subject (among other limitations) to the limitation in
Section 6(2) that the CPS may nevertheless take over the proceedings with a view either to
conducting or to terminating those proceedings.

Private prosecutors are not bound to apply the Code for Crown Prosecutors when deciding
whether to institute proceedings, nor do the courts apply the evidential sufficiency test in the
Code when deciding whether there is a case to answer. The Service therefore recognises that
it is not appropriate to intervene to terminate a private prosecution without good reason. That
general principle has recently been endorsed by the Law Commission in its Consultation
Paper No. 149 "Consents to Prosecution" (see paragraphs 6.3 and 6.4).

The Service’s policy is that it will not take over a private prosecution with a view to
terminating it unless one or more of the following applies:

(i)      there is clearly no case to answer. A private prosecution started in these
         circumstances would be unfounded and ought not to be permitted to continue; or

(ii) .   the public interest factors tending against prosecution clearly outweigh those in favour
         (examples might be where the prosecution is malicious, or vexatious; or the offence is
         one for which the defendant should clearly have been cautioned; or where, although
         the offence may be serious, the defendant is terminally ill); or

(iii)    the prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests of justice.

In this case, I took the decision not to intervene. After careful consideration, I concluded in
respect of the charges of manslaughter and wilful neglect to perform a public duty (which, for
the avoidance of doubt, were considered against each individual separately) that I could not
say that there is clearly no case to answer. It was not right, therefore, for the Service to take
over the proceedings with a view to terminating them.

Against that background, and after specifically considering the appropriate course to take in
these circumstances, I concluded further that it would not be right to intervene in respect of
the one remaining charge against Mr Duckenfield, of attempting to pervert the course of
justice, albeit I had formed the view that there was clearly no case to answer on that charge,
alone. The charge of attempting to pervert the course of justice is a serious one, particularly
when levelled against someone who was, at the relevant time, a serving, senior police officer.
Nevertheless, in the context of the case as a whole that charge is not the gravamen of the
criminality alleged against Mr. Duckenfield and I concluded that my approach to that charge
 should be led by my conclusions on the charges of manslaughter and wilful neglect to
perform a public duty.

I also considered whether, nevertheless, there were overriding public interest factors that
should lead to the Service intervening with a view to discontinuance, but I came to the
conclusion that any public interest factors tending against prosecution did not clearly
outweigh those in favour; nor did I consider that the prosecution is clearly likely to damage
the interests of justice.

The Crown Prosecution Service is not obliged in law to provide detailed reasons for its
decisions, let alone an analysis of the evidence. However, in the circumstances of this
particular case I consider it appropriate to explain the factors taken into account in more detail
than was contained in the Service's letter dated 18 December 1998.

I have written in similar terms to those representing Mr Murray and enclose a copy of that
letter, for your information. I have sent copies of both letters to Ms Adlington.

Yours faithfully




C W P NEWELL
Director, Casework
                                                                            (1) C.W .P. Newell
                                                                              (2) First Affidavit
                                                               (3) Sworn on behalf of Respondent
                                                                            (4) Sworn 22.3.99.

                                                                                     C-Q/g^/9?
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUSTTCE

QUEEN'S B E N C H DIVISION



B E TW EEN :



                                         REGINA



                             DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
                                                                                   R e spo n den t
                                         Ex parte
                               DAVID GODFREY DUCKENHELD
                                           and
                                 BERNARD DEAN MURRAY
                                                                                    Aopljfflnts




                                     AFFIDAVIT




I, CHRISTOPHER WILLIAM PAUL NEW ELL, of 50 Ludgate Hill, London EC4M 7EX,
MAKE OATH and say as follows:


1.   I am Director of Casework of the Crown Prosecution Service at the above address and

      it was I who took the decision in this case on behalf of the CPS and the DPP not to

      intervene in the private prosecution against Messrs Duckenfield and Murray. I refer

      to my letters of 1 February 1999 to the solicitors for Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray,

      in which I sought to set out the reasons which led me to that decision. I am now asked

      to elaborate on my conclusion that any public interest factors tending against
     prosecution did not clearly outweigh those in favour and on my conclusion in relation

     to the specific charge against Mr Duckenfield alone of attempting to pervert the course

     of justice.




PUBLIC INTEREST FACTORS

2.   As I now recall, the public interest factors tending against prosecution which I

     considered were as follows.

     (1)     Previous reviews of the case, in particular those carried out by the DPP when

             considering the question whether criminal proceedings should be taken against

             M r Duckenfield and Mr Murray and the more recent report of Lord Justice

             Stuart-Smith.

     (2)     The fact that the Applicants had been told on previous occasions that the DPP

             did not intend to prosecute.

     (3)     The delay which had occurred between the commission of the alleged offences

             and the commencement of this prosecution and its likely effect on the

             Applicants, although I took the view that delay may be offset by the seriousness

             of the alleged offences (as is reflected in paragraph 6.5(d) of the Code for

             Crown Prosecutors) ("the Code”).

     (4)     The effect of the delay on the evidence, for example in terms of the potential

             impairment of the recollections of witnesses.

     (5)     The assertion made on behalf of Mr Murray of ill-health, although I noted that

             no medical evidence had been put forward in support of this assertion and that,

             as again reflected in the Code (at paragraph 6.5(e)). ill-health may be offset by



                                             2
             che seriousness of the offence.




3.   As against these factors tending against prosecution, there was in my view one

     extremely important factor in favour of prosecution, namely the very serious nature of

     the alleged offences, in particular, the alleged offences of manslaughter.         In my

     opinion, the allegation that two senior police officers were responsible for the deaths

     of a number of people as a result of criminal negligence was a very grave allegation.



4.   Paragraph 6.2 of the Code reflects the considerable weight attached by the CPS to the

     seriousness of the alleged offence when seeking to strike the right balance as to the

     factors for and against prosecution. (I refer also to the opening words of paragraph

     6.4).   Having carefully considered the factors tending against prosecution and this

     extremely important factor in favour of it, I came to the firm conclusion that the factors

     tending against prosecution did not clearly outweigh what I considered'to be the very

     strong public interest factor in favour of prosecution.



THE ADDITIONAL CHARGE AS AGAINST MR DUCKENFIELD ALONE

5.   I was fully aware of the seriousness of this additional charge.        I also tentatively

     concluded that partial intervention (i.e. intervening in order to cake over one charge but

     not intervening in relation to the other charges) was in law open to the CPS and I

     proceeded on that assumption. However, the existing policy did not cover the situation

     which arose in this case, namely where the conclusion was reached that there was

     clearly a case to answer in relation to some of the charges but not in relation to others.



                                               3
        (I can say that with some confidence, since I had overall responsibility for formulating

        the policy). I had therefore to consider the question which arose in relation to this

        additional charge without the benefit of any specific or settled policy. Having carefully

        considered the question, I concluded that it was in fact inappropriate to intervene only

        to take over (with a view to discontinuing) this additional charge.



6.      First, partial intervention was not, in my view, either appropriate or desirable. It

        seemed to me that the DPP should either intervene so as to take over the proceedings

        in their entirety or not at all. To have intervened partially would still have left criminal

        proceedings in place in relation to the other charges which included the even more

        serious charge of manslaughter.       Secondly, I took into account the fact that Mr

        Duckenfield would not be left without any remedy in relation to this additional charge.

        On the contrary, he would be entitled to invite the Magistrates’ Court to dismiss it on

        the basis thai there was no case to answer. Thirdly, the charge arose, out of essentially

        the same events as the events which gave rise to the other charges and thus those events

       would be scrutinised in any event.



SWORN at

this Z h . dayi



Before me,

                               Solicitor/€€Knmissioner-fQ£ Oaths




                                                 4
                                                           Case Nos: CO/ 856/99. CO/Q934..
                                                         CO 1070/99. CO/1071/99.CQ/0582/99
IN THE SUPREME COURT OF JUDICATURE
DIVISIONAL COURT
                                                                    Royal Courts of Justice
                                                               Strand, London. WC2A 2LL

                                                                       Date: 31 March 1999
                                       Before:

                              LORD JUSTICE LAWS
                             MR JUSTICE CRESWELL
                                      and
                              MR JUSTICE LATHAM

                                         R
                                         v
                     THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
                                      ex parte
                               (1) DUCKENFIELD
                                   (2) MURRAY

                                      R
                                      v
                 (1) SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
                                     and
(2) ANN ADLINGTON (ON BEHALF OF THE HILLSBOROUGH FAMILY SUPPORT GROUP)
                             (3) DUCKENFIELD
                                (4) MURRAY
                   (5) HILLSBOROUGH POLICE AUTHORITY
                                   ex parte
               THE CHIEF CONSTABLE OF SOUTH YORKSHIRE


         Mr Michael Harrison QC and Mr Simon Myerson (for Duckenfield & Murray)
       (instructed by Winkworth Sherwood for Duckenfield and Walker Morris for Murray)
      Mr Alun Jones QC and Mr Janies Lewis (for the Hillsborough Family Support Group)
          Ms Presiley Baxendale QC and Mark Shaw (for the South Yorkshire Police)
                           (instructed by Garretts for the Respondents)
                    Mr P Havers QC (for the Director of Public Prosecutions)
                              (instructed by the Treasury Solicitors)
                 Nigel Baker QC and Ms Louise Varty (for the Chief Constable)


    JUDGMENT: APPROVED BY THE COURT FOR
    HANDING DOWN (subject to editorial corrections)
     Ju d g m en t: A pproved b y th e C ourt fo r handino dow n                   Ex P arte Murray & Ouckenfield
     (subject to editorial corrections)                            R v Chief C onstable of S outh Yorkshire Police
                                                                       Ex Parte S o u th Yorkshire Police Authority



                             R v THE DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC PROSECUTIONS
                                              ex parte
                                       DUCKENFIELD & MURRAY

                             R v SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE AUTHORITY
                                                and
                                          ANN ADLINGTON
                                              ex parte
                         (1) THE CHIEF CONSTABLE OF SOUTH YORKSHIRE
                                    (2) DUCKENFIELD & MURRAY

12
     LORD JUSTICE LAWS

15                    These are linked applications for judicial review which require the court,
      to revisit the terrible disaster which took place at the Hillsborough Football Ground at
      Sheffield on 15 April 1989. In what I will call the first case the applicants Mr
18   Duckenfield and Mr Murray (to whom I will refer as “D” and “M”), who are retired
      police officers, seek leave to move for judicial review of the decision of the Director
      of Public Prosecutions (“the DPP”) to refuse to take over and discontinue private
21    prosecutions which have been instituted against them by Ann Adlington (“AA”) on
      behalf of the Hillsborough Family Support Group (“the HFSG”). The decision was
      communicated by letter of 18 December 1998. On 15 March 1999 Latham J adjourned
24   the leave application to 22 March 1999 and directed that the parties should then be
      ready to proceed with the substantive application if leave were granted. On 22 March
      this court granted leave and proceeded at once to hear the inter partes application. In
27   the second case the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire (“the CCSY”) seeks to
      challenge a decision of the South Yorkshire Police Authority (“the SYPA”) made on 5
      February 1999 to the effect that it lacked the legal power to fund the defences of D
30    and M to the private prosecutions brought by AA, or to fund their prospective ju d ic ia l^
      review applications against the DPP. On 12 February 1999 Latham J granted leave to
      the CCSY, joined AA as second respondent, abridged time and ordered expedition. On
33   24 March 1999 this court (having reserved judgment in the first case the previous day)
      granted leave to D and M to challenge the same decision and. again, proceeded at once
      to hear the inter partes application. We now deliver our judgments in both cases.
36
                    I will first set out the facts material to the first case, which also form the
     necessary background to the second. I will later describe the further facts which are
39   specifically relevant to the second case.

                  The football match at Hillsborough on Saturday 15 April 1989 was the
42   FA Cup semi-final between Liverpool Football Club and Nottingham Forest Football
     Club. In the events which happened 96 people lost their lives. The Divisional
     Commander in charge of police operations at the match was D, then holding the rank
45   of Chief Superintendent in the South Yorkshire Police Force. The second applicant.


     Drali ."10 M arch 19V,1 12:26
      Ju d g m en t: A pproved b y th e C ourt for handino dow n                  Ex P arte M urray & Duckenfield
      (subject to editorial corrections)                           R v Chief C onstable of S o u th Yorkshire Police
                                                                       Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



      then Superintendent Murray, held the position of Sub-Divisional Commander and was
      also on duty at the match.
 3
                     On 17 April 1989 Taylor LJ, as he then was, was appointed by the
       government to conduct a public inquiry into the disaster. He heard the oral testimony
 6    of 174 witnesses between 15 May and 29 June 1989, and presented an interim report
       on 4 August 1989. He found that the immediate cause of the gross overcrowding
       which had taken place, and thus of the disaster, had been the failure to cut off access
 9    to the central pens behind the goal (which were already overfull) when Gate C was
       opened. He found also a number of contributing factors including the condition of the
       ground, police planning, police operations on the day, and the interaction of parties
12     responsible for safety issues. Lord Taylor’s final report was delivered on 18 January
       1990 and included a number of recommendations relating to crowd control and safety
       at sporting events.
  5
                     Meanwhile, immediately after the disaster, the West Midlands Police
       had been appointed to conduct a review of the policing operations of the South
18    Yorkshire Police. In March 1990 the West Midlands Police reported to the DPP. After
       taking the opinion of two experienced leading counsel the DPP announced on 30
       August 1990 that in his view there was insufficient evidence to justify any prosecution
21    for a criminal offence, relating to the disaster, against any member of the South
       Yorkshire Police Force. Then from November 1990 to March 1991 HM Coroner for
       South Yorkshire conducted an inquest into the deaths in the course of which 230
24    witnesses gave evidence. On 28 March 1991 the Coroner’s jury returned verdicts of
       accidental death.

27                    Disciplinary proceedings for neglect of duty were instituted against D
       and M bythe Police Complaints Authority (“the PCA”). But D retired from the Force
       on 10 November 1991 on medical grounds, and so the proceedings against him fell
|30   away. On 13 January 1992 the PCA decided not to proceed with the case against M.
       On 27 August 1992 he too retired on medical grounds. Then on 5 November 1993 the
       Divisional Court dismissed an application for judicial review brought by family
33    members of those who had died, refusing orders of certiorari to quash the inquest
       verdict and to require a fresh inquest to be convened.

36                    On 5 December 1996 a documentary programme called “Hillsborough”
       was broadcast on ITV. The programme suggested that fresh evidence about the
       disaster had come to light. The allegations made in the broadcast were investigated by
39    the Crown Prosecution Service between March and May 1997. At length on 30 June
       1997          the Home Secretary announced in Parliament that an independent scrutiny would
       be undertaken by Stuart-Smith LJ in order to ascertain inter alia whether there was
42    evidence relating to the disaster which had not been available to Lord Taylor, or to the
       DPP or the Attorney General for the purposes of their discharge o f their statutory
       responsibilities. Stuart-Smith LJ’s report was presented to the House of Commons on
45    18 February 1998. Chapter 1 paras 55-57 state:


      Drail 30 March 1999 12:26
     Ju d g m en t: A pproved b y th e C ourt fo r handing dow n                          Ex P arte M urray & Duckenfield
     (subject to editorial corrections)                                   R v Chief C onstable o f S o u th Yorkshire Police
                                                                               Ex P arte South Yorkshire Police A uthority



              “ 55. From my meetings with the bereaved families and their
               representatives, I am left in no doubt th a t there was widespread
 3            disappointm ent at the D PP’s decision not to prosecute. They find it difficult
               to understand in the light of Lord T aylor’s trenchant criticisms of the South
               Y orkshire police and the fact that the force had been paying compensation.
 6
               56. W hat the D irector of Public Prosecutions had to bear in mind, however,
               is the significantly different and greater degree of culpability which is
 9            involved in m anslaughter, or culpable misfeasance in public office, as
               against the degree of negligence which gives rise to liability, and
               compensation payments, under civil law. Any prosecution of an individual
12             police officer would have to establish his individual responsibility. It would
               not be enough simply to prove the composite failure of the police operation.

15            57. The causes of the disaster were many and complex. So far as these two
               officers [sc D and M] were concerned, the prosecution would have to prove
               to the high standard required for a criminal conviction that the failure to
18            give the order to close off the tunnel when G ate C was opened amounted to
               the serious degree of recklessness necessary to constitute m anslaughter.”

21   Para 5 of Chapter 7 (“ Sum m ary”) stated:

               “... I have come to the clear conclusion that there is no basis upon which
24            there should be a further judicial inquiry or a re-opening of Lord T aylor’s
               inquiry... I do not consider that there is any m aterial which should be
               placed before the D irector of Public Prosecutions or the Police Complaints
27            A uthority which might cause them to re-consider the decisions they have
               already taken.”

30   On the same day, 18 February 1998, the Home Secretary announced in the House that
     he, the Attorney General and the DPP had very carefully considered Stuart-Smith LJ’s
     report, and said: “We have no reason to doubt his conclusions” .
33
                     The HFSG was clearly not satisfied with this result. There was first an
      abortive attempt on 26 June 1998 by AA to institute criminal proceedings against D
36   and M in the South Sefton Petty Sessional Division. That was given its quietus on
      technical or jurisdictional grounds into which it is unnecessary to go. Then on 13 July
      1998          Miss Adlington laid informations against them before the Leeds Petty Sessional
39   Division, and summonses were accordingly issued by the Stipendiary Magistrate. The
      charges accuse D and M of the manslaughter of two of those who died at
      Hillsborough, John Anderson and James Aspinall. They also allege against both an
42   offence of “wilful neglect to perform a public duty” ; and in the case of D, a further
      offence of attempting to pervert the course of justice, said to consist in his having lied
      about the circumstances in which Gate C at the football ground became open.
45

                                                                   -3 -
     Draft 30 March 1999 12:26
Ju d g m e n t: A pproved b y th e C ourt for handing dow n                          Ex P a rte M urray & Duckenfield
(sub ject to editorial corrections)                                  R v Chief C onstable o f S o u th Y orkshire Police
                                                                         Ex P arte S o u th Y orkshire Police Authority



              Both D and M made representations to the DPP that he should exercise
his power under s.6(2) o f the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 (“the POA”) to take
over the conduct of the proceedings initiated against them, and then discontinue the
proceedings under s.23(3). In order to appreciate the contrary positions being taken
and the issues in the case, it is convenient to set out the relevant statutory provisions at
this stage.

                      Section 3(2) of the POA provides so far as relevant:

            " It shall be the duty of the D irector -
           (a) to take over the conduct of all criminal proceedings, other than specified
           proceedings, instituted on behalf of a police force (whether by a member of
           that force or by any other person);
           (b) to institute and have the conduct of criminal proceedings in any case
           w here it appears to him that -

                      (i) the importance or difficulty of the case makes it appropriate that
                      proceedings should be instituted by him; or

                      (ii) it is otherwise appropriate for proceedings to be instituted by
                      him;

           (c) to take over the conduct of all binding over proceedings instituted on
           behalf of a police force...

           (d) to take over the conduct of all proceedings begun by summons issued
           under s.3 of the Obscene Publications Act 1959..."

S.6 provides so far as relevant:

           "(1) Subject to subsection (2) below, nothing in this P a rt shall preclude any
           person from instituting any criminal proceedings or conducting any
           criminal proceedings to which the D irector's duty to take over the conduct
           of proceedings does not apply.

           (2) W here criminal proceedings are instituted in circumstances in which the
           D irector is not under a duty to take over their conduct, he may nevertheless
           do so at any stage."

S. 10 provides so far as relevant:

           “(1) The D irector shall issue a Code of Practice for Crown Prosecutors
           giving guidance on general principles to be applied by them -

                      (a) in determining in any case -

                                                              -4 -
 Drafi 30 March 1999 12:26
     Judgm ent: A pproved b y th e C o u rt fo r handino dow n                                  Ex P arte M urray & Duckenfield
     (subject to editorial co rrectio n s)                                      R v Chief C onstable of S o u th Yorkshire Police
                                                                                    Ex P arte S o u th Y orkshire Police Authority



                                    (i) w hether proceedings for an offence should be instituted or,
                                    w here proceedings have been instituted, w hether they should
3                                   be discontinued;...

     S.23 provides so far as relevant:
6
               “(1) W here the D irector of Public Prosecutions has the conduct of
               proceedings for an offence, this section applies in relation to the
 9             prelim inary stages of those proceedings.

               (2) In this section, 'prelim inary stage’ inrelation                           to proceedings for an
12             offence does not include -
                         • ••


                         (b)                                     in the case of an indictable offence, any stage of the
15                       after -
                                    (i) the accused has been committed for trial...

18             (3) W here, a t any time during the preliminary stages of the proceedings,
                the D irector gives notice under this section to the clerk of the court that he
                does not w ant the proceedings to continue, they shall be discontinued with
21             effect from the giving of that notice...”


24                 Representations had first been made to the DPP on behalf o f D and M in
     early July 1998, after the commencement of the proceedings in the South Sefton Petty
     Sessional Division which proved abortive. In the course of correspondence the HFSG
27   again contended that it had discovered new evidence, which, it was said, had not been
     before Lord Taylor, the DPP, the Coroner, or Stuart-Smith LJ. At length, after AA’s
     informations had been laid in the Leeds Petty Sessional Division, the considered views
30   of the DPP as to the approach to be taken to a request to take over and discontinue a
     private prosecution were set out in a letter to the HFSG on 27 July 1998. The letter did
     not contain a decision, but it explained the DPP’s policy:
33
               “The policy w here proceedings have been commenced by a private
               prosecutor builds on th at contained in the Code for Crown Prosecutors.
36             The right to bring a private prosecution is preserved by s.6(l)... subject to
               the power under s.6(2). The CPS will take over a private prosecution where
               there is a p articu lar need for it do so on behalf of the public...
39             In the instant case w here we have been asked by the defendants to take over
               the prosecution in order to discontinue it, we would do so if one (or more) of
               the following circumstances applies:
42
                          •                        There is clearly no case to answer. A private
                                commenced in these circumstances would be unfounded, and
45                              would, therefore be an abuse of the right to bring a prosecution.

                                                                     -5-
     Drafl 30 March 1999 12:26
o        Judg m en t: A pproved b v th e C ourt fo r handino dow n
         (subject to editorial co rrectio n s)
                                                                                     Ex Parte M urray & Duckenfield
                                                                       R v Chief Constable o f S o u th Yorkshire Police
                                                                           Ex Parte South Y orkshire Police A uthority



                             • T h e p u b lic in terest fa c to rs tending against prosecution clearly
                               outw eigh th o se fa c to rs ten ding in fa vo u r.
    3                        • T he p rosecution is clearly likely to dam age th e interests o f justice.
                             • The p ro secution is clearly likely to dam age the interests o f justice.

    6              The CPS would then regard itself as having to act in accordance with our
                   policy.

    9              If none of the above apply there would be no need for the CPS to become
                   involved and we would not interfere with the private prosecution.

    12             Clearly there is a distinction between the 'realistic prospect of conviction’
                   test in the Code [the Code for Crown Prosecutors issued by the DPP under
                   s. 10 of the 1985 Act] and the 'clearly no case to answer’ test mentioned
    Bd             above. Accordingly we recognise that there will be some cases which do not
                   meet the CPS Code tests w here nevertheless we will not intervene. It has
                   been considered th at to apply the Code tests to private prosecutions would
    18             unfairly limit the right of individuals to bring their owncases.

                    Before this decision can properly be made the CPS must be assured that all
    21             relevant m aterial has been considered...

                   Until there has been a detailed review of the many papers in the case the
    24             Crow n’s position cannot be determined...”


    27                  There followed very substantial representations from D and M and from
         the HFSG. At length the DPP communicated his decision not to intervene, as I have
         said by letter of 18 December 1998. The letter merely stated:
    50
                   “We have considered the evidence, the representations made by the parties
                   and all the relevant circumstances of the case. We have concluded that we
    33             should not intervene to take over any of the charges.”

         The respective solicitors for D and M asked for reasons to be given. There followed a
    36   letter of 1 February 1999 (the “reasons letter”) from the CPS’ Casework Director to
         M ’s solicitor from which it is necessary to cite at some length:

    39             “As you know, the Code for Crown Prosecutors sets out the general
                   principles applied by the Service when (inter alia) deciding whether to
                   continue a prosecution it has taken over; or w hether to institute
    42             proceedings, or w hether to advise the police to do so. It is correct that the
                   CPS decided in 1997 th at the evidence available at th at time was not
                   sufficient, in its view, to provide a realistic prospect of the conviction of
    45             either your client or M r Duckenfield for any offence. However, it does not

         Draft 30 March 1999 12:26
     Judgment: Approved by the Court for handino down                        Ex Parte M urray & Duckenfield
     (subject to editorial corrections)                        R v Chief Constable of S o u th Yorkshire Police
                                                                   Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police A uthority



              follow that, when considering the evidence and the representations
              submitted by the private prosecutor, and by yourselves on behalf of your
3             client, the CPS should seek merely to identify whether there is now any new
              evidence sufficient to provide a realistic prospect of a conviction. The
              decision whether to intervene in a private prosecution with a view to
 6            terminating it calls for different considerations to be applied. It is quite
              possible for a private prosecution to continue, notwithstanding that the CPS
              is not satisfied, on the basis of its own assessment of the strength of the
 9            evidence, that the evidence would pass the evidential sufficiency test in the
              Code (that there should be a 'realistic prospect of a conviction’).

12            In broad terms, the reason for this is that s.6(l)... specifically preserved the
              right of private individuals and prosecuting authorities and bodies other
              than the CPS to bring criminal proceedings. This right is subject (among
15            other limitations) to the limitation in s.6(2) that the CPS may nevertheless
              take over the proceedings with a view either to conducting or to
              terminating those proceedings.
18
              Private prosecutors are not bound to apply the Code for Crown Prosecutors
              when deciding whether to institute proceedings, nor do the courts apply the
21            evidential sufficiency test in the Code when deciding whether there is a case
              to answer. The Service therefore recognises that it is not appropriate to
              intervene to terminate a private prosecution without good reason. That
24            general principle has recently been endorsed by the Law Commission in its
              Consultation Paper No. 149 'Consents to Prosecution’ (see paragraphs 6.3
              and 6.4).
27
              [The letter then proceeds to set out the DPP’s policy in the same terms as those
              in which it had earlier been described by the three “bullet-points” in the letter
30            of 27 July 1998, save that it gives instances of the “public interest factors” test
              as follows:

33            “examples might be where the prosecution is malicious, or vexatious; or the
              offence is one for which the defendant should clearly have been cautioned;
              or where, although the offence may be serious, the defendant is terminally
36            ill.” Then the letter continues as follows]

              In this case, I took the decision not to intervene... I concluded in respect of
39            the charges of manslaughter and wilful neglect to perform a public duty
              (which, for the avoidance of doubt, were each considered against each
              individual separately) that I could not say that there is clearly no case to
42            answer. It was not right, therefore, for the Service to take over the
              proceedings with a view to terminating them.



                                                        -7-
     Draft 30 March 1999 12:26
       Judgm ent; A pproved bv th e C ourt fo r handing dow n                            Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield
       (subject to editorial corrections)                                R v Chief C onstable of S outh Yorkshire Police
                                                                             Ex P arte S o u th Yorkshire Police Authority



                I should add that, against that background and after specifically
                considering the appropriate course to take in these circumstances, I
  3            concluded further that it would not be right to intervene in respect of the
                one remaining charge against Mr Duckenfield, of attempting to pervert the
                course of justice, albeit I had formed the view that there was clearly no case
   6           to answer on that charge alone. The charge of attempting to pervert the
                course of justice is a serious one, particularly when levelled against
                someone who was, at the relevant time, a serving, senior police officer.
   9           Nevertheless, in the context of the case as a whole that charge is not the
                gravamen of the       criminality alleged against Mr Duckenfield and I
                concluded that my approach to that charge should be led by my conclusions
 12            on the charges of manslaughter and wilful neglect to perform a public duty.
                I also considered whether, nevertheless, there were overriding public
                interest factors that should lead to the Service intervening with a view to
                discontinuance, but I came to the conclusion that any public interest factors
                tending against prosecution did not clearly outweigh those in favour; nor
                did I consider that the prosecution is clearly likely to damage the interests
  18           of justice...”


  21                  The private prosecution of D and M presently stands adjourned in the
       magistrates’ court. Committal proceedings were due to commence on 19 April 1999.
        But we understand that date has been vacated. There is a directions hearing fixed for
  24   hearing later in April. The matter was earlier before the magistrates’ court on 21
        December 1998, an occasion to which I should refer because Mr Jones QC for AA
        contends that the applications in the first case have not been made promptly, as Order
  27   53 and the Supreme Court Act 1981 require (Mr Havers QC for the DPP likewise so
        contends but only in relation to the assault which is directed to the legality of the
        DPP’s policy; he says, as is plainly the fact, that D and M had notice of the policy by
# 0    the letter of 27 July 1998). On 21 December it is said by AA that Mr Harrison QC for
        D and M indicated his clients’ intention to seek leave to bring an application for
       judicial review against the DPP’s decision, whatever the reasons for it (the reasons
  33   had not, of course, by then been supplied). Mr Jones contends that the application for
       judicial review could and should have been lodged then or very shortly thereafter.
        There is an issue as to the context in which Mr Harrison said what he said to the
  36   magistrate. It is clear from an affidavit sworn by M ’s solicitor Mr Maiming that Mr
       Harrison took the view (as, if I may say so, one would expect) that he would have to
        consider the DPP’s written reasons before finally advising as to a judicial review. As
  39   at 21 December 1998 a reasons letter was expected before Christmas, and Mr Harrison
        so informed the magistrate. In the event the reasons were not delivered until 1
        February 1999. These applications were lodged in the Crown Office on 1 and 5 March
  42   1999.

                      In my judgment there is nothing in the delay point. It would have been
  45   irresponsible to seek judicial review leave before the DPP’s reasons were available.
        And the letter of 27 July 1998 could not have been a proper trigger to seek leave; it
                                                                -   8-
       Drafi 30 March 1999 12:26
         Ju d g m e n t: A pproved b y th e C ourt for handing dow n                   Ex P arte iviunoy v» -----------
0        tsu b iect to editorial corrections!                          R v Chief C onstable of South Yorkshire Police
                                                                           Ex P arte S o u th Yorkshire Police Authority



          contained no decision. It is true that a challenge only to the legality of the policy need
          not strictly have awaited the DPP’s reasons for applying it as he decided to do; but
     3   since D and M, very obviously, were at least as interested in the application of the
          policy as in its legality, overall it was perfectly proper and reasonable to wait for the
          reasons letter before lodging any application for leave.
     6


     9   The First Case: the Decision o f the DPP

                        I may now turn to the substantive arguments in the first case. The lead
    12   skeleton argument is that prepared on behalf of M, which is adopted by D who adds
         further submissions to challenge the distinct decision of the DPP not to take over and
         discontinue the charge against him of attempting to pervert the course of justice. To
    15   that I will come in due course.

         S.3(2)(b) o f the Act o f 1985
    18
                        The applicants’ first submission is that the DPP’s decision fails to pay
          any regard to his duty under s.3(2)(b), which I have set out. It is put thus at #2.6 of the
    21   skeleton argument:

                    “The applicant’s point is that the policy and decision process in this case
    24              have not recognised th at the s.3(2)(b) duty is relevant to the exercise of
                    discretion w hether to intervene under s.6(2) and apply s.23(3)’\

    27   In the course of his oral submissions Mr Harrison expanded this argument He
          submitted that in deciding whether to take over and discontinue a private prosecution
          where the case is one of “importance or difficulty” , the DPP should bear in mind that
    30   it is ordinarily his duty to institute and conduct such proceedings. Accordingly, as I
          understand it, the suggestion is that the DPP should in some way entertain a
          heightened concern where such a private prosecution is launched, and his policy in
    33   relation to the potential discontinuance of such cases under s.23(3) should reflect this;
          presumably (for otherwise I cannot see how the argument can assist Mr Harrison) by
          leaning more favourably towards discontinuance than in other classes of case.
    36
                         In my judgment this is a bad argument. S.3(2)(b) speaks only of the
          institution of proceedings by the DPP; contrast s.3(2)(a), (c), and (d), which require
    39   him to take over proceedings. Plainly the DPP would not institute proceedings with a
          view to discontinuance. Moreover, as Mr Havers submitted, had it been the
          legislature’s intention to require the DPP to treat “important or difficult” cases in a
    42   different way from others for the purposes of ss.6(2) and 23(3), it could have readily
          so provided and it is to be supposed would have done so. In my judgment the right of
          private prosecution preserved by s.6(1) is in no way qualified by s.3(2)(b), which has
    45   nothing to do with the discretion to take over such a prosecution under s.6(2) with a
          view to discontinuance under s.23(3). I consider that this conclusion is lent support b>

         Drali 30 March 1999 12:26
p        Ju d g m en t: A pproved by th e C ourt fo r handing dow n
         (subject to editorial corrections)
                                                                                                 Ex P arte M urray & Duckenfield
                                                                                R v Chief C onstab le o f S o u th Yorkshire Police
                                                                                    Ex P arte S o u th Y orkshire Police Authority



         the decision o f the Divisional Court in R v Bow Street Stipendiary, ex p. South Coast
         L td [1993] 2 WLR 621, in which Lloyd LJ, as he then was, said at 624:
    3
                    “It will be noticed that section 3(2)(a)... provide[s] for the Director to take
                    over the conduct of certain kinds of proceedings. By contrast, section
    6              3(2)(b) provides for the Director to institute certain other kinds of
                    proceedings where it appears to him to be appropriate, having regard to the
                    importance and the difficulty of the case. The difference in language is not,
     9             in my view, accidental. It becomes of crucial importance when one turns to
                    section 6, which deals with private prosecutions... The effect of section 6(1)
                    is to preclude a person from bringing a private prosecution in cases covered
    12             by section 3(2)(a), (c) and (d) but not in the residuary category of cases
                    covered by section 3(2)(b). So far as section 3(2)(b) cases are concerned,
                    there is nothing to preclude a private prosecution.” (Lloyd LJ’s emphasis)


          The D P P ’s policy fa ils to have regard to the fun d a m en ta l purpose fo r which private
    18   prosecution is preserved by statute

                       Mr Harrison’s second submission was that the right to maintain a private
    21   prosecution essentially operates as a constitutional safeguard in cases where there is
          some suggestion of “inertia, partiality or improper action” by the public prosecutor;
          and the implication is that where nothing of that kind is present, the DPP should lean
    24   towards intervention to stop the prosecution. Mr Harrison relies on statements of their
          Lordships in Gouriet v Union o f Post Office Workers [1978] AC 435. Lord
          Wilberforce said at 477B-C:
    27
                    “This historical right which goes right back to the earliest days of our legal
                    system, though rarely exercised in relation to indictable offences, and
® 30               though ultimately liable to be controlled by the Attorney-General (by
                    taking over the prosecution and, if he thinks fit, entering a nolle prosequi)
                    remains a valuable constitutional safeguard against inertia or partiality on
    33             the part of authority.”

         Lord Diplock said this at 498B:
    36
                    “In English public law every citizen still has the right, as he once had a
                    duty (though of imperfect obligation), to invoke the aid of courts of criminal
    39             jurisdiction for the enforcement of the criminal law by this procedure. It is
                    a right which nowadays seldom needs to be exercised by an ordinary
                    member of the public, for since the formation of regular police forces
    42             charged with the duty in public law to prevent and detect crime and to
                    bring criminals to justice, and the creation in 1879 of the office of Director
                    of Public Prosecutions, the need for prosecutions to be undertaken (and
    45             paid for) by private individuals has largely disappeared; but it still exists
                    and is a useful constitutional safeguard against capricious, corrupt or
                                                                      -   10-
          Drafi 30 March 1999 12:26
         Jud g m en t: A pproved b y th e C o u rt fo r handing dow n                            Ex P arte M urray & Duckenfield
(        (subject to editorial corrections)                                      R v Chief C onstable of S o u th Yorlcshire Police
                                                                                     Ex P arte S o u th Y orkshire Police Authority



                   biased failure o r refusal of those authorities to prosecute offenders against
                   the crim inal law.”
     3
          Reliance is also placed on a passage at para 7.50 in the report o f the Royal
          Commission on Criminal Procedure 1981, which refers to the retention o f the right of
     6   private prosecution “as an effective safeguard against im proper inaction by the
          prosecuting authority” , and to a recent recommendation of the Law Commission,
          contained in para 5.26 of its final report on “Consents to Prosecution” (October 1998),
     9   to the effect that private prosecutions might be made subject to a statutory provision
          requiring the consent o f the CPS.

    12                  In my judgment this argument is also misconceived. The obiter dicta in
          Gouriet are not reflected in the 1985 statute, which was of course enacted some seven
         years after Gouriet was decided. More particularly, it is simply quixotic to suggest that
    15   the DPP should allow a private prosecution to go ahead if there has been “inertia,
          partiality or im proper action” by the public prosecutor - namely himself - but not
          otherwise. Is he to be judge and jury on the question whether he has let the public
    18   down? Their Lordships’ dicta in Gouriet do not with respect provide anything
          approaching a compulsory template of a lawful policy to be adopted by the DPP for
         the execution of his duty under ss.6(2) and 23(3).
    21
         The Code fo r Crown P rosecutors

    24                   The argument here, at least as originally put forward in M ’s skeleton
          argument, was that because of his view (referred to in the reasons letter) that private
          prosecutors are not bound to apply the Code when deciding whether to institute
    27   proceedings, the DPP has erroneously proceeded on the basis that the principles in the
          Code are irrelevant to his discretion under ss.6(2) and 23(3). But the DPP has nowhere
          stated that he regards the Code as systematically or generally irrelevant to his power to
    30   discontinue. Indeed, as I shall show, there are some aspects of the Code which are
          reflected in his approach to the question, how his policy should be applied in this case.
          In truth, however, it could not be right for the DPP to apply across the board the same
    33   tests, in particular the “reasonable prospect of conviction” test referred to in the
          correspondence, in considering whether to take over and discontinue a private
          prosecution as the Code enjoins Crown Prosecutors to follow in deciding whether to
    36   institute or proceed with a prosecution themselves; the consequence would be that the
          DPP would stop a private prosecution merely on the ground that the case is not one
          which he would him self proceed with. But that, in my judgment, would amount to an
    39   emasculation of s.6(l) and itself be an unlawful policy; and in fairness Mr Harrison
          (#7 of M ’s skeleton) made it clear that he did not submit so much. The very premise of
          s.6(l) must be that some cases will go to trial which the DPP himself chooses not to
    42   prosecute.

                        As it seems to me the only points remaining in relation to the Code
    45   concern the application of the DPP’s policy to the facts of this case, and I will deal
          with that shortly.
                                                                        - ii -
         DniH 30 March 1999 12:26
       Ju d g m en t: A pproved bv th e C ourt fo r handing dow n                            Ex P arte Murray & Duckenfield
       (subject to editorial corrections!                                     R v Chief C onstable of S o u th Yorkshire Police
                                                                                  Ex Parte S o u th Yorkshire Police A uthority




       The “clearly no case to answer” test
  3
                       The argument here (#7 of the skeleton) is that such a test is
        impermissibly rigid. It is said that the policy excludes “ any assessment of evidential
  6    deficiencies” and so amounts to an unlawful fetter of the DPP’s discretion; and that it
        “also leads to a distorted evaluation of the public interest factors” . In my judgment
        the test involves no unlawful fetter of discretion. It is plain from the formulation “there
  9    is clearly no case to answer” (my emphasis) that the DPP only intends to stop private
        prosecutions on this ground where no reasonable decision-maker could conclude that
        there was sufficient evidence for the case to go forward. That seems to me to be a
 12    perfectly proper approach. Such a prosecution could offer no legitimate benefit to
        anyone and would, potentially at least, be an abuse of the process of the court. The
        test rightly identifies a class of case which should always be stopped; if the case is not
   5   within the class, then the decision whether to stop it will, of course, depend on the
        other two tests which, in my judgment, amply contemplate an exercise of discretion in
        which all material factors will be considered and whose application accordingly
  18   negates any unlawful fetter of discretion.

                     As regards any “distorted evaluation” of the public interest test, it is
 21    clear that the three aspects of the policy are individually self-standing. Their
        respective application in this case is a another matter, to which as I have said I will
        come. But the applicants have a separate argument about the public interest test.
 24
        The “public interestfactors” test

 27                    Here it is submitted (#8 of the skeleton) that the public interest
        necessarily involves consideration of the likelihood of conviction, so that the
        evidential test should not be hived off from that relating to the public interest. Mr
^30    Harrison also argues that the public interest test as formulated - “the public interest
       factors tending against prosecution clearly outweigh those factors tending in
       favour ” - gets it the wrong way round; the test should be whether the public interest
 33    factors in favour of the private prosecution outweigh those against.

                       I see no reason why quite aside from the evidential test of no case to
  36   answer the DPP should not, within his policy as presently formulated, have in mind
        the likelihood or otherwise of conviction when considering where the public interest
        lies. And I see no basis for the suggestion that the law should compel the DPP to
  39   reverse the effect of the public interest factors so as to favour discontinuance unless in
        his judgment they clearly point in the other direction. The test as presently formulated
        seems to me designed to allow proper scope for the operation of the right of private
 42    prosecution. The private prosecutor is very likely to take a different view as to where
        the public interest lies than does the DPP, and s.6(l), I think, implies that he is entitled
        to do so. The approach urged by Mr Harrison would in effect require the private
  45   prosecutor to persuade the DPP that his view of the public interest is plainly right. I
        consider it strongly arguable that that would place an illegitimate constraint upon the
                                                                    -   12-
        Draft 30 March 1999 12:26
           Judgm ent: A pproved bv th e C ourt for handino dow n                           Ex Parte M urray & Duckenfield
r">
V,         (subject to editorial corrections)                               R v Chief C onstable o f S o u th Yorkshire Police
                                                                                Ex Parte South Y orkshire Police A uthority



           right of private prosecution; but it is enough to hold, as I would, that the present public
           interest policy is perfectly consistent with the objects of the statute and thus well
       3   within the proper discretion of the DPP.

                          Mr Hanison directed similar criticisms to the third limb of the policy,
       6   but in light of what I have said about the public interest test they possess no separate
           force.

       g                                                           ***

                            For all these reasons, the DPP’s policy overall is in my judgment a
      12   lawful one. The real question in the case is whether it has been lawfully applied. It is
            clear that (a) the DPP maintains his view that the “reasonable prospect of conviction”
            test in the Code would not be met in this case, but that (b) the “no evidence” test is not
      15   met either (save as regards the charge against D of attempting to pervert the course of
           justice, with which I deal separately below). In those circumstances, the application of
            the public interest test was crucial. In this context it is convenient to deal first with Mr
      18    Harrison’s submission that the reasons letter shows that the DPP has given improper
            and perhaps decisive weight to the “no evidence” test. He relies on the sentence which
            follows the conclusion that that test is not satisfied: “It was not right, therefore, for
      21   the Service to take over the proceedings with a view to term inating them” , and
            submits that it suggests the author of the letter considered that that was the end of the
            matter. However after dealing with the particular issue concerning the charge against
      24   D of attempting to pervert the course of justice, the letter continues: “I also
            considered w hether, nevertheless, there were overriding public interest factors
            that should lead to the Service intervening with a view to discontinuance” . I think
      27   the letter could have been better expressed, so as to make it clear that the public
            interest test is by no means secondary to the “no evidence” test. However I am quite
            satisfied that there was no intention to downgrade or sideline the balance of public
      30   interest factors. It is not really credible to suppose that author of the letter
            misunderstood or failed to apply the very policy which he had just clearly set out.

      33   The D P P ’s ju d g m en t o f th e public interest

                           Mr Hanison submitted that in light of everything that had gone before,
      36   and not least Stuart-Smith LJ’s Scrutiny, there were no public interest factors
           favouring continuation of the prosecutions of D and M. He said that there is nothing in
           the reasons letter to show that the DPP accepted the suggestion, urged forcefully and
      39   at length by the HFSG in the course of their representations, that further evidence had
            come to light since the Scrutiny. With this latter proposition I agree. But the reasons
            letter clearly implies an acceptance that some factors existed which favoured the
      42   prosecutions. It stated: “ I came to the conclusion that any public interest factors
            tending against prosecution did not clearly outweigh those in favour” . What were
           those in favour? If in truth there were no factors which a reasonable decision-maker
      45   could regard as going in favour of the prosecutions, then the DPP’s decision would be

                                                                   - 13 -
           Draft 30 March 1999 12:26
c         Judgm en t: A pproved by th e C ourt fo r handing dow n
          (subject to editorial corrections)
                                                                                             Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield
                                                                             R v Chief C onstable of S o u th Yorkshire Police
                                                                                 Ex Parte S o u th Yorkshire Police Authority



           vulnerable to a challenge on Wednesbuty1 grounds (as indeed Mr Harrison claims it is)
           since there would be nothing in public interest terms to weigh in the scales against
      3   discontinuance. When the case was opened there was no affidavit from the DPP
           dealing with the point, nor did Mr Havers’ skeleton argument articulate any such
           factors. So it was that, effectively at the court’s invitation so that the matter could be
      6   clarified, Mr Newell swore an affidavit for the DPP on 22 March 1999. He is the CPS’
           Director of Casework and the author of the reasons letter. Paras 2 - 4 are as follows:

      9             “2. As I now recall, the public interest factors tending against prosecution
                    which I considered were as follows:

     12                       (1) Previous reviews of the case, in particular those carried out by
                              the DPP when considering the question whether criminal
                               proceedings should be taken against Mr Duckenfield and Mr
      5                       Murray and the more recent report of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith.

                               (2) The fact that the Applicants had been told on previous occasions
     18                       that the DPP did not intend to prosecute.

                               (3) The delay which had occurred between the commissionof the
     21                       alleged offences and the commencement of this prosecution and its
                               likely effect on the Applicants, although I took the view that delay
                               may be offset by the seriousness of the alleged offences (as is reflected
     24                       in paragraph 6.5(d) of the Code...).

                               (4) The effect of the delay on the evidence, for example in terms of
     27                       the potential impairment of the recollections of witnesses.

                              (5) The assertion made on behalf of Mr Murray of ill-health,
    ^30                       although I noted that no medical evidence had been put forward in
                              support of this assertion and that, as again reflected in the Code (at
                              paragraph 6.5(e)), ill-health may be offset by the seriousness of the
     33                       offence.

                    3. As against these factors tending against prosecution, there was in my
     36             view one extremely important factor in favour of prosecution, namely the
                    very serious nature of the alleged offences, in particular, the alleged
                    offences of manslaughter. In my opinion, the allegation that two senior
     39             police officers were responsible for the deaths of a number of people as a
                    result of criminal negligence was a very grave allegation.

     42             4. Paragraph 6.2 of the Code reflects the considerable weight attached by
                    the CPS to the seriousness of the alleged offence when seeking to strike the
                    right balance as to the factors for and against prosecution. (I refer also to

           1 [1948] 1 KB 223.
                                                                    - 14 -
           Draft 30 March 1999 12:26
         Ju d g m en t: A pproved by th e Court for handing dow n                         Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield
e        (sub ject to editorial corrections)                               R v Chief C onstable of South Yorkshire Police
                                                                               Ex P arte South Yorkshire Police Authority



                  the opening words of paragraph 6.4.) Having carefully considered the
                  factors tending against prosecution and this extremely important factor in
     3            favour of it, I came to the firm conclusion that the factors tending against
                  prosecution did not clearly outweigh what I considered to be the very
                  strong public interest in favour of prosecution.”
     6

                        One of Mr Harrison’s complaints, advanced before this affidavit was
     9   sworn, was that the policy should have taken account of para 10.1 of the Code which
         includes this:

    12            “Normally, if the Crown Prosecution Service tells a suspect or defendant
                  that there will not be a prosecution... that is the end of the matter... But
                  occasionally there are special reasons why the Crown Prosecution Service
    15            will re-start the prosecution, particularly if the case is serious.”

           This is one of the points relating to the Code which, as it seems to me, bear on the
    18   application of the policy rather than the policy itself; and para 2(2) of Mr Newell’s
          affidavit shows that regard was had to assurances or statements made to D and M that
          for his part the DPP would not prosecute. Clearly it was right to do so, within the
    21   public interest balance. But I think there is a qualitative difference between the
          situation where the DPP himself goes back upon a previous assurance not to prosecute
          and one where the DPP does not change his mind but a private prosecutor chooses to
    24   instigate proceedings.

                        In reply, having by then seen Mr Newell’s affidavit, Mr Harrison made
    27   further submissions. While accepting that there could be a case in which a single
          factor favouring prosecution might not be outweighed by a multiplicity of factors
          going the other way, he submitted that if the raft of public interest considerations
    30   favouring discontinuance in this case was held not to be enough to outweigh the single
          factor of the allegations’ gravity, it was difficult or impossible to imagine what set of
          considerations might do so; and the court should conclude that DPP had fettered his
    33   discretion by treating the seriousness of the allegations as overriding everything else,
          so that he had not in truth carried out a proper balancing exercise at all.

    36                  I would reject this argument. There is no reason to suppose that the
          factors against prosecution were not properly weighed and considered, and certainly
          no basis for the supposition that once faced with a private prosecution for something
    39   as serious as manslaughter the DPP would inevitably decide to allow it to proceed.

                       Mr Harrison submitted next that Mr Newell’s affidavit showed that the
    42   DPP had transposed from the Code the “seriousness of the charge” factor as a
         consideration favouring the prosecution without also taking account of his own view
         that the Code test of “realistic prospect of conviction” was not met. I agree that the
    45   DPP’s view of the prospects of conviction is a proper matter for him to consider,
         within the public interest test contained in the policy, when deciding whether to
                                                                    -15-
         Draft 30 March 1999 12:26
     Ju d g m en t: A pproved by th e C ourt for handing dow n                          Ex P arte Murray & Duckenfield
     (subject to editorial corrections)                                 R v Chief C onstable of S outh Yorkshire Police
                                                                            Ex P arte S o u th Yorkshire Police Authority



     discontinue; but, as it seems to me, para 2(1) o f Mr Newell’s affidavit shows that in
     this case he has done so.
 3
                    Then Mr Harrison suggested that para 3 of the affidavit demonstrated
      that the DPP’s view of the gravity of the allegation was informed simply by the fact
 6   that there was a manslaughter charge. He had not properly considered the real degree
      of culpability inherent in the facts alleged; and the gravity of the offence of
     manslaughter can vary very widely. There is nothing in this. Mr Newell made it
 9   perfectly clear that he had regard to the species of manslaughter in question
      (“criminal negligence”) and it cannot sensibly be doubted that he was well aware and
      took account of the circumstances in which the alleged offences are said to have been
12   committed.

                   Lastly on this part of the case Mr Harrison submitted that the refusal to
     discontinue was simply perverse, given the “enormous weight” of the public interest
     considerations going the other way.

18                The DPP might, in my judgment, lawfully have decided to discontinue.
     The tragic events at Hillsborough have been the subject of repeated, detailed, thorough
     enquiries. Nearly ten years have passed. But the judgment was for the DPP to make. If
21   we acceded to Mr Harrison’s submission, we would I think usurp the role of the
     primary decision-maker.

24                 In my judgment the decision not to discontinue is no more unlawful than
     is the policy which the DPP applied.

27

     The first applicant: attempting to pervert the course ofjustice

                    Mr Harrison discretely submits that the decision to let the charge of
     attempting to pervert the course of justice go ahead was unlawful, because it runs flat
33   counter to the “no case to answer” test in his own policy. It will be recalled that the
     reasons letter said:

36             “I concluded fu rth er that it would not be right to intervene in respect of the
                one remaining charge against M r Duckenfield, of attem pting to pervert the
                course of justice, albeit I had formed the view that there was clearly no case
39             to answer on th at charge alone... in the context of the case as a whole that
                charge is not the gravamen of the crim inality alleged against M r
                Duckenfield and I concluded that my approach to th at charge should be led
42             by my conclusions on the charges of m anslaughter and wilful neglect to
                perform a public duty.”

45   Paras 5 and 6 of Mr Newell’s affidavit state as follows:

                                                                 -16-
     Draft 30 March 1999 12:26
      Ju d g m en t: A pproved by th e C ourt for handing dow n                    Ex P arte Murray & Duckenfield
      (subject to editorial corrections)                          R v Chief C o n sta b le o f S outh Y orkshire Police
                                                                      Ex P arte S o u th V orkshire Police Authority



                 “ 5. I was fully aw are of the seriousness of the additional charge. I also
                 tentatively concluded th at partial intervention... was in law open to the CPS
3               and I proceeded on th at assumption. However, the existing policy did not
                 cover the situation which arose in this case, namely w here the conclusion
                 was reached th at there was clearly a case to answer in relation to some of
 6              the charges but not in relation to others. (I can say that with some
                 confidence, since I had overall responsibility for form ulating the policy.) ...
                 I concluded that it was in fact inappropriate to intervene only to take over
 9              (with a view to discontinuing) this additional charge.

                 6. First, partial intervention was not, in my view, either appropriate or
12              desirable. It seemed to me that the DPP should either intervene so as to
                 take over the proceedings in their entirety or not at all. To have intervened
                 partially would still have left the criminal proceedings in place in relation to
15              the other charges which included the even more serious charge of ^
                 m anslaughter. Secondly, I took into account the fact th at M r Duckenfield
                 would not be left without any remedy in relation to this additional charge.
18              On the contrary, he would be entitled to invite the M agistrates’ C ourt to
                 dismiss it on the basis th at there was no case to answer. Thirdly, the charge
                 arose out of essentially the same events as the events which gave rise to the
21              other charges and thus those events would be scrutinised in any event.”


24                     I of course accept that Mr Newell did not subjectively believe - or intend
       -         that the policy covered this situation. But the policy has to be read objectively; there
       can be no doubt that it gave rise to a legitimate expectation on the part of D and M
P'7   that it would be applied according to its terms. The first question, then, is as to the true
      meaning of the policy on a fair reading of the letter of 27 July 1998 and the reasons
       letter. It is true that the letters use the singular: “the prosecution” and “a private
30     prosecution” . But it is elementary that in criminal cases each count constitutes a
       separate indictment; it is as if there are separate trials relating to each. And this is no
      mere technicality; for it means, o f course, that where there is more than one charge
33    any question whether there is “no case to answ er is, as regards each individual
       charge, wholly discrete. I do not consider that the policy can fairly be read as
       indicating that the DPP would necessarily either take over or discontinue a private
36    prosecution in its entirety. In my view the articulation of the “no case to answer” test
      would be taken by any informed reader, facing a multiple private prosecution, to imply
      that the DPP would consider whether in his view there was clearly no case to answer
39    on each charge.

                     The DPP concluded that there was clearly no such case in relation to this
42    charge against D, and yet decided to allow it to proceed. It follows, in my judgment,
      that there is a breach of D ’s legitimate expectation that the policy would be applied.
      The pragmatic factors spoken to by Mr Newell in para 6 can make no difference. Nor,
45    of course, can the vigorous assertion by the HFSG that there is in fact a case to
      answer. What matters for present purposes is the DPP’s conclusion on that issue.
      Ju d g m en t: A pproved by th e C ourt for handing dow n                                 Ex P arte M urray & Duckenfield
      (subject to editorial corrections!                                       R v Chief C onstable of S o u th Yorkshire Police
                                                                                   Ex P arte S o u th Y orkshire Police Authority




                     For these reasons I would quash the DPP’s decision only so far as it
      relates to this charge against D. I make it clear that I say nothing as to what might
      follow as regards any further decision concerning that charge to be made by the DPP.

                      Otherwise, for the reasons I have given I would dismiss the application
      in the first case.



      The Second Case: the Decision o f the SYPA
12
                     First I should describe the further facts which are specifically relevant to
      the second case. These must be read into the narrative of events which I have already
      given in relation to the first case; it seems to me clearer and more convenient to isolate
      here the particular facts which bear on the challenge to the decision of the SYPA.

18                   The history shows that at earlier stages the SYPA had been prepared to
       provide financial support for D and M (and other officers) to be legally represented in
       matters arising from the Hillsborough disaster. On 7 December 1990 they resolved to
21    fund the representation of six police officers, including D and M, at the inquest. They
       had earlier resolved not to do so; the decision of 7 December was taken after
       considering “the most recent legal advice available” . Then on 1 August 1997 the
24     SYPA resolved to set aside £500,000 for financial assistance for police officers in
       connection with Stuart-Smith LJ’s Scrutiny. In both instances they had considered a
       report from the Chief Constable (or a joint report of the Chief Constable and the Clerk
27    and Treasurer). The latter decision was said to be taken “in accordance with the
       principles set out in Home Office C ircular No 77/87 Financial Assistance to Police
       Officers in Legal Proceedings”, to which I will have to refer.
IBO
                      On 27 February 1998, following publication of the Scrutiny, and
       considering that “there were indications that private prosecutions could be brought
33    against 3 officers”, the SYPA resolved in principle to authorise consideration being
       given to applications by officers for financial assistance. On 5 March 1998 D’s
       application for such assistance was approved by the SYPA, and M ’s was approved on
36    29 June 1998. It will be recalled that three days earlier, on 26 June, AA had first
       sought to institute criminal proceedings against D and M in the South Sefton Petty
       Sessional Division. On 20 November 1998 M applied for further financial assistance
39    in relation to the judicial review which was then seen to be in prospect should the DPP
       decide to allow the private prosecutions to continue; and the HFSG had made it clear
       that were the DPP to take over the prosecutions and discontinue, they would seek a
42    judicial review. On 21 December 1998 counsel for D and M indicated to the
       Stipendiary Magistrate their intention to seek a judicial review of the DPP’s decision; I
       have already referred to this in dealing with Mr Jones’ misconceived argument that the
45    first case should be dismissed on grounds of delay. The following day, 22 December
        1998, in a letter of over six pages AA made written representations on leading
                                                                  -   18   -

       Dralt 30 March 1999 12:26
        Judgm ent: A pproved b v th e C ourt for handing dow n                                       Ex P arte M urray & Duckenfield
(       (subject to editorial corrections)                                            R v Chief C onstable of S o u th Yorkshire Police
v                                                                    Ex P arte S o u th Y orkshire Police Authority



        counsel’s advice to urge the SYPA that the decision to fund the defences o f D and M
        was “ unlawful, irrational, ultra vires and proceduraiiy im proper on various
    3   grounds” . On 23 December 1998 D applied for further financial assistance in relation
        to the prospective judicial review proceedings. On 5 January 1999 AA wrote a further
        lengthy letter to the SYPA repeating and expanding her assertions that the funding
    6   decisions were unlawful.

                       Then on 5 February 1999 the SYPA passed the resolutions under
    9    challenge, “that, on balance, the A uthority has no legal power to provide financial
         assistance” to D and M in respect either of the private prosecution or a judicial review
         of the DPP’s decision. On 10 February 1999 the CCSY’s application for judicial
12      review in these proceedings was lodged, and on the same day solicitors for the SYPA
         wrote to the Crown Office to consent to the grant of leave and seek expedition. They
         stated:
i5               “SYPA passed these resolutions with great reluctance on the basis of advice
                 received from ourselves and Counsel...”

                                                                 ***
18

                      The legality or otherwise of the decisions under challenge ultimately
21      turns on the construction and application of s.6(l) of the Police Act 1996 and s. 111(1)
        of the Local Government Act 1972. I shall have to look at other statutory provisions,
        but it is convenient to set these out at once. The cross-heading to s.6 reads “General
24      functions of police authorities”, and ss.(l) provides:

                  “Every police authority established under section 3 shall secure the
27                maintenance of an efficient and effective police force for its a re a .”

         S.111(1) of the Act of 1972 in its present form provides:
30
                  “W ithout prejudice to any powers exercisable ap art from this section but
                  subject to the following provisions of this Act, a local authority shall have
33                power to do any thing (whether or not involving expenditure, borrowing or
                  lending of money or the acquisition or disposal of any property or rights)
                  which is calculated to facilitate, or is conducive or incidental to, the
36                discharge of their functions.”


39                    S. 111(1) applies to police authorities (but in light of my conclusions it is
        unnecessary to go into the legislative history relating to that). Now, it might be
        thought - indeed this is the applicants’ case - that by s.6(l), securing “the
42      maintenance of an efficient and effective police force” is plainly made the function
        of a police authority, and that accordingly it is no less plain that s. 111(1) empowers
        the police authority to do such things as fund the legal representation o f police officers
45      in proceedings if the authority reasonably concludes that to do so is conducive to that
        function’s discharge. That has been the settled view of the Association of Chief Police
                                                                 -   19-
         Drafi 30 March 1999 12:26
        Judgm en t: A pproved bv th e C ourt for handinn dnwn                           Ex P arte Murray & Duckenfield
        (subject to editorial corrections)                             R v Chief C onstable of S o u th Yorkshire Police
                                                                           Ex P arte S o u th Yorkshire Police Authority



       Officers, the Police Superintendents Association, and (until 1998) the Home Office.
       The decision to provide such finance, in common with any decision taken under
    3 s. 111(1), would of course be subject to well known public law constraints enshrined in
       the Wednesbury and Padfield1 principles. There is before the court an affidavit of Mr
       Daines, Assistant Chief Constable of South Yorkshire, in which he describes what he
    6 regards as the “absolutely vital” requirement “that officers should know that if they
       act in good faith in perform ing their duties their Police A uthority will support
       them in the event that they face litigation” . If as a matter of vires s. 111(1) allows a
    9 police authority to incur expenditure in furtherance of the general function seemingly
       conferred by s.6(l), then in my judgment the use of s. 111(1) to finance police officers’
       legal expenses in litigation, including private prosecutions brought against them and
   12 the bringing of judicial review proceedings, cannot in principle be ruled unlawful on
       Wednesbury or Padfield grounds. The circumstances in which such funding might be
       provided in any particular case is another matter. The policy has in the past been to the
^ 1 5 effect that the authority must be satisfied that the officer has acted in good faith in the
       discharge of his duty; and I can see that, at least where a private prosecution is
       involved, there may be issues for the authority to consider which would involve their
   18 taking a view of the merits in advance of any trial. But in these proceedings we are not
       concerned with any question whether, when, or to what extent the SYPA might
       provide financial assistance to D or M. We are only to decide whether the power
   21 exists to do so at all.

                      In fact the argument of the CCSY was put two ways by Mr Baker QC. It
  24    was first said that s.6(l) o f itself, without the aid of s.. 111(1), enabled the funding
        decision. Alternatively, it was enabled by s. 111(1) read with s.6(l).

  27                 Upon this issue Miss Baxendale QC for the SYPA submits that the
        apparently obvious relation between s.6(l) and s. 111(1) is in fact no relation at all.
        The essence o f her argument may be expressed very shortly, as follows.
 k30
                      (a)                    S.6(l) confers no powers of any kind. All the powers poss
        police authorities are conferred elsewhere in the Police Act and by the local
  33   government legislation. S.6(1) does no more than to provide the purpose for which the
        authority’s powers are to be exercised; it states the Act’s “policy and objects”, in the
        language of the Padfield case, as they apply to police authorities. If this is right, it
 36    would contradict Mr Baker’s first argument, that s.6(l) alone is enough to empower
        the SYPA to fund D and M.

 39                   (b) S.111(1) cannot be read as enabling the authority to do anything
        which is not ancillary to a power which is elsewhere conferred upon it. If this is right,
        then taken with (a) it contradicts Mr Baker’s second argument which relies on
 42    s. 111(1).




        2 [1968] AC 997.
                                                                -20-
        Draft 30 March 1999 12:26
         Judgm ent: A pproved by th e C ourt for handing dow n                           Ex Parte M urray & Duckenfield
     i   (subject to editorial corrections)                               R v Chief C onstable of S o u th Yorkshire Police
                                                                              Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority



                        There is no doubt that express powers are conferred on police authorities
         by a raft o f statutory provisions. Miss Baxendale says that such provisions support
         proposition (a) which I have set out, by application of the canon of statutory
         construction expressed by the Latin maxim expressio unius est exclusio alterius. Thus,
         she submits, where Parliament has seen fit to confer a range of specific powers on
         police authorities, the intention must have been thereby to set the limits on what such
         an authority may do and it cannot be supposed that s.6(l) provides an undefined and
         open-ended power to do anything else which the authority may choose, merely on the
         ground that in some way it may be said to support the general aim of “the
         maintenance of an efficient and effective police force” . The high water-mark of this
         submission is found in s.88(4) of the Act of 1996 which confers an express power to
12       fund police officers’ costs in certain circumstances which do not include the defence
         of private (or any) criminal prosecutions or participation in proceedings for judicial
         review.

                        I shall have to look in a little more detail at s.88(4). I have concluded, ^
         however, that the correctness or otherwise of proposition (a) is not in the end at the
18       centre of the case. The reason is that in the particular statutory context proposition (b)
         is in my judgment wrong; so that the SYPA is enabled by s. 111(1) (subject to
         Wednesbury and Padfield) to finance D and M in the criminal and judicial review
21       proceedings even if s.6(l) confers no powers as such.

                        The scheme of the Act of 1996 involves the distribution of
24       responsibilities between three bodies: the Chief Constable, the Secretary of State, and
         the police authority. The Chief Constable’s role is principally given by s. 10:

27                 “(1) A police force m aintained under section 2 shall be under the direction
                   and control of the chief constable appointed under s .ll."

30                 (2) In discharging his functions, every chief constable shall have regard to A
                   the local policing plan issued by the police authority for his area under ^
                   section 8.”
33
         (S. l l provides for the appointment and removal of the Chief Constable, by the police
         authority with the approval of the Secretary of State.) I should notice also ss.22(l) and
36       44(4):
                  “22(1) Every chief constable shall, as soon as possible after the end of each
                  financial year, subm it to the police authority a general report on the
39                policing during th at year of the area for which his force is m aintained.”

                   “44(4) Every chief constable shall, as soon as possible after the end of each
42                 financial year, subm it to the Secretary of State the like report as is required
                   by section 22(1) to be subm itted to the police authority.”

45       The role of the Secretary of State is principally given by ss.36 and 37(1):

                                                                 -2 1 -
         Draft 30 March 1999 12:26
  o   Ju d g m en t: A pproved by th e Court for handing dow n
      (subject to editorial corrections)
                                                                                          Ex P arte Murray & Duckenfield
                                                                         R v Chief C onstable o f S o u th Yorkshire Police
                                                                             Ex P arte S o u th Yorkshire Police Authority



                “36(1) The Secretary of State shall exercise his powers under the provisions
                of this Act referred to in subsection (2) in such m anner and to such extent
                as appears to him to be best calculated to prom ote the efficiency and
                effectiveness of the police.”

                 37(1) The Secretary of State m ay by o rd er determ ine objectives for the
                policing of the areas of all police authorities established under section 3.”

      As regards the Secretary of State’s position I should notice also these provisions of the
      Act of 1996:
             “38(1) W here an objective has been determ ined under section 37, the
 12          Secretary of State m ay direct police authorities to establish levels of
             perform ance (perform ance targets) to be aimed a t in seeking to achieve the
             objective.

                39(1) The Secretary of State m ay issue codes of practice relating to the
                discharge by police authorities established under section 3 of any of their
 18             functions.”

      The role o f the police authority is given first by the subsections of s.6 which follow
 21   subsection (1):

                “ 6(2) In discharging its functions, every police authority established under
 24             section 3 shall have reg ard to -

                (a) any objectives determ ined by the Secretary of State under section 37,
 27
                (b) any objectives determ ined by the authority under section 7,

030             (c) any perform ance targ ets established by the authority, w hether in
                compliance with a direction under section 38 or otherwise, and

 33             (d) any local policing plan issued by the authority under section 8.

                (3) In discharging any function to which a code of practice issued under
 36             section 39 relates, a police authority established under section 3 shall have
                regard to the code.

 39             (4) A police authority shall comply with any direction given to it by the
                Secretary of State un d er section 38 or 40.”

 42   These provisions, of course, confer duties rather than powers. In relation to the police
      authority I should next notice ss.7 - 9:



                                                                 -22 -
      Draft 30 March 1999 12:55
     Ju d g m e n t: A pproved by th e Court fo r handing dow n                            Ex P arte M urray & Duckenfield
'O   (su b ject to editorial corrections)                                  R v Chief C onstab le o f S o u th Yorkshire Police
                                                                               Ex Parte S o u th Y orkshire Police Authority



               “7(1) Every police authority established under section 3 shall, before the
               beginning of each financial year, determine objectives for the policing of the
               authority’s area during that year.

               (2) Objectives determ ined under this section may relate to m atters to which
               objectives determ ined under section 37 also relate, or to other m atters, but
               in any event shall be so framed as to be consistent with the objectives
               determined under th a t section.

                (3) Before determ ining objectives under this section, a police authority shall

12              (a) consult the chief constable for the area, and

                (b) consider any views obtained by the authority in accordance with
15              arrangem ents made under section 96.

                8(1) Every police authority established under section 3 shall, before the
18              beginning of each financial year, issue a plan setting out the proposed
                arrangem ents for the policing of the authority’s area during the year (the
                local policing plan).
21
                (2) The local policing plan shall include a statem ent of the authority’s
                priorities for the year, of the financial resources expected to be available
24              and of the proposed allocation of those resources, and shall give particulars
                o f-

27              (a) any objectives determ ined by the Secretary of State under section 37,

                (b) any objectives determ ined by the authority under section 7, and
30                                                                                                                               I
                (c) any perform ance targets established by the authority, whether in
                compliance with a direction under section 38 or otherwise.
33
                (3) A draft of the local policing plan shall be prepared by the chief
                constable for the area and submitted by him to the police authority for it to
36              consider.

                (4) Before issuing a local policing plan which differs from the draft
39              submitted by the chief constable under subsection (3), a police authority
                shall consult the chief constable.

42              (5) A police authority shall arrange for every local policing plan issued by it
                under this section to be published in such m anner as appears to it to be
                appropriate, and shall send a copy of the plan to the Secretary of State.
45

                                                                  -2 3 -
     Drall 30 March 1999 12:55
      Ju d g m en t; A pproved bv th e Court for handing dow n                           Ex P arte M urray & Duckenfield
      (subject to editorial corrections)                                R v Chief C o n stab le of S o u th Yorkshire Police
                                                                            Ex Parte S o u th Yorkshire Police Authority



                9(1) As soon as possible after the end of each financial y ear every police
                authority established under section 3 shall issue a report relating to the
                policing of the authority’s area for the year.

                (2) A report issued by a police authority under this section for any year
                shall include an assessment of the extent to which the local policing plan for
                that year issued under section 8 has been carried out.

                (3) A police authority shall arrange for every report issued by it under this
                section to be published in such manner as appears to it to be appropriate,
                and shall send a copy of the report to the Secretary of State.”
12
      S. 14 is important:

^15            “(1) Each police authority established under section 3 shall keep a fund to
                be known as the police fund.

18             (2) Subject to any regulations under the Police Pensions Act 1976, all
                receipts of the police authority shall be paid into the police fund and all
                expenditure of the authority shall be paid out of that fund.
21
                (3) Accounts shall be kept by each police authority of paym ents made into
                or out of the police fund.”
24
      Then s.43(l):

27             “A police authority shall, whenever so required by the Secretary of State,
                submit to the Secretary of State a report on such m atters connected with
                the discharge of the authority’s functions, or otherwise with the policing of
)30            its area, as may be specified in the requirem ent.”

      S.92:
33             “(1) The council of a county, district, county borough or London borough
                may make grants to any police authority established under section 3 whose
               police area falls wholly or partly within the county, district, county borough
36             or                                                                    borough.

                (3)             G rants under this section may be made unconditionally or, with t
39             agreem ent of the chief officer of police for the police area concerned,
               subject to conditions.”

42    S.96:

                 ‘(1) A rrangem ents shall be made for each police area for obtaining -
45

                                                                 -24-
      Draft 30 March 1999 12:55
     Judgm ent: A pproved by th e C ourt fo r handing dow n                           Ex P arte Murray & Duckenfield
     (subject to editorial corrections)                              R v Chief Constable^ of S outh Yorkshire Police
                                                                          Ex P arte S o u th Yorkshire Police Authority



                     (a) the views of people in that area about matters concerning the
                     policing of the area, and

                     (b) their co-operation with the police in preventing crime in that area.

               (2) Except as provided by subsections (3) to (6), arrangements for each
               police area shall be made by the police authority after consulting the chief
               constable as to the arrangements that would be appropriate.”


                     Looking at the whole picture displayed by these provisions, it is clear
12   that the Chief Constable is in charge of day-to-day policing (s. 10(1)); the police
      authority has a role in relation to policy, or strategy (ss.7, 8 and other provisions); but
      this is subject to the overall direction of the Secretary of State (ss.37, 38, 39 and other
15    provisions, taken with s.6((2) - (4)). The police authority holds the purse (s. 14). Those
      provisions specifically concerned with the police authority’s role confer duties rather
      than powers, though in some cases there is clearly a discretion as to how the duty is to
18   be performed (as for example under s.37). Other powers (including those contained in
      s. 111(1)) are conferred on the police authority by the local government legislation, to
      the extent that measures there contained were applied to police authorities by
21   s.l46A (l) o f the Act o f 1972. The powers so conferred are listed in a helpful note
      provided by Miss Baxendale. I do not propose to set them out. They include (apart
      from s. 111(1)) such matters as the disposition and treatment o f staff and the
24   acquisition and disposal of land.

                     The critical point which in my judgment emerges from a consideration
27   of the interlocking roles of Chief Constable, Secretary o f State and police authority is
      that it cannot have been within the contemplation of Parliament in enacting the
      scheme, and in embracing within it s. 111(1), that the police authority should only be
30   empowered to incur expenditure in support of those duties, and ancillary powers,
      which are specifically conferred upon it. The police authority holds the funds from
      which expenses for its local police force will be supplied: s. 14. It is inherent in the
33   system (as Mr Baker submitted in reply) that the Chief Constable will apply to the
      authority for authorisation to incur expenditure; it may be for the use o f resources such
      as helicopters, or the installation of video surveillance systems in city streets, or a host
36   of other things. No doubt the Chief Constable presents a general budget. We were not
     referred to any provision in statute which shows or suggests that the police authority’s
     power to accede to such requests rests in anything other than the combination of s.6(l)
39   and s. 111(1). Given this, it seems to me plain that, in the particular context before us
     in this case, the legitimate scope of the ancillary power provided by s. 111(1) cannot be
     restricted so as to support only those powers and duties which are expressly conferred
42   on the police authority. Those powers and duties are themselves ancillary; though they
     are very important, they take second place to the Chief Constable’s tactical role, and
     second place also to the Secretary of State’s strategic role. S. 111(1) must in context
45   (whatever it does in other cases) allow the police authority to support what its express
     powers and duties also support; and this is no less than its general function conferred
                                                              -25-
          1 0 M arch 1999
       Ju d g m en t: A pproved bv th e C ourt fo r handing down                             Ex Parte M urray & Duckenfield
       (subject to editorial corrections)                                    R v Chief C onstable of S o u th Yorkshire Police
                                                                                 Ex Parte S o u th Yorkshire Police Authority



       by s.6 (l). If that is right, the authority may in principle decide to fund officers’ legal
       representation in proceedings no less than they may fund any other activity which the
  3    Chief Constable might propose as being conducive to “the m aintenance of an
       efficient and effective police force for its area” .

  6                    This result is supported, if only ex silentio, by the decision o f this court
        in R v Derbyshire Police A uthority ex p. Wilson (8 August 1989, unreported save in
        The Times). The court had to consider a decision o f the police authority not to
  9    contribute to the legal expenses o f two police officers in relation to an auditor’s
        enquiry. The court assumed that s.4 o f the Police Act 1964 (the predecessor o f s.6(1))
        provided the pow er to grant financial assistance. However the point o f principle was
 12    not argued. The applicants also point to other materials. In 1962 the report o f the
        Royal Commission on the Police was published. It indicated the then current practice
        in relation to the provision o f financial support to police officers in civil proceedings,
        which included a requirement that “a constable must have acted in good faith in the
        intended execution of his d u ty ” (para 196(a)). Para 197 stated:

 18             “In E ngland and W ales a distinction is m ade between a p riv ate prosecution,
                in which the decision as to the support of the constable will be taken on the
                sam e basis as in the case of a civil action, and a public prosecution brought
21              by the police o r the D irecto r of Public Prosecutions.”

       Home Office Circular 77/1987, published on 4 December 1987, stated:
24
                 “... acting in p u rsu an ce of its general statutory duty to m aintain an
                adequate and efficient police force for its are a , the police authority has
27              discretion to m eet expenditure incurred by officers in all kinds of legal
                proceedings w here the officers have acted in good faith in pursuance of
                th eir duties, or the interests of the force as a whole a re involved...
|p 0            [Then under the heading “Private Prosecutions”]
                A police officer should be able to c arry out his duties in the confidence that,
                if he acts in good faith and exercises his judgm ent reasonably, his police
33              authority will su p p o rt him. If, in a case w here a m em ber of the public
                brings a prosecution against an officer, the authority is satisfied th at the
                officer has acted in this way, the authority should provide or fund legal
36              advice an d /o r rep resen tatio n .”

          On 17 February 1998 Home Office Circular 4/1998 was published. Unlike its
39     predecessor it sits on the fence as regards the power o f a police authority to fund
        defences to private prosecutions. It has no persuasive effect one way or the other upon
        the issues in these proceedings. The earlier Circular, though obviously not a source o f
42     law, may possibly possess some force as regards the purposes to be fulfilled by
        s.6 ( l ) ’s predecessor in s.4 (l) o f the Police Act 1964: see per Scarman LJ as he then
        was in Bristol D C v Clark [1975] 3 AER 976, referred to in Wilson. But there are
45     great dangers in treating government pronouncements, however helpful, as an aid to
        statutory construction. I would prefer to base my conclusion, that s. 111(1) in principle
                                                                   -   26-
       Drait 30 March 1999 12:55
     Ju d g m en t: A pproved by th e C ourt fo r handino down                         Ex Parte M urray & Duckenfield
     {subject to editorial corrections)                                 R v Chief C onstable of S o u th Y orkshire Police
                                                                                                                             V
                                                                            Ex Parte S outh Yorkshire Police A uthority


      empowers the SYPA to support D and M ’s defence (and their participation in the
     judicial review against the DPP), upon those considerations touching the correct
 3   construction o f the material statutory provisions which I have already set out.

                     If my Lords agree with this conclusion, it is enough to dispose o f the
 6   case in the applicants’ favour. However we heard much argument on the question
      whether s.6 ( l) conferred on the police authority any power, in any circumstances, to
      take action not otherwise expressly authorised. This engages Miss Baxendale’s
 9   proposition (a) as I have described it, and her reliance on the expressio unius est
      exclusio alterius doctrine. It only has relevance if I am wrong to hold, as I have done,
      that s. 111(1) in principle enables the SYPA to fund D and M even if s. 6 ( l ) does not
12   itself empower the authority to do anything. In this context I will deal only (and that
      shortly) with s. 8 8(4) o f the Act o f 1996, which as I have said is the high water-mark o f
      this part o f Miss Baxendale’s argument.

                   S .88 contains a comprehensive scheme as to liability on the part o f the ^
     police for torts. By ss.(l) the chief officer o f police for a police area is liable in
18   respect o f torts committed by constables under his direction and control in the
     performance or purported performance o f their functions. Without this provision there
     would be no such liability because police officers are not servants but office-holders.
21   Ss.(2) provides in part:

               “ T here shall be paid out of the police fund -
24
                         (a) any dam ages o r costs aw arded against the chief officer of police
                         in any proceedings b rought against him by virtue of this section and
27                       any costs incu rred by him in any such proceedings so fa r as not
                         recovered by him in the proceedings...”

30   Ss. (4) provides:-
             “A police au th o rity m ay, in such cases and to such extent as a p p e a r to it to
             be ap p ro p riate, pay out of the police fund -
33
                        (a) any dam ages o r costs aw arded against a person to whom this
                        subsection applies in proceedings for a tort comm itted by th at
36                      person,

                        (b) any costs in cu rred and not recovered by such a person in such
39                      proceedings, and

                         (c) any sum req u ired in connection with the settlem ent of a claim
42                      th at has o r m ight have given rise to such proceedings.”

     In my judgm ent this provision offers no support for Miss Baxendale’s reliance on the
45   exclusio alterius rule. S .88 is self-standing. It has no implications for the general reach
     o f the police authority’s functions. And once s.88(4) was to allow the police authority
                                                                 -27-
     Draft 30 March 1999 12:55
         Ju d g m en t: A pproved by th e C ourt for handing dow n                  Ex Parte Murray & Duckenfield
         (subject to editorial Corrections)                          R v Chief C onstable of South Yorkshire Police
                                                                         Ex Parte South Yorkshire Police Authority


         to cover damages awarded against an officer in a tort action, it is no surprise that it
         covers costs as well. If it did not, there might well be an argument - based on the
     3   exclusio alterius rule - that costs were deliberately excluded.


     6                  In all these circumstances I do not think it necessary to go into the
         legislative history o f s. 6 (l), or to canvass the arguments which were addressed to us as
         to the construction or effect o f its predecessor, s.4(l) o f the Police Act 1964. In the
     9   end there are two possibilities: s. 6( 1) empowers the police authority to do things, or it
         does not. I have so far proceeded on the assumption asserted by Miss Baxendale that it
         does not; but given that assumption, nevertheless for reasons I have sought to explain
    12   the SYPA possesses in principle the legal power to fund D and M.

                       In fact I think the better view is that s.6 ( l) enables the police authority to
         do things which reasonably support the function which s.6 ( 1) confers. Such a power is
#    5   by no means open-ended. It would not allow the authority to invade the provinces of
         the Chief Constable or the Secretary o f State; and this is an important and
    18   considerable constraint.

                         In the course o f argument some time was spent, in fairness at the
    21   encouragement o f the court, in seeing whether the specific provisions in the Act of
          1996 or the local government legislation, conferring specific powers on the police
         authority, left gaps which only s.6 ( l) could fill. Points were made about lower ranks’
    24   rights o f representation in legal proceedings, which are covered as appropriate by the
         Police Federation; and about the representation o f higher ranks in various forms of
         legal proceedings. But the answer to the question we must decide, whether the power
    27   to fund D and M in principle lies in the hands o f the SYPA, cannot in my judgment
         depend on a trawl through all the things a police authority is expressly empowered to
         do. The provisions which expressly confer and impose powers and duties on police
         authorities do not constitute an independent code. The police authority’s functions are,
0°       to use a questionable modernism, symbiotic with those of the Chief Constable and the
         Secretary of State. So judged, and for the reasons I have given, they allow the use o f
    33   s. 111( 1) to fund officers in the defence o f private prosecutions and injudicial review
         proceedings.

    36                  I would allow this application. It will be appropriate to hear counsel as
         to relief, and costs.

    39   MR JUSTICE CRESSWELL

         I agree.
    42
         MR JUSTICE LATHAM

    45   I also agree.


         Oral! 30 March 1999 12:55
C W P N ew ell                                                         ? 5 p r
                                                                                                  rara
Pirector, Casework.

                                                                                                  Headquarters
                                                                                                  50 Ludgate HM
                                                                                                  London EC4M 7EX


                                                                                              0171-273 1226
 r                                                 i                             Din'd Line:
                                                                                              0171-273 8000
                                                                                 SicitrlihHinl:
                                                                                    I'MsimiiK 0171-329 8366
                                                                                      dx x.i: 300850 Ludgate EC4
     Messrs Winckworth Sherwood
     Solicitors
     Dx: 2312 Victoria

                                                                        Our Ref: YBF/3341/89
 L
                                                                        Your Ref: 24332/1/SBE/jet


                                                                                   12 April 1999


                                  NOTICE OF DISCONTINUANCE


     Dear Sirs

     RE:      DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELD
              LEEDS MAGISTRATES COURT - ADJOURNED HEARING

     I have today written to the Clerk to the Justices at Leeds Magistrates’ Court, informing him,
     first, that I have taken over and secondly, that I am discontinuing under Section 23 of the
     Prosecution of Offences Act, 1985, the following charge against your client: that on the 15th
     day of April, 1989, at Hillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield, with intent to pervert the
     course of justice, he did an act which had a tendency to pervert the course of justice in that he
     lied about the circumstances in which gate C at the Football Stadium became open: contrary to
     Common Law.

     The effect of this notice is that your client no longer needs to attend court in respect of this
     charge and any bail conditions imposed in relation to it cease to apply.

     The decision to discontinue this charge has been taken because there is notenough                 evidence to
     provide a realistic prospect of conviction.

     This notice does not apply to any other charges against you client. Your client must still attend
     court in respect of these charges and any bail conditions imposed in relation to them continue to
     apply.

     Your client has the right to require the discontinued proceedings io be revived. If you wish to
     exercise this right, you must give written notice to the Clerk to the Justices at the above
     magistrates' court as soon as possible (and in any event within 35 days).

     Should your client wish to apply for any costs incurred in respect of ourtaking over ol this
!"'^J*fr'~harge, you may make a written request to the Clerk to the Justices. It is not necessary to apply
       - ;ior the proceedings to be continued in order to apply for your costs.

       CAUTION: this notice only applies to the charge specified in it, and does not have any effect in
       relation to any others that may be pending, or other proceedings against your client.

       Yours faithfully




        C W P NEWELL
C W I* N ew ell                                                                                  CPS
Director, Casework.
                                                                                                 Headquarters
                                                                                                 50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                                 London EC4M 7EX


                                                   —i                          Direct Litu :     0171-273 1226
 l~                                                                            Su'tfchbikml;     0171-273 S000
                                                                                  im siiu i!.:   0171-329 8366
                                                                                     U S A'..    300850 L u n e t t e   Ii<_




        Messrs Winckworth Sherwood
        Solicitors                                                                  YBF/3341/S9
        D X 2312 Victoria
 L                                                 -                                24332/1/SBE /'jet


                                                                                     12 April 1999




         Dear Sirs

         RE:      ADLINGTON v DUCKENFIELD AND .MURRAY
                  LEEDS MAGISTRATES’ COURT: Adjourned hearing

         On 31 March, 1999, the Divisional Court handed down judgement in the case of R v
         DPP ex parte Duckenfield and Murray. The court ruled that, whilst the overall Crown
         Prosecution Service policy on private prosecutions and the Director’s decision not to
         take over and discontinue the charges of manslaughter and wilful neglect to perform a
         public duty were lawful, that policy was only partly followed in the consideration of
         the allegation against your client concerning an attempt to pervert the course of
         justice. Accordingly, the Divisional Court quashed ihe decision insofar as it related to
         that charge.

          1have, therefore, reconsidered my decision in relation to that charge in the light of the
         judgment and I have decided that the CPS should lake over that single charge in order
          to discontinue it under section 23(3) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 19S5. The
          reason is that there is clearly no case to answer on that charge.

          Accordingly, on behalf of the Director of Public Prosecutions. I am exercising the
          power under section 6(2) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 to take over the
          private prosecution by Ann Adlinglon, of the charge against Mr Duckenfield of
          attempting to pervert the course of justice on 15 April. 1989. The prosecution of the
          remaining charees against both Mr Duckenfield and Mr Murray is not affected by this
          decision.

          A formal letter of discontinuance is enclosed.
1 have informed Leeds Magistrates’ Court and Ann Adlington of this decision.

Yours faithfully




C W P NEWELL
