                                 RECEIVED
To:   SlM s Newell                 13 JAN 1999              Ref:      YBF/3341/89
      Director Casework
      Ludgate Hill                 DIRECTOR
                                 (C A SE W O R K )
cc:   Robin Booth
      Chris Enzor



RE: HILLSBOROUGH

1.    An update of the Hillsborough Log is being sent by e-mail within the next two
      days.

2.    Enclosed are copies of recent correspondence between the HFSG and the
       South Yorkshire Police Authority. Recipients will note that the group is
       attempting to cut off what appears to be unlimited legal funding by the
      Authority for the two defendants.

3.    The Authority is considering the HFSG representations on Friday 14 January
       1999. If they are successful then it may mean that the application for leave to
      move for judicial review of our decision will not proceed, unless other suitable
       funding is obtained. The Legal Aid Board would want to look at the merits of
       any such application to be funded by them.



                                                                                               (jLi f r )

George R Croston                                                                 Vu .          tL
Prosecution Team Leader
12 January 1999


                                                     .1*                 t                 *




                                            L.*X\                                It—^>s
                                                       j>              U v -j'    H * l/       IHAa-sV”



                                           ■fe*            L*   fer                        lU w ?

                                           fJL .                                           ^ —>—j

                                                                                                          •




                                                                      Vi f \
V*B0H%




                      H ills b o r o u g h F a m ily S u p p o rt G rou p




W J Wilkinson BA(Econ) CPFA
Clerk and Treasurer
South Yorkshire Police Authority
P 0 Box 37
Regent Street
Barnsley
South Yorkshire S70 2PQ

22 December 1008

Dear Sir


Adliimton v Murray: Adlington v Duckenfield


1.    1 am the prosecutor in the above case, in which the defendants are charged before the
       Leeds Magistrates Court with serious offences arising out of the disaster at the
       Hillsborough Football Ground in April 1989. I write on the advice of leading counsel,
      as solicitor to the Hillsborough Family Support Group to express concern about the
      decision to fund the defence of these two men. As you know, the defendants were
      senior police officers on duty at the ground when the disaster occurred. Both are
       charged with manslaughter of two representative victims, and with misfeasance. Mr
       Duckenfield is also charged, with attempting to pervert the course of justice.

2.    It has recently been admitted publicly by Mr lan Daines, Assistant Chief Constable,
       that the South Yorkshire Police Authority has agreed to fund the defence of these two
       men. We have suspected this for some time. The purpose of this letter is to argue that
       the decision to provide finance appears to have been made irrationally and unlawfully.

3.    We refer to the following documents, all of which are in your possession.

         A.      The Home Office Circular of 4lh December 1987 No .7.7/87
         B.      The Home Office Circular of 17lh February 1998 HOC 4/1998
     ■*. C.      Minute 38 of the South Yorkshire Police Authority Meeting o f 1stAugust
                  1997
        D.       Minute 62 of the South Yorkshire Police Authority Meeting of 19th September

                                                -   1
                                                    -




                Phone 0151 236 1919. Fax 0151 236 1936. E Mafl lnfo@hfsg.org
              1st Floor Central Buildings 41 North John Street Liverpool L2 6RR
       1997.
E.     Minute 151 of the South Yorkshire Police Authority Meeting of 27th February
       1998.                                        •      •
F.   ' Minute 174 of the South Yorkshire Police Authority Meeting of 24th April
       1.998.
G.    The letter o f 25,b September 1998 from Maureen Oades to me.
H.    Minute 86 of the South Yorkshire Police Authority Meeting of 30th October
       IW8.
I.    The South Yorkshire Police Authority Scheme of Delegation.
J.    A document headed “Standing Orders. Interpretation. Issued January 1996"
       on the headed paper of the South Yorkshire Police Authority.

The Home Office Circular No 77/87, suggests that, in the case of a private
prosecution, where a police officer has been acquitted and has not been awarded all his
costs, the police authority may make up the difference. It also suggests that, in the
case of a private prosecution, the authority should provide or fund legal advice and/or
representation if the authority is “satisfied” that the officer has acted “in good faith
and has exercised his judgment “reasonably”.

The Home Office Circular of 17,h February 1998, 4/1998, replaces with immediate
effect the 1987 circular, and suggests that under the very wide terms of section 111(1)
of the Local Government Act 1972, “it could be argued” that payment of money to
“officers (either former or serving) involved in criminal proceedings would in some
way facilitate or be conducive to a police authority s broad functions. The Circular
emphasises that a police authority must take its own advice. It is noticeable that the
“guidance" has been prepared after consultation with “ACPO , the Superintendents
Association, the Police Federation, and the Association of Police Authorities; it does
not purport to be an independent legal opinion.

This Circular seems to have coincided almost exactly with the report of the “Scrutiny"
of Lord Justice Stuart-Smith in February of this year. I note that on 27lh February this
year, your authority agreed to authorise the Clerk and Treasurer to consider
applications from officers; serving or retired, tor financial assistance in relation to
possible private prosecutions arising out ot the “Scrutiny .

For a reason which is not clear, the Resolution was taken under the replaced 1987
Circular. There is therefore no lawful authority to validate the decision taken on that
day. The assertion, recorded in the minutes, that the members of the Authority
“remain of the opiniorfthat the officers acted in good faith is extraordinary. The
Enquiry of Lord Justice Taylor of 1989 found that there had been negligence, and
blamed the two defendants (among other police officers^ The failure of these two to
seal off the tunnel to the central pens at the Leppings Lane end of the ground was a
“blunder of the first magnitude”, and the immediate cause ot death. The then Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire Police, uneqTiivocably accepted these findings.

 Further, .Lord Taylor found, at page 16, paragraph 98 of his Interim Report that Mr
 Duckenfield'misled Graham Kelly and GfenKirton of the FA and Graham Mackrell of
   Sheffield Wednesday, at atim e when he knew there were fatalities (and that there
   would therefore be an inquest and no doubt other formal inquiries). Duckenfield
   indicated that a gate had been forced and there had been an inrush of supporters, and
   pointed out to them the fate allegedly forced on the screen.

   In 1998, Lord Justice Stuart-Smith upheld these findings after his “Scrutiny”, referring
   scathingly to Duckenfield’s “disgraceful lie”.

  In July 1991, the Police Complaints Authority directed that charges of neglect of duty
  be preferred against both men. These charges were never determined because the
  Chief Constable o f South Yorkshire retired Mr Duckenfield on “health grounds”, and
  it was thought to be unfair to try Mr Murray,

  It is impossible in the light of this history to understand how your authority could have
  been satisfied in February 1998 that “the officers had acted in good faith”; and also
  impo.s.sible to understand how the other condition in the 1987 Circular, namely, that
  the officers had exercised their judgment reasonably, could be thought to have been
  satisfied. The minutes show that this condition was not even considered.

IWK ( 'ircnlar   ------------------------------                               "

  The 1998 Circular was not applied. If it had been, it woujd have_ become clear in my
  view that its terms were not met, and thayherejwas no lawful authority for the
  provision of tax-payers’ money in this way to flmd the defence in this case. There is
  no statutory authority. There is a limited power in relation to civil proceedings to pay
  damages and costs; but no power even in civil proceedings .to fund an action brought
  against an individual officer. Section 88 of the Police Act 1996 deals with “Liability
  for wrongful acts of constables”, and allows for the provision of costs incurred and.not
  recovered.       '

  Parliament has not provided for the payments of any fines incurred by constables; or
  tor reimbursement of costs incurred and not recovered. To have done so would have
  been surprising, since criminal liability is individual and personal. You will note that
  the Circular indicated at the highest that “it could be argued” that to allow the payment
  to be made to officers, (either former or retired) involved in criminal proceedings
  would “in some way facilitate or be conducive to a police authority’s broad functions.
  For example, failure to provide financial assistance could adversely affect the morale of
  the force if officers had to meet their costs after acquittal.”

  This is legal nonsense. The case law indicates that section 111(1) of the 1972 Act
  cannot be used in this way. The practice in relation to costs incurred by an acquitted
  person is set out in the Practice DirectioiL&lasts in Criminal Proceedings) .93 Cr.
  App.R.8 which provides that a person acquitted after trial On indictment should
  normally have his costs paid out of central funds except where the defendant has
  brought suspicion upon himself anefha's misled the prosecution into thinking the case
  against him is stronger than it is; or where he has been acquitted on a meritless
  technicality. How can it be said that police morale woulcl suffer if the officers of a
        force heard that one of its members had been refused its costs on one of the reasonable
        grounds set out in this direction?


15.    In any event the South Yorkshire Police Authority seems to have gone way beyond
        this highly dubious guidance in the 1998 Circular and authorised, in February 1998,
        any financial assistance to be given by the Clerk and Treasurer in respect of
        applications from serving or retired officers for potential and future criminal
        proceedings, in which, of course, a defendant could be convicted. (Is counsel
        instaicted on this basis able to advise that a defendant plead guilty?).


Delegation and hlxdnsion o f the public

16.    Maureen Oades’ letter to me of 25"’ September 1998 says that the public were
       excluded from that part of the meeting when this matter was dealt with as it was a
       matter relating to “any action taken in connection with the prevention, investigation or
       prosecution of any crime.” It seems to have been the basis for granting the financial
       assistance that there was no crime at all, and that the officers had acted in good faith.
       In any event it is submitted that paragraph 14 of Schedule 12A to the Local
       Government Act 1972,'refers to prosecutions by South Yorkshire Police and not by a
       private prosecutor against two former police officers.

17.    Furthermore, 1 do not understand how such a decision, ever, if it could be lawfully
       made, could be delegated to the Clerk and Treasurer. The Authority resolution of 27
       February 1993 purports to delegate, absolutely, the decision making process to the
       “Clerk and Treasurer” who is one and the same person. -The report presented to the
       Authority on 30"' October was a joint report of the Clerk and Treasurer and the Chief
       Constable. 1 understand that the Clerk and Treasurer is not a Solicitor. It is implicit in
       your standing order 5.2.5, that any consideration of applications for financial assistance
       for legal proceedings ought to be undertaken by a person who is legally qualified and
       would thus understand the danger of granting open-ended financial provision.

Some features of the current criminal proceedings

18.    You also suggest in that letter that this delegation “was not viewed as a delegation
       which would extend beyond six months”. This may have been because Mr Daines,
       Assistant Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire Police, publicly asserted earlier this
       year that lie believed that any private prosecutions would “fall at the first hurdle”. Did
       he repeat this at the meeting of 2 7‘h'February? We do not know what applications have
       been made by Mr Murray-and Mr Duckenfield, but we assume, for reasons that appear
       below, that authority has been given for any judicial review proceedings of the CPS
       decision not to discontinue the case, and for leading and junior counsel to appear at
       old style committal proceedings, as well as at trial.

19.   • On 18lh December 1998, the Crown Prosecution Service, after five months of careful
        study, rejected the applications of the defendants to take over and discontinue the

                                               -4 -
prosecutions. It is clear that the criminal proceedings are now likely to, be protracted,
complex and very expensive.




The prosecutions are straightforward. We enclose for your guidance a copy of the
informations presented to the Leeds Magistrates Court last July on the basis of which
the summonses were issued. You will see that the allegations are based upon the
findings of the Taylor Enquiry in 1989, supported by evidence that has come to the
Family Support Group in 1997-98. Negligence has been admitted again and again by
the Chief Constable in court proceedings. It has never been disputed that the acts
alleged against the defendants were the acts of negligence that caused the deaths of the
96 people.

Before the decision of the Crown Prosecution Service was announced on I8'1'
December, the solicitor for Mr Murray indicated that it was highly likely that an
adverse decision of the CPS would be challenged by judicial review proceedings. At
the hearing of the case before the Leeds Magistrates Court on 21st December, it was
made clear by leading and junior counsel for Mr Murray, in the presence of his
solicitor, Mr Manning, and by junior counsel for Mr Duckenfield, that a decision had
already been made to seek judicial review :>f the CPS decision. The magistrate was
told this by counsel for the defendants when he was dealing with the questions of
timetable and voluntary disclosure of documents.

However, it was also made clear, although a concluded decision had been made to
apply for judicial review, that the defendants had asked the CPS for their “reasons”;
alternatively, iheir “policy” behind the decision, and that those reasons o~r policy might
be received by 2 1 December.

No legally-aided lawyers could proceed in this way. Professional obligations exist
which require that a lawyer must assess the prospects of success before committing
hard-pressed public funds to an expensive application for judicial review. I am advised
by leading counsel that the prospects of quashing the CPS decision in such proceedings
are small on the following’,, among other, grounds. The CPS have told us all what
criteria lhey were applying; the defendants argued that the CPS were in a good
position to assess the public interest involved in the prosecution; the CPS, Police
Complaints Authority and Coroner were all misled by a cover-up by ihe South
Yorkshire police, the magnitude of which has become apparent only after the Home
Office ordered the release of documents this year; and the defendants have alternative
remedies in the Magistrates’ court.

The fact that the court was assured that applications for judicial review would be made
suggests that the South Yorkshire Police Authority has already agreed, before the CPS
decision, to fund these applications, irrespective of their merits. Counsel would not
have told the court that the applications would be made, if funding was not in place.
Neither would they have told counsel for South Yorkshire Police of their decision to
apply to the High Court; they knew that the fact of impending applications was
        material to decisions that the South Yorkshire police and the CPS were making that
        day about voluntary disclosure to the prosecution.of documents in their possession. It
        is clear that both those bodies decided to defer any decision on voluntary disclosure
        because of the assurance from counsel that judicial review applications would be
        lodged (“in the first two weeks of January”) on behalf of both defendants.


25.     The prosecution and the Court have also been told that both defendants have estimated
         that four weeks at least will be needed at committal proceedings. The court has set
         aside four weeks beginning 19th April 1999, and the time was chose to accord with the
        convenience of leading counsel for the defence. The court has been told that two
         leading counsel will appear, one for each defendant. No doubt two juniors will also
        appear, and two solicitors. Leading counsel for Mr Murray has indicated that there
        will also be an abuse of process application to the magistrate to stay the proceedings.
         He intends to argue that this should be heard on a different occasion from the
         committal, and before it. I suspect that the defendants will seek leave to move for
        judicial review of any adverse decision upon this issue. This is hardly surprising as
        your Authority does not appear to have placed any restriction as to the amount or
         duration of the financial assistance to the defendants.

26.     1 am advised by leading counsel that the prosecution has astrong prima facie case on
        the charges alleged; and that an abuse of process application is likely to fail. We have
        a mass of evidence ir. our possessiOff'which has come to us in the last year, indicating
        that the South Yorkshire Police force hascovered up facts which are embarrassing as
        to the nature and extent of its admitted negligence, and that the CPS, Coroner and
        Police Complaints Authority, inter alia, were misled when they were pursuing their
        various enquiries between 1989 and 1992. 1 shall willingly help you further about this
        on request.

27.    Of course, the trial of this matter could take many months. From all these facts, you
       will see that the exposure of the South Yorkshire taxpayer (in relation to its own costs,
       let alone ours) is of the order of millions of pounds. I should make it clear that neither
       1 nor the Hillsborough Family Support Group, on whose behalf I act, wish in any way
       to deprive either defendant of the means to conduct a proper defence to these charges.
       They should surely apply, like anyone else, for legal aid if they are unable to fund the
       costs of the defence themselves. In that event they would be subject to the usual
       restraints and disciplines of the legal aid system. I believe that the defence, with access
       to pubiic funds’fro’m your authority, are seeking at present to inflict unnecessary
       expenses upon us by recourse to every possible type of legal hearing, in the knowledge
       that we do not have such access, and are instead dependent oh private donations and
       fund-raising events. Neither defendant lives in South Yorkshire, but the South
       Yorkshire Police has a strong interest of its own in the discharge or acquittal of these
       defendants.

( '(inclusion

28.    The decisions taken pursuant to the Resolutions of the South Yorkshire Police

                                                -   6-




                                             ( b)
       Authority appear, on the information available to.me, to be unlawful, irrational, ultra
       vires and procedurally improper on various grounds. We have an interest, as do you
       and South Yorkshire taxpayers, in ensuring that public money is not wasted or spent
       wrongly in the course of this criminal litigation. I look forward to your reply. You
       will appreciate that we are obviously considering an application for judicial review
       ourselves, supported by some South Yorkshire tax-payers, and an approach to the
       District Auditor. We invite you to reply by the 15"’ January 1999.


Yours sincerely




Ann Adlinuton
Solicitor
                                                                                             Su ppor*
                  Hillsborough Family Support Group


        All members of the South Yorkshire Police Authority
        South Yorkshire Police Authority
        P.O. Box 37, Regent Street,
        Barnsley, South Yorkshire
        S70 2PQ

    5Januaryl999

    Dear Member,

Adlin^ton v Murray: AHlinuton v Dnrk^n^M



    '         GrouDhr w r A t0r in ' hiS C3Se' a"d, the S0'idt0r ‘° the Hillsb° r°ugh Family Support
              Hilkh        5    an asrs0ciatl0n whose members are families of the victims of the
              Hillsborough disaster of April 1989. The prosecutions were commenced in the Leeds
             to the Restitution^ f ^     '" h ' * am-Writin» t0 y0U about the decisi°n taken pursuant
             to the Resolution of your authority of Februaiy 1998 to fond the defence of these two
              ormer senior officers in these criminal proceedings. Much of the c t l t f o f tf c
                   is ase upon submissions and facts that have been supplied by the HFSG to the

             .h  Z e s funding
              he present       Se™iI o
                         e rrr issue.  n,theadvicthat
                                      understand  eofthe
                                                      ieadingc°umatter
                                                         subject n“ o f last
                                                                         ^ February’s t
             arvour meefn ° E S f * ™            ^                           ™     ™      b e ^ id e re d
             to which r shalf refer in . S t e f                   ^         “ 3          of


"           o n lT J n 3 ° T ° f 3 letter th3t 1 Sem t0 Mr w ' 1 Wilki"“ n. Clerk and Treasurer
            wav in 1 ^ 7 - Se“ “1S ° Ut|° bjections in law t0 the grant of the funding, and to the
            way in which decisions were taken. That letter may conveniently be read first At
             nnexB are copies of earlier correspondence between Miss Oades and myself and the
            mTdeC'irnC“       m “*          ^        in re'3ti0n “ ““ “          10 ^     r X     ™


            R e so ^ L a„T /,t F3! 6 th3‘ ^ ar8Ur ni iS th3t <leCiSi0nS ‘° 8 ™ ' S ^ i n g pursuant to the
            a full         . .      mary w* 'f ^lawful, irrational and procedurally improper, and that
              further such decision would now be unlawful in any event.
       Thefa d s o f the case; Manslaughter and Misfeasance

       4         r s V    ^   ^   to s e tth e s eo u t’ l,ecau“ ‘ <>« South V o ^ K „ P(Ji,    .   ,   .
                 ( SYPA ) is recorded as havm« resolved on 99* v\            '“ 7 Po“ce Authority
                 after publication o f the report o°                                 leSS than *«» weeks
                 Smith,                      r     ‘ L- ' • Scru“-ny conducted by Lord Justice Stuart-


                         “That in the light o f the findings o f Lord                  .    .
                        c o n se n ts on the outcome, members do not b e i Z ' Z ^ t t " * * " * <*
                        to cause them to recor          th^ Anthnrit, >     • ~    w —   "v evidence
                        opinion that the officerslc'tedln '^ d 'S t h "P m i a ‘S “ d remain of

   5           Lord Justice Stuart-Smith reinforced       finHlnoc nf t   t   ,
               interim report was published in                       “o m *3y • whose oriSinal
               course, that you h a ^       tn fh T n ^ - " 7 ' ~ w‘“e      guidance requires of
               does not seem to have                                    ^   of the case, although this
               decisions were made in nnw;n^°k~f~~ •" * 6 SOiUtl0n of last Febrjary, when
               prosecuted, and, more Im porting* for what offenceT ^                 * 3ny0ne Was goillS to be


              t o £ d £ S ^ d ^ p ^ , ^ n ^ h” ^              0f last Februa,y- P - " o f Annex B,
              Authority made its decision. MemW *               ^            ? C^ baSiS the
              attitude of the South Yorkshire poii~ a«                  therf ore t0 be aware o f the
              Court on 21st December 1QQR              -------       “e Leeds District Ma»i«t™>t*«
             the South Yorkshire force s h o u M ^ t ™                     -     Cati0n by the P ™ « ^ o n that
             Louise Vaity, in s t a t e d by h Z Z 2 u £ £ X w'*w*W
                                                                  W WU
                                                                       3
                                                                      iUj
                                                                               “ *               Counsel, Ms

                       South Yorkshire P o^*a pm n n t««!/» + ,t
                     issues within it and therefore ar<* ™7 ih u t * nature of L“s prosecution and the
                     relevant.”                   ~ w*-w- — *0 say or agree what is or is not


            an informed source I a n . r f T f e ^ j ! ^ ^ ***                 Sreater confidence, and fr"m
            manslaughter and misfe^                                                * * * ? ? “ ** ‘ harges'o'f
            the Taylor Report as Annex D. The chargesare soundlybased inlaw anTfect .^ar*S

The attitude of,he South Yorkshire Police to the allegation o f negligence

            T n ^ ° f nCe t‘h“S °‘ass °* ^voluntary mans^' >»Ver accord;™ *u
           Lords decision in R v A d o ™ ^ ♦»,„                          accordmg t0 the 1995 House of
           breach o f that d             u                 t             pr ° ve; <*>a duty o f care- (b) -
           essence o f the n 2 e r l ^ ^ l Z 7 *                          •“ * ° f ^
           the nsk o f death involved the c o n d u itif t h i T f ’^      “ whetier hav» 8 regard to
           circumstances as to                                 defendant was so bad in all the
           MackayLC[1995] 1 A .C . 187E.              S - M to a criminal act or omission ” per Lord


           * is submitted that *U elements but the las, have never been seriously disputed. The

                                                      2
          remaining element is for the jury. Lord Taylor found, and it is i n h ^ n t in
          acceptance of liability by South Yorkshire police in the various neohoenceTases tb«t
             police were under a duty of care, and that there was a breach of that d"tv
          causative of death.^ See^also Frost v. Chief Constable o f the South Yr>rVohireVolirg
          I 9y/j 1           :>4u M4b-c, in the High Court action brought by police officers at
          me ground, per Rose LJ- •

                 “The Immediate cause of the disaster was a senior officer’s d^.irion to nn*n
                 the outer gate without cutting off access to the pens. Liability fcr~the d ^ «
                 and injuries o f those spectators has been admitted by the three defendants*the
                 first of whom is the Plaintiffs Chief Constable.”

         and per Lord Steyn m the House of Lords appeal in the same case r w w v rh i^f
         Constable o f the South Yorkshire Poi.v^ (December 1998)                ........


                “It is admitted by the Chief Constable that the events were caused b- the
                negligence o f the police m allowing the overcrowding of two spectator pens ”

 10     ^ o n Tay!; r Iep0rt was accepted by the Chief Constable of South Y o rk s h - in a,™ *
        1989, and after the Scrutiny, Mr Richard Wells accepted that Mr Duckenfield hadbeen
        S       u me? aS neghgent' 0 n Yorkshire Television’s “Camera” on 18th February"
        iyys tins exchange took place-

                Interviewer,     Well if somebody has been to blame, who is that person?”

                Wells,          ‘David Duckenfield has been blamed, by Lord Justice Taylor
                               The South Yorkshire police are culpable, in the sense of, that
                               they lost senior officer control that day. We’ve said that
                               repeatedly.”

        The Stuart-Smith report, it should be pointed out, rejected claims made on behalf
        xe             there WaS LrTlportant new evidence. However, it supported W o r i« n a l
        -ay.or findings strongly, and emphasised the criticisms o f the police th*t fa A
        made. Copies of relevant parts o f the report will be made available onT-q~~t ~ Itm -t
        be appreciated that the charges brought by the HFSG do not in any way contradict the
        ^tuart-^mith report. They are based upon the original findings o f the Tailor report as
       supported by the Stuart-Smith report. For this reason, it is puzzling to read that on
       27 February 1998, the SYPA relied on the Stuart-Smith findings to confinnaview
       previously held that the officers had behaved in good faith. As set out below, Lord
       .ustice Stuart-Smith referred in withering terms to Duckenfield’s                 k "

Attempting to pervert the course o f justice

12     It is important to set out the extent of the evidence in support o f this charge, because it
       w u not be apparent from previous Reports and documents on the case. The charge
       against Mr Duckenfield is that he lied to a number of people, either himself or through

                                                3-* _
        others, in the hour after the disaster, in a careful and calculating way, as the bodies
        were being earned away from the field and terraces. He did so to influence falsely the
        persons or courts who would investigate the circumstances o f the disaster. He alleged
        that the supporters had burst the gates opened, whereas he had himself, after
        consideration, ordered that they be opened. He failed to correct this lie after the event,
        and continued, together with many senior officers o f the South Yorkshire police to
        allow the lie to have effect for several weeks. The evidence in support of this*charge is
        oUmmansed at /lfLftcsz /y

 The decision of the Crown Prosecution Ser\>ice
 n
         At the beginning of July 1998 the solicitors for the defendants asked the Crown
         Prosecution Service to take over the prosecutions and discontinue them. The Cp S
         entitled in law to take over any prosecution begun by a private individual, and it will
         discontinue any prosecution of which it has the conduct (including those which it has
         taken over) if there is clearly no evidence, or if there are public Interest factors such Is
        ill-health, unacceptable delay, or if the prosecution is likely to damage the interests of
        justice

 14     The CPS conducted a most painstaking and professional review over a period of near'y
        six months, before deciding on 18th December 1998 that they would not t~ake~over and"
        discontinue the case. The ability of the CPS to make an informed and balanced
        decision was recognised by Winfcworth Sherwood for Mr Duckenfield, when thev
        wrote to the CPS on 9th October 1998 in these terms;

               “It is submitted on behalf of Mr Duckenfield that the power of the Director is
               far wider than a mere assessment of the evidence, and embraces a consideration
               of the wider public interest. The Director is well placed to assess where the
               public interest lies having had Involvement in the case over a period of nine
               years and having seen the Taylor report, the Stuart-Smith report, the coroner’s
               verdict, the judgement o f the Divisional Court and the review o f evidence, and         ,
               the advice of leading counsel obtained when the Director made the decision/to / ^
               prosecute.”                                                         ~ ~ ~

15     The representations put forward by the prosecution included the above assertions
       about the strength of the evidence. Contrary arguments were put forward by the
       defendants, but were obviously rejected. It is very doubtful that the facts were set out
       in detail before the SYPA last February, or indeed thereafter. Mr Daines wrote in a
       published article last spring that “It is hard to imagine a private prosecution getting
       past the first hurdle.” Presumably he ventured a similar opinion to the SYPA in
       February 1998, but was not aware o f the full facts about the prosecution, nor the
       public interest factors set out below, the existence of which has allowed the
       prosecution to clear the first hurdle and face the next hurdles with confidence.

Widerpublic interest considerations.

16     The SYPA will no doubt wish, in accordance with paragraph 6 of the Circular

                                                4
            HOC/1998, to “decide m the particular circumstances o f the case ar^ o" t h^ b*ci‘°
            of legal advice, whether to make financial assistance available to officers m ^ r i ^ a T
            proceedings.” (Emphasis added.) It is obviously doubtful
            c^ideralio n was given on 27» Februao-1998, but the S Y P ^ in consUteriLg whether
            to fund the defence m this case, might wish to be aware of the wider puWi, i n t ^ t c
            matters that were put to the CPS before the review was decided in the p ^ ^
            favour. It may also wish to consider whether the advice given by the South Y o ri-W .
            police themselves is dispassionate and detached.

     17      I t was “ S'^ed by the prosecution to the CPS that reliance couH «0t    pia^ nn
            previous Inquiries that had exculpated the defendants, such as the co k n er’s'i^ u est
            w.jc„ had returned verdicts o f accidental death, and the DPP’s decision in 1990 not to
            bring prosecutions. The prosecution argued that evidence has been available to the
            HFSG smce the publication o f the Stuart-Smith report in February 19Q8
            that the previous inquiries had been misled. These wider consideration*
           ^nnexF , and documents referred to therein at Annex G avA Annex H t w                    *
           the South Yorkshire police has maintained a tight and unjustified control of the"
           paperwork; that previous Investigations were misled; and that th^ p ^ ^ a l m ^
           independence of the West Midlands police was false. That force was hi reifty acti™
           as an agent of the South Yorkshire police, a force which put the protection of its
           interests at all time before the public interest.

 The interest o f the prosecution in the finding issue

 18       I have already set out in Annex A that the HFSG has no wish to deny the defence
          access to proper legal representation. I drew attention in that letter t^ th<* fW * w
          defence seemed able to call upon the SYPA for unqualified and ir^fi«;7Z fiT n ^ T T
          should inform you that I have had since then received written confirmation thatM r
          Murray’s lawyers are indeed going to apply for judicial review, whatever         re«o"«
          o -the CPS- 1 haye Presumed that this decision to apply for judicial review was made
          pursuant to funding arrangements made pursuant to the Resolution of the SYPA last
          February. It is not reasonable i o believe that that firm decision was made in t ^ m^re
          hope that the SYPA would agree to fund it on 8thJanuary next.
19
           Another concern is the closeness o f the connection between the defence and those who
                ^             the case- At three COurt hearings at the Leeds Magistrates Court
            a ".ugust’ December and 2 1st December) the lawyers for the defence have
          refuse.. to support the prosecution in calling for the disclosure o f papers held in the
          case by the South Yorkshire Police. I am in no doubt that this is because they believe
          with every good reason, that the archive will assist the prosecution mor* than t ^
          defence However, it is clear that it win be difficult for the defence In this case to ask
          tor the disclosure of information which is embarrassing to the South York«hir* po1'^ -
          the police argued successfully last year that the SYPA should fund that defence.

20        From the outside it looks as if a decision has been made to close ranks. It would be
          usual in decisions such as this to inquire what financial consequences would flow to
          the authority if funding were not granted, ifcwouid have been quite wrong for

                                                  5— _
       agreement to have been made on the basis that funding by the SYPA was the best way
       to ensure that the South Yorkshire force would not face further civil actions.

21     Wmkworth and Sherwood, who represent Mr Duckenfield, represented the South
       Yorkshire Police in the <cScrutiny” last year. It is not known whether they or
       Hammond Suddards advised the SYPA last February, upon this funding question
       GenerOUS fundinc arrangements hav^
                        O       O            wwVV
                                                1**
                                                  ■
                                                    cr>n»tit anH orant^H in on cmnciT7»nt attpmnt
                                                   'w            JJ*         *
                                                                             ***   ^ w
                                                                                     *Wi
                                                                                       i«.W
                                                                                          WWwn   «
                                                                                                 .


       to exhaust the resources of the prosecution,
                                        r              who do not have access to l^     i “oiA
                                                                                    wonw*   *wj w**w
       who have not applied for funding to the SYPA. If the prosecution did so apply, asking
       for funding to maintain the morale of the force, on the ground that junior officers
       would know that the negligent actions of the senior officers of the force would not be
       protected from a proper criminal inquiry, its claim would surely be more attractive than
       the present claim to fund the defence.

22     So far, the substantial decision to authorise the funding in the two individual cases has
       been taken in private. Both the defence and the SYPA has an interect ^ k^nino-
       much of the archive private as possible. The interest of the public and the prosecution
       is different. The force is sitting on material'that is deeply discreditable to the integrity
       o f the previous investigations. That is why it has refused to disclose it to the
       prosecution, and why it now seeks to insist on the most demanding conditions.

Tks alternative of !ega! aidfunding

      It is submitted that there is no reason why the South Yorkshire taxpayers should
      provide such potentially large and apparently unlimited funds to defend people who are
      entitled, like every other citizen, subject to means, to the provision o f legal aid. Those
      taxpayers would surely be disturbed if they were given full information about this.
      The lawyers that would be instructed under legal aid would be subject to the ususal
      constraints and disciplines of the scheme, but would at least be able to give
      independent advice; even, if appropriate, to plead guilty. There can be no doubt that
      the legal aid fund would be less profligate with its public money than it appears the
      SYPA. has decided to be. The -legal aid authorities would certainly have demanded
      down payments by way o f contributions from the defendants. They would have
      required a certification by the defendants’ lawyers that there were solid prospects of
      success for a judicial review, before authorising expenditure.

?d    No doubt you will wish to show a copy o f this letter and the enclosures to your
      lawyers and to the police. Of course, I have no objection, and would encourage you to
      ask them to deal with the matters I have set cut in detail, and for which evidential
      references have been given. A good test o f the strength o f the arguments I have
      presented is whether the police will be able to answer them. Since millions of pounds
      are potentially at stake, a proper and informed public debate can be expected, even if
      you have to postpone your hearing on 8* January. Members of the HFSG will wish to
      attend that meeting, whenever it occurs, and I request that we be kept informed of
      relevant dates. I shall be pleased to deal with any queries in advance that any member
      of the SYPA might have, or supply copies o f any documents to which I have referred.
      I shall myself send a copy of these representations to the defendants’ solicitors, so that

                                                6- ^
that they can make their own submissions.




Yours sincerely,



Ann Adlington.
Solicitor
                          IN THE COUNTY OF WEST YORKSHIRE




THE INFORMATION o f ANN ADLINGTON, Solicitor, acting on behalf of the Hillsborough Family
Support Group, who states that


            THE DEFENDANT


            DAVID GODFREY DUCKENFIELD of



             On the 15th April 1989 at Hillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield

             (1)    Unlawfully killed JOHN ALFRED ANDERSON
                    Contrary to Common Law

             (2)    Unlawfully killed JAMES GARY ASPINALL
                    Contrary to Common Law

             (3)    Wilfully neglected to perform a public duty
                    Contrary to Common Law

             (4)    With intent to pervert the course of justice did an act which had a
                    tendency to pervert the course o f justice in that he lied about the
                    circumstances in which gate C became open.
                    Contrary to Common Law




             DATED THE 10TH DAY OF JULY 1998
                              IN THE COUNTY OF WEST YORKSHIRE


THE INFORMATION o f ANN ADLINGTON, Solicitor, acting on behalf of the Hillsborough Family
Support Group, who states that                            ■




            THE DEFENDANT .


            BERNARD DEAN MURRAY


            On 15th April 1989 at Hillsborough Football Stadium, Sheffield

             0)    Unlawfully killed JOHN ALFRED ANDERSON
                   Contrary to Common Law

             (2)   Unlawfully killed JAMES GARY ASPINALL
                   Contrary to Common Law

             (3)   Wilfully neglected to perform a public duty
                   Contrary to Common Law



                   ( \ . f{
             DATED THE 10TH DAY OF JULY 1998
0B E      ONLINE NETWORK                      HOHEM .CE | SfTEMAP |TV LISTINGS | RADIO LISTINGS [ BBC EDUCATION [9 S C WOHLD SERVICE



                NEW S
                      SW^jKv** ¥Sfw*IS-^ilpSfl §yt«S§^Ji^ ‘j ftfiKisoiS? i3$>P£5**affit
.     Front Page       Monday. November 30. 1998 Published at 21:37 GMT_____
                                                                                                    Relevant Stories
           World                                                                                    16 Nov 98 | UK

               UK
                       UK                                                                           Police chief rejects
                                                                                                    Hillsborough claims
      UK Politics      Taxpayers to foot                                                            06 Nov 98 I UK
        Business                                                                                    Straw backs
        Sci/Tech
                       Hillsborough court costs                                                     Hillsborough officer
                                                                                                    05 Nov 98 I UK
           Health
                                                                                                    Two ouit over
       Education                                                                                    Hillsborough policeman
            Sport
 Entertainment
    Talking Point                                                                                   Internet Links
                                                                                                    Merseyside Police
                                                                                                    The Home Office
             On Air
          Feedback                                                                                  Hillsborough Family
       Low Graphics                                                                                 Support Group
               Help    Police tried to Eft fans out of the stadium crush
                                                                                                    The BBC is not responsible for the
                       Taxpayers are to pay the defence costs of two former                         content of external internet sites.
                       police officers accused of the unlawful killing of fans at
                       the Hillsborough disaster, it has been confirmed.
                                                                                                    In this section
                       South Yorkshire Police Authority says it will pay the                         From UK Pollies
                       legal costs of former Chief Superintendent David                              Mandelson backed in
                       Duckenfield and former Superintendent Bernard                                 loan row
                       Murray, who are due in court to face a private
                       prosecution brought by relatives of the 96 Liverpool                          Man charged with Jade
                       fans who were crushed to death in the 1989 tragedy.                           murder
                                                                                                     From Special Report
                       For 'long-term morale'                                                        China lets Branson flv on


                       Assistant C hief Constable Ian Daines, who was not                            Gulf criticism for UK
                       involved with Hillsborough policing that day, said it was                    1action
                       standard practice under the circumstances and                                 From UK Politics
                       necessary to maintain morale among officers who                               Lord Soper dies
                       have to make "split-second crucial decisions".
                                                                                                     Shopkeeper in court over
                                                                                                     Thomas murder
                       "South Yorkshire Police Authority is meeting the cost
                                                                                                     From Sport
                       of legal advice for these long-retired police officers and
                                                                                                     Angrv Gooch tears into
                       will continue to do so until this case is concluded," he
                                                                                                     England
                       confirmed.
                                                                                                     Hostage remains
                       T h e two men are fully entitled to have their costs met.                     handover delaved
                       It is necessary for the long-term morale of the force."                       Unions hail back-to-work
                                                                                                     scheme
                        First private prosecution                                                    RUC could face 'new
                                                                                                     beginning'
                       The private prosecutions follow the decision by Lord
                                                                                                     Football stars remanded
                       Justice Stuart Smith who headed a fresh inquiry, which
                       found there was no new evidence to justify action by                          Christmas strip prompts
                       the state.                                                                    BBC probe
                                                                                                     Firm faces railway
                        The first allegation the two former officers face is that                    accident charge
nrtp://news.bC)c.co.uK/niyengiisn/uK/newsiayo3t,2'2DUUu/'223 lyy.stm                                                                m 12/ys
 i>Dv^ inc^v^ j   | xoApayv

f*
                  on 13 Apni, iaey, xne two aeienaanxs uniawruny       Kinea
                  John Alfred Anderson and James Gary Aspinall.                  Lottery donations hit
                                                                                 £1bn
                  It is also alleged that the former senior officers "wilfully   From Entertainment
                  neglected to carry out a public duty on that day".             Jonathan Ross to host
                                                                                 BBC film show
                  Mr Duckenfield, of W est Parley, Bournemouth, and Mr           Murder quash woman's
                  Murray, of Pontefract, W est Yorkshire, are due to             inquest to start
                  appear at Leeds Magistrates Court on Monday,                   Driver killed in 23-car
                  December 7.                                                    pile-up
                                                                                 Court bid to stop tube
                  A spokesman for relatives of the disaster victims
                  declined to comment on the announcement made by                strikes
                  South Yorkshire Police Authority.                              Iona’s sad farewell to
                                                                                 boat victim
                                                                                 Murder charge trio freed
                                                                                 for appeal
                                                                                 From Education
                                                                                 Truancy rates
                                                                                 unchanged
                                                                                 Lockerbie ultimatum for
                                                                                 Libya
                                                                                 From Business
                                                                                 Scope for UK rate cuts -
                                                                                 IMF
                  Back to top | BBC News Home | BBC Homepage
                                                                    BIDS         From Health
                                                                                 Patients urged to pick u p
                                                                                 the phone
                                                                                 Drive to cut house fire
                                                                                 deaths
                                                                                 £9.2m for road crash
                                                                                 victim
                                                                                 From Special Report
                                                                                 Furbies in wilderness at
                                                                                 Christmas
                                                                                 From Health
                                                                                 Inequalities in cancer
                                                                                 support services
                                                                                 Justice pledge as
                                                                                 Lockerbie mourns
                                                                                 From Special Report
                                                                                 White Christmas iust a
                                                                                 dream
                                                                                 Blair: W e hit every target


                                                                                 Schoolboy murder Man
                                                                                 re-arrested
                                                                                 Former Saudi nurse
                                                                                 quiltv of theft
                                                                                 From Business
                                                                                 Newcastle directors defy
                                                                                 small shareholders
                                                                                 From Business
                                                                                 UK out of the red
                                                                                 From UK Politics
                                                                                 Bug problems to start in
                                                                                 weeks
                                                                                  Murder suspect dies on
 nttp://news.DDc.co.uk/myengnsn/uK/newsiau/o:>tzz:>uuu/zz:>iyy.stm                                         zn rz/ys

                                                    dP
