J MERVYN JONES MSc                                                 MEDICO LEGAL CENTRE
ASSIST ANT CHIEF CONSTABLE                                         W atery Street
^HILLSBOROUGH INQUIRY TEAM                                         Sheffield S3 7ET
                                                                   Telephone: 0 7 4 2 7 2 6 1 0 5
                                                                   Fax: 0 7 4 2 7 2 6 2 4 7
WEST MIDLANDS POLICE HQ
PO Box 52, Lloyd House                                             KNOWSLEY HALL
Colmore Circus Queensway                                           Prescot
Birmingham B4 6NQ                                                  Merseyside L34 4AF
Telephone: 0 2 1 -2 3 6 5 0 0 0 , extn. 2 0 2 5                    Telephone: 0 5 1 -4 4 9 3871
Fax: 0 2 1 -2 3 3 3 2 5 6                                          Fax: 0 5 1 -4 4 9 2 9 7 6

NECHELLS GREEN POLICE STATION                                      Your Ref:
Fowler Street
Birmingham B7 5DA
                                                                   Our Ref:         JMJ/VSC
Telephone: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 3 3 3 2
Fax: 0 2 1 -3 5 9 6 7 3 5 , , ^
                 n             -                                   Date:            11 October 1989




             R M Whalley Esq
             Secretary to the Inquiry
             Room 662
             Home Office
             50 Queen Anne's Gate
             London
             SW1H 9AT




              LETTER FROM BRIAN THOMPSON & PARTNERS OF       27   SEPTEMBER      1989

             I refer to your recent correspondence in which you forward a letter from
             Brian Thompson and Partners, dated 27 September 1898, to me for comment.

             As you know Mr Dear has now been asked to extend his investigation to
             consider the criminal aspects, if any, arising out of the events at
             Hillsborough on 15 April 1989. On his behalf I am charged, on a full time
             basis, to enquire into these matters. An important aspect of the criminal
             investigation will be the barrier, its condition and the force applied to
             it. At this time the investigation is under the direction of the
             Director of Public Prosecutions and he has appointed a QC to assess the
             evidence and advise me and my colleagues as to how to progress the
             investigation.  At the same time the investigation is being supervised by
             the Police Complaints Authority.

             As far as physical evidence is concerned it is highly likely that
             existing findings will have to be considered.   It is also possible that
             future research work will have to be undertaken in respect of the
             barrier, although at this time I am not sure precisely what will be
             entailed. However, in anticipation I have written to Dr Nicholson and
             his senior management with a view to securing his services to assist in
             the criminal inquiry.   I have also directed that the broken barrier
             should be preserved in its present form and that no further research
             work should be carried out on it until I have had an opportunity to
             discuss it with my supervising authorities. Similarly, I have asked
             Dr Nicholson to retain his findings so far made, until such a time that
             the Director of Public Prosecutions has had time to consider them.
             Given that the criminal inquiry is continuing and will not be concluded
             for some time, I would not be supportive to a suggestion that any
             barrier material or other evidential findings should be released until
             the Director of Public Prosecutions has made his decision.


   PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT                  Lloyd House, Birmingham
I appreciate that this might frustrate Brian Thompson and Partners in
seeking the evidence to support their civil case, which I regret, but
I do feel that the criminal Investigation must take precedence at this
time. Furthermore, that evidence probably will be relevant to the Coroner'
Inquiry and again this must receive priority.  It may well be that
Dr Nicholson will be called for the criminal proceedings, if they are taken
and for the Coroner's Inquest when, no doubt, the information requested
would be made available and an opportunity afforded to cross-examine
Dr Nicholson and his colleagues.

I have now had an opportunity to read David Brummell's letter dated
5 October to you on this subject.  I concur with the views expressed there.
In particular I would support his suggestion for more information as he
details in his paragraph 8.

I hope this is of assistance to you in helping Lord Justice Taylor decide
on what he would like to do in respect of Brian Thompson and Partners'
letter.  If I can be of any further assistance, please do not hesitate
to contact me. I have copied this letter to the offices of the Director
of Public Prosecutions and the Police Complaints Authority for their
information.




Assistant Chief Constable
(Hillsborough Inquiry)




                            Lloyd House, Birmingham
