From:                 George Croston
To:                   CPSHQL.CCU(kennedym)
Date:                 26 August 1998 11:13am
Subject:              Hillsborough: draft reply to HFSG letter -Reply -Reply

Mike

Items 11 and 17 of the chronology apply.

The HFSG had asked the police for a copy of every witness statement in their possession. The Chief Constable
through the Force solicitors asked for advice under S.3(2)e of the Prosecution of Offences Act.

They specifically asked the following questions:

1. Is it appropriate to provide the solicitors with access to the documentation?

2. If documentation is to be copied is it appropriate to raise a charge for this service?

3. Should original statements be allowed out of police possession as appears to be requested ?

4. Should any form of undertaking be requested as to the return of original or copy material when its purpose
has been served?

My detailed reply is attached. As you can see I did not give any guidance re their retention of the archives, only
as to voluntary disclosure. I spoke to Ann Adlington yesterday and she said that the the police are refusing to
provide certain documents to them, copies of which should have been placed in the House of Commons Library
pursuant to the Home Secretary's statement to the House re the material from the Scrutiny. The police are said
to claim that our guidance empowers that. I explained that we only advised on voluntary disclosure prior to our
review decision being made.

I certainly have not discussed with the police or their solicitors anything to do with their retention of the archive
material. I have just spoken with Peter Metcalfe of Hammond Suddards (the police solicitors) and he agrees that
advice on the retention of archive material was neither sought nor given. He does not want to initiate contact
with the HFSG on this point and does not know of any response to them as alleged by Ann Adlington. Perhaps
your letter could include a suggestion that the HFSG write directly to the police solicitors on the point. PM states
that he will then respond, as he believes that they have provided the House Library with all the documents that
the Secretary to the Scrutiny requested.

As regards the PCA, I spoke to Colin Dalby yesterday about the HFSG representations concerning the archive
material as I thought that they might tie able to assist the HFSG, at least by informing them of the legal aspects
of the matter. Colin did not think that they had any jurisdiction now but was quite willing to respond to the HFSG
and explain the legal situation ie the S Yorkshire Police own the material and can decide what to do with it. He
has suggested that the HFSG write to the Chairman as he has dealt with Mr Trevor Hicks in the past.

I hope this sufficient.


George
