f




                           THE HILLSBOROUGH DISASTER
                  Ann Adlington v David Duckenfield and Bernard Murray



    1.    ISSUE

    1.1   Preliminary consideration of CPS action following the private prosecution by the
          Hillsborough Family Support group begun by summonses against ex-Chief
          Superintendent Duckenfield and ex- Superintendent Murray for the unlawful killing
          of two men (specimen charges), and wilful neglect to perform a public duty (based
          on the same evidence as the alleged homicides). Against Mr Duckenfield alone is
          a charge of perverting the course of justice in that he lied about the circumstances
          in which a gate at the Stadium was opened.

    2.    ACTION REQUIRED

    2.1   Central Casework at York to prepare a full brief for the Director through line
          management on the merits or otherwise of taking over this private prosecution under
          the provisions of section 6(2) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985.

    3.    TIMING

    3.1   The scheduled first hearing date at South Sefton Magistrates’ Court is 17 July 1998.
           However this date may slip because of jurisdictional problems with the summonses
           and a defence request for an adjournment. It would be prudent to work to the
           known date at this stage.

    4.    BACKGROUND

    4.1   The background to the Hillsborough Disaster of 15 April 1989 is well known and
           does not need to be repeated here.

    4.2   In August 1989 the findings of the Taylor Enquiry were published. Certain actions
           and responses of police officers were found to be a main cause of the subsequent
           deaths. The Director then requested that a full criminal enquiry be undertaken.

    4.3   Following a police report received in early 1990, Counsels’ joint advice, which was
          received in August 1990, was that there was insufficient evidence to support
          criminal proceedings of any sort against those mentioned in that report (including
          the present defendants). This was swiftly followed by a CPS press release that to
          that effect.

    4.4   In March 1991 the Inquest returned verdicts of accidental death on those who died.

    4.5   In December 1996 a televised drama-documentary brought the matter into the public
           eye once more. The case came under review by Central Casework and in March
           1997 a large bundle o f material was received from the HFSG as being ‘new
           evidence’.
*




    4.6   On 8 May 1997 the CPS Review conducted by myself was submitted to the Director
                                                                                                    •
          through line management. The review did not consider the merits of the previous
          decision (and therefore whilst I read much of the original evidence I did not
          consider all of it) but only whether the alleged new evidence was sufficient to
          support the new allegations concerning suppression of video and medical evidence
          amounting to a perverting of the course of justice. The conclusion was that there
          was no suppression of this evidence and therefore no grounds for a reopening o f the
          police investigation into criminal allegations.

    4.7   The Home Secretary then set up a Scrutiny, under the direction of Lord Justice
          Stuart-Smith, which reported in January 1998 to the effect that there was no material
          to be put before the DPP which might cause her to reconsider the decisions already
          taken.

    4.8   Solicitors acting for Mr Duckenfield have written to the Director asking her to
          exercise her power under section 6(2) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 to
          take over this private prosecution and then to discontinue it under section 23.

    5.    KEY CONSIDERATIONS

    5.1   The CPS Prosecution Manual Volume 1 Chapter 7 contains the guidance and policy
          applicable to this issue.

    5.2   From para 7.11 the defendant should be asked to supply copies of the case papers.
          Unfortunately I doubt if he has any at all as the prosecutor is asking the CPS for full
          disclosure of all the documents that we hold. The solicitor for the HFSG has
          informed us of the material held by them but it is not certain whether or not they
          have other new material not yet seen by the CPS. Once this point is dealt with then
          we will have sufficient papers to make the required decision.

    5.3   From para 7.12 we can agree that this is not a case which we should take over and
          prosecute as we have previously decided that there is not a realistic prospect of
          conviction on any criminal charges. This is subject to a reservation that counsels’
          advice and any subsequent CPS review in 1990 may not have considered the
          allegation that Mr Duckenfield’s lying to the FA Chief Executive about a gate being
          forced open by fans was a possible perverting of the course o f justice.

    5.4   Paras 7.10 and 7.13 concern taking over to discontinue a prosecution. O f the three
          circumstances noted in 7.10 only the first two are relevant , that is, that there is
          clearly no case to answer or that the public interest factors tending against
          prosecution clearly outweigh those factors tending in favour. If either o f these is
          relevant then we should take over in order to discontinue.

    5.5   Following a full review the choices open to us would appear to be:

          •      If there is clearly no case to answer on all charges, to take over and
                 discontinue the whole case;

          •      If there is a case to answer on all charges then to consider the public interest
♦




                 factors for and against prosecution and either discontinue or allow the private
                 prosecution to proceed;

          •      If there is clearly no case to answer on some charges only, for example the
                  alleged homicides and the misconduct, but there is a case to answer for the
                  perverting the course o f justice, then policy and the law are rather unclear as
                  to the correct procedure to be taken. Common sense would dictate that if we
                  could take over a case consisting o f two allegations and discontinue one
                  offence while proceeding with the other, then we should be able to take over
                  one offence in order to discontinue while leaving the other to be privately
                  prosecuted. If this option becomes relevant, it will be examined further at
                  a later date.

          •      There could be a mixture of the first two choices above combining no case
                  to answer with the public interest against prosecution, and again allowing for
                  discontinuance o f all charges.

    5.6   In helping us to come to the correct decision, the learned opinions from the Taylor
          Enquiry and the later Scrutiny as well as those of counsel in 1990 will be of great
          assistance. However the evidential test applied by us previously was of ‘not a
          realistic prospect o f conviction’. The evidential test to be applied now in
          determining our exercise of the section 6(2) power is that o f clearly no case to
          answer’. In which case there will need to be a full review o f all the documents
          available to the Taylor Enquiry and a re-appraisal o f the ‘new evidence’ provided
          to the Scrutiny. We can be mindful o f the conclusion o f Lord Justice Stuart-Smith
          at paragraph 6 of his Scrutiny summary where he says:

                 "None of the evidence I was asked to consider added anything significant to
                 the evidence which was available to Lord Taylor’s Inquiry or to the
                 Inquests."

    5.7   The so-called ‘new evidence’ provided in 1997 was mainly a rehash of the
          inferences to be made from previous documents with the addition o f a sprinkling of
          new material subsequently found to be lacking in credibility by both myself and the
          Scrutiny. It was said to support criminal allegations of perjury and perverting the
          course o f justice against junior officers in the police control room at the match. The
          relevant material concerned video recordings of the pen where the victims died and
          what could be seen by the control room occupants on their monitor screens. It did
          not refer specifically to the senior officers who were also present and are now
          subject to this private prosecution, although it must also be applicable to their
          viewpoint o f the terraces and their alleged gross negligence in not acting to stop the
          disaster.

    5.8   A request has been received from the solicitors acting for the HFSG for copies or
          schedules of documents in past or present possession, together with copies of any
          counsel’s advices. They are putting pressure on us to act quickly.

    5.9   I understand that the solicitors for Mr Murray will be making a formal approach to
          us.
6.    RECOMMENDATIONS

6.1   That a full review o f the relevant papers becommencedimmediately sothat the
      necessary recommendations can be made to the Director through line management.

6.2     That a timescale be set for the recommendations to be tendered commensurate with
        a projected committal hearing date after which the opportunity to discontinue is lost.

6.3     That both prosecutor and defendants be asked if they have any material not
        previously provided to the police or the CPS.

6.4     The HFSG request for disclosure cannot be actioned until the decision flowing from
        6.1 above has been made, however consideration should be given to the specifics
        of it in the next report.

7.    CONCLUSION

7.1   Whichever way the eventualdecisiongoes there            islikely to be atleast    one
      disgruntled party and the possibility of a Judicial Review of the decision. Even now
      solicitors for one o f the defendants are threatening the Magistrates’s Court with an
      application to the Divisional Court if a jurisdiction point does not go their way.




G.R.Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
Date: 6 July 1998



T7C Qth b M                         ex Gb.               k)                         IL tk

b e ^      p c c v ik i    (b      fie       Oticchts         ■
From:                George Croston
To:                  CPSHQL.CCU.SHARPLID
Date:                10 July 1998 2:12pm
Subject:             Hillsborough - Reply to solicitors for Murray

Attached is a draft copy of a letter to be sent to Walker Morris, in reply to their letter of 3/7 to the Director asking
us to take over this private prosecution in order to discontinue it.

It is very similar to the one sent to the solicitors for Mr Duckenfield by me on 6/7.

Please confirm that it is acceptable.

I am preparing a short briefing note for you concerning disclosure of review policy re the criteria we use in taking
over private prosecutions. It should be with you later this afternoon.

George Croston

CC:                  CPSHQL.CCU.DAWKINSL
                                                               i4/Mx mo

DRAFT LETTER



ADMIN ACTION: Please have the following letter word processed as I do not have the std
letter macro on my machine. Thanks.

Letter to R.B.Manning Esq
              Walker Morris Solicitors
              Kings Court
              12 King Street
              LEEDS
              DX: 12051 Leeds 24

Our ref: YBF/GC/3341/89
Your ref: RBM/MT/MURRAY



Dear Mr Manning

Bernard Murray
South Sefton Magistates’ Court, 17 July 1998

Thank you for your letter of 6 July 1998 with enclosures. Mr Enzor has asked me to reply
on his behalf as I have had detailed involvement with this matter.

Your letter addressed to the Director o f Public Prosecutions has being forwarded to me so
that I can give a more detailed preliminary answer to your representations. I have been
asked to read all the papers and make recommendations concerning the available options
open to the Crown Prosecution Service and to your request that we take over this private
prosecution in order to discontinue it.

In order that I can be sure that I have all the relevant material before me, I would be
grateful if you could let me have a schedule of any documents in your possession that you
consider to be relevant to the prosecution.

The issues raised in your letter can then be fully considered and a detailed reply given to
you as soon as possible.

I regret thet I am unable to provide an estimate for the conclusion of this review as there
are a number o f factors which are not within my control, however, I can assure you that
consideration of all the representations made to us will be given a high priority.

Yours sincerely


George R. Croston
Prosecution Team Leader
