                                                                               l« < S
                                                                                                                      ©
                                                                                                         CPS
                                                                                                       Central Casework

   Facsimile                                                                                              United House
                                                                                                              Piccadilly
                                                                                                         York Y01 IPQ

                                                                                               Direct One:
                                                                                              Switchboard: 01904-450070
                                                                                                Facsimile: 01904-456577
                                                                                                  DX No. 65204 York 6
Attention of:


Address     U^U< (K K * B \S
Fax No          0 |l 3    2uS^fLt’l'2.
Fr°m                                   R. ejtosio-j
CPS Division:

Date:                     Time:

This fax transmission consists of this page plus £ others

Please acknowledge receipt:


If transmission is not properly received please call 01904-



                               A ypMi                                                        ‘3 £, ObhcUgoi
 out. fulWxtr cJptL% qC pag 2(f
  \tXMr& 3* 7         a kJMr j:




                          Crown Prosecution Service * Working in the interests o f justice
                                              Treasury Solicitor
                                              Hillsborough Stadium Disaster Inquiry
                                              Town Hall
                                              Sheffield SI 2HH

                                              Telephone 0742-736903/736905
                                              Fax       0742-736900

                                               7 June, 1989
J. Mervyn Jones, Esq., Msc.,
Assistant Chief Constable,
Furnival House,
Fumival Gate,
Sheffield SI 4QN

                 SOUTH YORKSHIRE POLICE RECOLLECTIONS

  Thank you for your letter of today’s date, which we have already discussed.

  The main difference between the initial and final versions of the South Yorkshire
Police Officers’ statements is that any expressions of opinion were (as I understand it,
on the advice of Mr Woodward) removed from the final version. As I understand it,
Andrew Collins’ view is that there is absolutely no reason for excluding such
expressions of opinion when they touch on matters relevant to the Public Inquiry and
that, in the circumstances, there is no objection in principle to written statements
containing such opinions being submitted to the Inquiry.

   Clearly, in view of the personal undertaking which you have given to the Chief
Constable of South Yorkshire, Andrew Collins agrees that it would not be appropriate
to use the original statement for the purposes of the Inquiry when this has been
superseded by a subsequent statement. However, what I understand may have
happened in the case of the Officer who gave his evidence yesterday is that the original
unamended statement was circulated because of the need to circulate statements to all
parties as much in advance of the calling of the relevant witnesses as possible and
because at the time of circulation of the relevant batch of witness statements the revised,
final version of the statement in question had not yet been received. I understand that in
total there are three cases where this has been necessary: PCs Best, Huckstepp and
Illingworth. However, in such cases only the final, revised version of the statement was
given to the press.

   I trust that this problem will not recur in the future.

   I    have not copied this letter to the Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police, but am
 naturally happy for you to do so.

                                        D. Brummell



                                              213
8    Publicity. We doubt whether you would consider that the publicity that has arisen in
      the case is a reason why you should interfere: it would be a most dangerous precedent
      to discontinue a prosecution on this ground. Again, we know of no case in which this
      has happened or indeed any case in which it has been conceded by the prosecution in
      court that it should not proceed for this reason.

      The criteria fo r discontinuance: “ likely to damage the interests o f justice”

9    We do not understand what, if anything, this adds to the “public interest factors”
     criterion.

      The relevance o f previous investigations

10   Obviously the history of the investigations is relevant to your decision. We would
     argue that even if there was no hint of controversy about them, there would be no
     justification for intervening to discontinue. However as I set out in outline in my
     previous letter, the Group suspects that the CPS was given incomplete information in
      1990. The Group is becoming increasingly disturbed by what we are learning as more
     and more papers are revealed to us. Our purpose in asking to see your previous
     papers, and those held by the two police forces and coroner, is to gain necessary
     access to original evidence, whether we have seen it before or not. We believe that
     there is much more evidence, previously concealed from the Group, which is directly
     relevant to gross negligence issue, and which is probative of guilt of the charges laid, in
     the possession of the police in South Yorkshire, and West Midlands. We also believe
     that provision of this information will enable us to prove that the decision in 1990 was
     taken on a false basis and on the basis of absence of full and frank disclosure.

11   The task that you have embarked upon of considering whether you have seen all
     relevant material is a formidable one. We were supplied by you last year with a
     “Master Witness List (Alphabetical)” with the name and badge of the “West Midlands
     Police” on it, and the words “Hillsborough Inquiry”. The beginning of the first page of
     the alphabetical list is dated 4th April 1990. Leading counsel were instructed by the
     Director on 16thFebruary 1990, but they did not advise until August. It is reasonable
     to believe that this “Master Witness List” was the list of statements tendered to
     counsel. We know in fact that the West Midlands Police took 3,776 statements (and
     did not take any of the hundreds of statements provided by South Yorkshire police
     officers: see below). The Master Witness List contains statements from supporters,
     South Yorkshire police and many others.

12   We have recently been examining and selecting witness statements from those that
     have come into our possession in the last year for the purpose of compiling a
     committal bundle. We have selected a group of 35 spectators who give clear
     evidential support to Lord Taylor’s findings as to the “blunder on opening the gates”
     and provide further evidence pointing clearly to the guilt of the two defendants.


                                              3
