wfl
                                                       HILLSBOROUGH IN Q U IR Y T E A M
J M ER VYN JONES M S c
D EP U TY CHIEF CO NSTABLE
                                                      n e c h e l l s g r e e n p o l ic e s t a t io n
   RO NER 'S OFFICER
                                                      Fowler Street


f  nival House
   nival G ate
   Eyre S treet
Sheffield S1 4Q N
                                                      Birmingham B7 5D A




Telephone: 0 7 4 2 - 7 3 1 5 4 6
Fax        : 0 7 4 2 -7 3 1 4 8 3                     Your Ref:
C HESHIRE CONSTABULARY
Police Headquarters
                                                      Our Ref:       j ^J/AES
Chester CH1 2PP
Telephone: 0 2 4 4 - 3 5 0 0 0 0 Ext 2 0 9 1
Fax          : 0244                                   D ate:         nth      December 1990




Mr Allan Green QC
Director of Public Prosecutions
4/12 Queen A n n e ’s Gate
London
SW1H 9AT




VIDEO TAPE RECORDING OF INTERVIEWS

You may recall that we have met previously in Birmingham when you came to
luncheon at Headquarters, Lloyd House with Geoffrey Dear and my ACP0 colleagues.
Since that time I have moved on to an appointment m the Cheshire Constabulary.

 The purpose of my writing is to advise you of developments with video tape
 recording.  When we last spoke I briefly mentioned developments in this field
 activity.  Since then video tape recording has been developed and we have used
 the system for the taping of interviews, under caution, of certain parties
 involved in the Hillsborough Disaster.

 As you are probably aware the inquests into the ninety five deceased were
 re-convened on 19th November at Sheffield Town Hall and the Coroner     r
 Popper, is continuing to receive evidence before a Jury.   It is likely   a l
 will be February or March before they conclude.   Talking to Dr Popper, he tell
 me he intends to call the evidence of the interview by either playing the audio
 tape (in accordance with PACE) or displaying the video recording, the faciliti
 already being in place in Court.   This latter action will depend on the agreem
 of the person interviewed to the video being shown.   The indicators are that
 least one Superintendent has raised no objections to the video recording being
 displayed.   If that view is sustained it is likely that the recording wi   _e
  shown to the Court, including the Jury, very early in the New Year when we
  reconvene after the Christmas/New Year recess on 7th January 1991.

  This may be the first use of such a technique before a Jury in Court, although
  you may be more aware of the uniqueness of the event.  Notwithstanding the
  Coroner has asked me to cordially invite you to consider whether you, or your
  nominated representative would like to attend the proceedings to o serve   e
  process of replay.




                                                   Sheffield
        PLEASE REPLY TO THE OFFICE AT
Neither the Coroner nor myself will     be offended if any way if you °* y ° £
nominated representative choose not to attend Sheffield in winter, but we both
felt you ought to be made aware of this interesting development.

With all good wishes for the forthcoming festive season.




      .

      Mr Colin Clough
      Mr Mike Kennedy
      Dr Popper
