                                         tk.                       ,     Mackrell & Thomas
                                                                                        Solicitors
                                                                         144 Liverpool Road
Jos*1' 1’ Mackrell LL .B .                                               Page Moss
                                                                         Liverpool L36 3RG
                                                                         Telephone. 051-480 3666
                                                                         Fax: 051-480 3677
                                                                         V .A .T . No 320 2341 23

                                                     When Telephoning or Calling Please ask for: J/[p   # Tring

Your Ref:                             Our Ref:   ST .LC .HAR R I S O N .CLM             D.ate 28.2.1 990




           Dear Sir

           We act on behalf of Mr. and. Mrs. John Harrison who are the personal
           representatives of Peter Andrew Harrison deceased who died as a
           result of the unfortunate incident at Hillsborough on April 15th 1989-
           Peter was one of those killed as a result of the negligent opening
           of Gate C which was done by Superintendent Marshall acting upon the
           order of Chief Superintendent Duckenfield.   It would appear to be the
           case that there is evidence to show that deaths and injuries would
           have occurred had not the Gate been opened.   However it is also
           clear that had proper precautions been taken by Superintendent
           Duckenfield there was clearly no danger involved in opening the
           gate as such.

           In our view however there appears to be a case for bringing a
           prosecution against South Yorkshire Police Authority on the basis
           that proper precautions were clearly not taken and as such deaths
           resulted from the action of Superintendent Marshall who opened the
           gate. The evidence appears to be therefore that certain members of
           the South Yorkshire Police Force were not only negligent but grossly
           negligent since ib was fcheix* specific job to ensure the safety of
           those at the ground.   In view of the contents of Lord Justice Taylor,1s
           report we would strenuously argue a case for prosecuting South
           Yorkshire Police Authority.    In our view there is no public policy which
           would require immunity from this type of action on the part of the
           Police but rather would such a prosecution show that British Justice
           is impartial.

           Yours faithfully


            Mackrell & Thomas


            Director of Public Prosecutions,
            4-12 Queen Anne's Gate,
            LONDON.
            SW1H 9AZ
