C W P Newell
                                                                                              m
                                                                                              CPS
Director, Casework
                                                 VV d
                                                                                              Headquarters
                                                        . (L^szVtn^       •                   50 Ludgate Hill
                                                                                              London EC4M 7EX

                                                                               Direct Line:   0207 796 8553
                                                                                              0207 796 8000
 r
     Lord Williams of Mostyn QC
     HM Attorney General
                                                   1
                                                          ik.                  Switchboard:
                                                                                 Facsimile:
                                                                                   DX No:
                                                                                              0207 796 8680
                                                                                              300850 Ludgate EC4

     Attorney General’s Chambers
     9 Buckingham Gate
     London
     SW1E 6JP
                                                                         7 January 2000
 L                                                 J




     R v DUCKENFIELD AND MURRAY

     For the avoidance of any doubt, I should state at once that I am writing to you in your
     personal capacity, as a member of the Bar formerly instructed by the Crown Prosecution
     Service, rather than in your capacity as Attorney General. This explains my style of address.

     I enclose a copy of a letter that I have received today from James Lewis, junior counsel for the
     prosecution in the current proceedings brought by Ms Ann Adlington, on behalf of the
     Hillsborough Family Support Group, against Messrs Duckenfield and Murray, formerly of the
     South Yorkshire Police.

     You have, of course, distanced yourself from any involvement with the current proceedings.
     Inevitably, however, you will be well aware of the case; and in particular, you will clearly
     recall advising the then Director in a Joint Opinion in 1990, following which advice the
     Director reached his decision not to prosecute anyone for any criminal offence arising out of
     the Hillsborough tragedy.

     James Lewis’ letter is self-explanatory. I have not followed the abuse argument in court, but
     it is clear that the Judge is satisfied that the Joint Opinion may be relevant. The Judge has
     asked that I disclose to him a copy of the Joint Opinion, for him to consider appropriate
     onward disclosure to the parties.

     Assuming that legal professional privilege attaches to advice provided by counsel to the
     Crown Prosecution Service (from time to time, the contrary has been argued), it would be for
     the Crown Prosecution Service to waive the privilege. Nevertheless, on the rare occasions on
     which I consider disclosing counsel’s advice, it is my invariable practice to consult counsel
     and to invite any comments on my proposed course of action.
On the basis of James Lewis’ letter, the contents of which have been expressly approved by
the Judge, I would be minded to waive any privilege and disclose the Joint Opinion. In so
doing, I might draw to the Judge’s attention any passages that I think should be redacted; but I
should be content to leave the final decision on that to him. Before disclosing the document,
however, I should welcome any comment that you might care to make.

As is clear, the Opinion was the Joint Opinion of you and your junior, Peter Birts (now Peter
Birts QC). Not least because of the urgency of the Judge’s request, I have decided not to
approach Peter Birts separately for his comments. Subject to your views, and should the Joint
Opinion in due course be disclosed, I should arrange for him to be informed as a matter of
courtesy.

I look forward to hearing from you as soon as is convenient. I am, of course, available on
Monday, should you wish to discuss the matter. If the Joint Opinion is to be disclosed, I can
arrange for a copy to be delivered to the Judge at the Royal Courts of Justice on Monday.




C W P NEWELL
